   ‘And yet’, continues Hildebrandt, ‘what appears to be the contrary of

this  is  equally  true  and  correct.  In  spite  of  everything,  the  most

intimate relationship goes hand in hand, I believe, with the seclusion

and  separation.  We  may  even  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  whatever

dreams may offer, they derive their material from reality and from the

intellectual life that revolves around that reality. . . . Whatever strange

results they may achieve, they can never in fact get free from the real

world;  and  their  most  sublime  as  well  as  their  most  ridiculous

structures must always borrow their basic material either from what

has passed before our eyes in the world of the senses or from what

has already found a place somewhere in the course of our waking

thoughts  -  in  other  words  from  what  we  have  already  experienced

either externally or internally.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        525

 

                                          (B)

 

                  THE MATERIAL OF DREAMS - MEMORY IN DREAMS

 

   All the material making up the content of a dream is in some way

derived  from  experience,  that  is  to  say,  has  been  reproduced  or

remembered in the dream - so much at least we may regard as an

undisputed  fact.  But  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  a

connection of this kind between the content of a dream and reality is

bound to come to light easily, as an immediate result of comparing

them.  The  connection  requires,  on  the  contrary,  to  be  looked  for

diligently, and in a whole quantity of cases it may long remain hidden.

The reason for this lies in a number of peculiarities which are exhibited

by  the  faculty  of  memory  in  dreams  and  which,  though  generally

remarked  upon,  have  hitherto  resisted  explanation.  It  will  be  worth

while to examine these characteristics more closely.

 

   It may happen that a piece of material occurs in the content of a

dream which in the waking state we do not recognize as forming a

part of our knowledge or experience. We remember, of course, havingdreamt  the  thing  in  question,  but  we  cannot  remember  whether  or

when we experienced it in real life. We are thus left in doubt as to the

source which has been drawn upon by the dream and are tempted to

believe that dreams have a power of independent production. Then at

last, often after a long interval, some fresh experience recalls the lost

memory of the other event and at the same time reveals the source of

the dream. We are thus driven to admit that in the dream we knew and

remembered something which was beyond the reach of our waking

memory.¹

   A particularly striking example of this is given by Delboeuf from his

own  experience.  He  saw  in  a  dream  the  courtyard  of  his  house

covered with snow and found two small lizards half-frozen and buried

under it. Being an animal-lover, he picked them up, warmed them and

carried  them  back  to  the  little  hole  in  the  masonry  where  they

belonged. He further gave them a few leaves of a small fern which

grew on the wall and of which, as he knew, they were very fond. In the

dream he knew the name of the plant: Asplenium ruta muralis. The

dream proceeded and, after a digression, came back to the lizards.

Delboeuf  then  saw  to  his  astonishment  two  new  ones  which  were

busy on the remains of the fern. He then looked round him and saw a

fifth and then a sixth lizard making their way to the hole in the wall,

until  the  whole  roadway  was  filled  with  a  procession  of  lizards,  all

moving in the same direction . . . and so on.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] Vaschide (1911) remarks that it has often been observed that in

dreams people speak foreign language more fluently and correctly than in waking life.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        526

 

   When he was awake, Delbouf knew the Latin names of very few

plants and an Asplenium was not among them. To his great surprise

he was able to confirm the fact that a fern of this name actually exists.

Its correct name is Asplenium ruta muraria, which had been slightly

distorted  in  the  dream.  It  was  hardly  possible  that  this  could  be  a

coincidence;  and  it  remained  a  mystery  to  Delboeuf  how  he  had

acquired his knowledge of the name ‘Asplenium’ in his dream.      The  dream  occurred  in  1862.  Sixteen  years  later,  while  the

philosopher was on a visit to one of his friends, he saw a little album of

pressed flowers of the sort that are sold to foreigners as mementoes

in some parts of Switzerland. A recollection began to dawn on him -

he opened the herbarium, found the Asplenium of his dream and saw

its Latin name written underneath it in his own handwriting. The facts

could now be established. In 1860 (two years before the lizard dream)

a sister of this same friend had visited Delboeuf on her honeymoon.

She had with her the album, which was to be a gift to her brother, and

Delboeuf  took  the  trouble  to  write  its  Latin  name  under  each  dried

plant, at the dictation of a botanist.

      Good  luck,  which  made  this  example  so  well  worth  recording,

enabled Delboeuf to trace yet another part of the content of the dream

to its forgotten source. One day in 1877 he happened to take up an

old volume of an illustrated periodical and in it he found a picture of

the whole procession of lizards which he had dreamed of in 1862. The

volume  was  dated  1861  and  Delbouf  remembered  having  been  a

subscriber to the paper from its first number.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        527

 

   The fact that dreams have at their command memories which are

inaccessible in waking life is so remarkable and of such theoretical

importance that I should like to draw still more attention to it by relating

some further ‘hypermnesic’ dreams. Maury tells us how for some time

the  word  ‘Mussidan’  kept  coming  into  his  head  during  the  day.  He

knew nothing about it except that it was the name of a town in France.

One night he dreamt that he was talking to someone who told him he

came  from  Mussidan,  and  who,  on  being  asked  where  that  was,

replied that it was a small town in the Department of Dordogne. When

he woke up, Maury had no belief in the information given him in the

dream;  he  learnt  from  a  gazetteer,  however,  that  it  was  perfectly

correct. In this case the fact of the dream’s superior knowledge was

confirmed,  but  the  forgotten  source  of  that  knowledge  was  not

discovered.   Jessen (1855, 551) reports a very similar event in a dream dating

from remoter times: ‘To this class belongs among others a dream of

the elder Scaliger (quoted by Hennings, 1784, 300) who wrote a poem

in praise of the famous men of Verona. A man who called himself

Brugnolus appeared to him in a dream and complained that he had

been overlooked. Although Scaliger could not remember having ever

heard of him, he wrote some verses on him. His son learnt later in

Verona that someone named Brugnolus had in fact been celebrated

there as a critic.’

   The Marquis d’Hervey de St. Denys, quoted by Vaschide (1911, 232

f.), describes a hypermnesic dream which has a special peculiarity, for

it was followed by another dream which completed the recognition of

what was at first an unidentified memory: ‘I once dreamt of a young

woman  with  golden  hair,  whom  I  saw  talking  to  my  sister  while

showing her some embroidery. She seemed very familiar to me in the

dream and I thought I had seen her very often before. After I woke up,

I still had her face very clearly before me but I was totally unable to

recognize it. I then went to sleep once more and the dream-picture

was repeated. . . . But in this second dream I spoke to the fair-haired

lady and asked her if I had not had the pleasure of meeting her before

somewhere. "Of course," she replied, "don’t you remember the plage

at  Pornic?"  I  immediately  woke  up  again  and  I  was  then  able  to

recollect clearly all the details associated with the attractive vision in

the dream.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        528

 

   The same author (quoted again by Vaschide, ibid., 233-4-) tells how

a musician of his acquaintance once heard in a dream a tune which

seemed to him entirely new. It was not until several years later that he

found the same tune in an old collected volume of musical pieces,

though  he  still  could  not  remember  ever  having  looked  through  it

before.

      I  understand  that  Myers  has  published  a  whole  collection  of

hypermnesic dreams of this kind in the Proceedings of the Society forPsychical Research; but these are unluckily inaccessible to me.

   No one who occupies himself with dreams can, I believe, fail to

discover that it is a very common event for a dream to give evidence

of knowledge and memories which the waking subject is unaware of

possessing.  In  my  psycho-analytic  work  with  nervous  patients,  of

which I shall speak later, I am in a position several times a week to

prove to patients from their dreams that they are really quite familiar

with quotations, obscene words and so on, and make use of them in

their dreams, though they have forgotten them in their waking life. I

will add one more innocent case of hypermnesia in a dream, because

of the great ease with which it was possible to trace the source of the

knowledge that was accessible only in the dream.

   One of my patients dreamt in the course of a fairly lengthy dream

that he had ordered a ‘Kontuszówka’ while he was in a cafe. After

telling me this, he asked me what a ‘Kontuszówka’ was, as he had

never heard the name. I was able to tell him in reply that it was a

Polish liqueur, and that he could not have invented the name as it had

long been familiar to me from advertisements on the hoardings. At first

he would not believe me; but some days later, after making his dream

come true in a cafe, he noticed the name on a hoarding at a street

corner which he must have gone past at least twice a day for several

months.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        529

 

   I have noticed myself from my own dreams how much it a matter of

chance whether one discovers the source of particular elements of a

dream.  Thus,  for  several  years  before  completing  this  book,  I  was

pursued by the picture of a church tower of very simple design, which I

could not remember ever having seen. Then I suddenly recognized it,

with absolute certainty, at a small station on the line between Salzburg

and  Reichenhall.  That  was  during  the  second  half  of  the  eighteen

nineties and I had travelled over the line for the first time in 1886.

During later years, when I was already deeply absorbed in the study of

dreams,  the  frequent  recurrence  in  my  dreams  of  the  picture  of  aparticular unusual-looking place became a positive nuisance to me. In

a specific spatial relation to myself, on my left-hand side, I saw a dark

space out of which there glimmered a number of grotesque sandstone

figures. A faint recollection, which I was unwilling to credit, told me it

was the entrance to a beer-cellar. But I failed to discover either the

meaning of the dream-picture or its origin. In 1907 I happened to be in

Padua, which, to my regret, I had not been able to visit since 1895. My

first visit to that lovely University town had been a disappointment, as I

had not been able to see Giotto’s frescoes in the Madonna dell’Arena.

I had turned back half-way along the street leading there, on being

told that the chapel was closed on that particular day. On my second

visit, twelve years later, I decided to make up for this and the first thing

I did was to set off towards the Arena chapel. In the street leading to it,

on my left-hand side as I walked along and in all probability at the

point at which I had turned back in 1895, I came upon the place I had

seen so often in my dreams, with the sandstone figures that formed

part of it. It was in fact the entrance to the garden of a restaurant.

 

      One  of  the  sources  from  which  dreams  derive  material  for

reproduction - material which is in part neither remembered nor used

in  the  activities  of  waking  thought  -  is  childhood  experience.  I  will

quote only a few of the authors who have noticed and stressed this

fact.

      Hildebrandt  (1875,  23):  ‘I  have  already  expressly  admitted  that

dreams sometimes bring back to our minds, with a wonderful power of

reproduction, very remote and even forgotten events from our earliest

years.’

   Strümpell (1877, 40): ‘The position is even more remarkable when

we observe how dreams sometimes bring to light, as it were, from

beneath  the  deepest  piles  of  débris  under  which  the  earliest

experiences of youth are buried in later times, pictures of particular

localities, things or people, completely intact and with all their original

freshness. This is not limited to experiences which created a lively

impression when they occurred or enjoy a high degree of psychical

importance  and  return  later  in  a  dream  as  genuine  recollections  at

which waking consciousness will rejoice. On the contrary, the depths

of memory in dreams also include pictures of people, things, localitiesand  events  dating  from  the  earliest  times,  which  either  never

possessed any psychical importance or more than a slight degree of

vividness,  or  which  have  long  since  lost  what  they  may  have

possessed of either, and which consequently seem completely alien

and unknown alike to the dreaming and waking mind till their earlier

origin has been discovered.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        530

 

      Volkelt  (1875,  119):  ‘It  is  especially  remarkable  how  readily

memories  of  childhood  and  youth  make  their  way  into  dreams.

Dreams are continually reminding us of things which we have ceased

to think of and which have long ceased to be important to us.’

   Since dreams have material from childhood at their command, and

since, as we all know, that material is for the most part blotted out by

gaps in our conscious faculty of memory, these circumstances give

rise to interesting hypermnesic dreams, of which I will once more give

a few examples.

   Maury (1878, 92) relates how when he was a child he used often to

go from Meaux, which was his birthplace, to the neighbouring village

of  Trilport,  where  his  father  was  superintending  the  building  of  a

bridge. One night in a dream he found himself in Trilport and was once

more playing in the village street. A man came up to him who was

wearing a sort of uniform. Maury asked him his name and he replied

that  he  was  called  G.  and  was  a  watchman  at  the  bridge.  Maury

awoke  feeling  sceptical  as  to  the  correctness  of  the  memory,  and

asked  an  old  maid-servant,  who  had  been  with  him  since  his

childhood, whether she could remember a man of that name. ‘Why,

yes’, was the reply, ‘he was the watchman at the bridge when your

father was building it.’

      Maury  (ibid.,  143-4)  gives  another  equally  well  corroborated

example  of  the  accuracy  of  a  memory  of  childhood  emerging  in  a

dream. It was dreamt by a Monsieur F., who as a child had lived at

Montbrison. Twenty-five years after leaving it, he decided to revisit his

home and some friends of the family whom he had not since met.During the night before his departure he dreamt that he was already at

Montbrison and, near the town, met a gentleman whom he did not

know by sight but who told him he was Monsieur T., a friend of his

father’s. The dreamer was aware that when he was a child he had

known  someone  of  that  name,  but  in  his  waking  state  no  longer

remembered what he looked like. A few days later he actually reached

Montbrison,  found  the  locality  which  in  his  dream  had  seemed

unknown  to  him,  and  there  met  a  gentleman  whom  he  at  once

recognized  as  the  Monsieur  T.  in  the  dream.  The  real  person,

however, looked much older than he had appeared in the dream.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        531

 

   At this point I may mention a dream of my own, in which what had to

be traced was not an impression but a connection. I had a dream of

someone who I knew in my dream was the doctor in my native town.

His face was indistinct, but was confused with a picture of one of the

masters  at  my  secondary  school,  whom  I  still  meet  occasionally.

When  I  woke  up  I  could  not  discover  what  connection  there  was

between  these  two  men.  I  made  some  enquiries  from  my  mother,

however, about this doctor who dated back to the earliest years of my

childhood,  and  learnt  that  he  had  only  one  eye.  The  schoolmaster

whose figure had covered that of the doctor in the dream, was also

one-eyed. It was thirty-eight years since I had seen the doctor, and so

far as I know I had never thought of him in my waking life, though a

scar on my chin might have reminded me of his attentions.

 

   A number of writers, on the other hand, assert that elements are to

be found in most dreams, which are derived from the very last few

days  before  they  were  dreamt;  and  this  sounds  like  an  attempt  to

counterbalance the laying of too much weight upon the part played in

dream-life  by  experiences  in  childhood.  Thus  Robert  (1886,  46)

actually declares that normal dreams are as a rule concerned only

with the impressions of the past few days. We shall find, however, that

the theory of dreams constructed by Robert makes it essential for himto bring forward the most recent impressions and leave the oldest out

of sight. None the less the fact stated by him remains correct, as I am

able  to  confirm  from  my  own  investigations.  An  American  writer,

Nelson,  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  impressions  most  frequently

employed  in  a  dream  arise  from  the  day  next  but  one  before  the

dream occurs, or from the day preceding that one - as though the

impressions  of  the  day immediately  before  the  dream  were  not

sufficiently attenuated or remote.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        532

 

   Several writers who are anxious not to cast doubts on the intimate

connection between the content of dreams and waking life have been

struck by the fact that impressions with which waking thoughts are

intensely  occupied  only  appear  in  dreams  after  they  have  been

pushed somewhat aside by the workings of daytime thought. Thus,

after  the  death  of  someone  dear  to  them,  people  do  not  as  a  rule

dream  of  him  to  begin  with,  while  they  are  overwhelmed  by  grief

(Delage, 1891). On the other hand one of the most recent observers,

Miss  Hallam  (Hallam  and  Weed,  1896,  410-11),  has  collected

instances  to  the  contrary,  thus  asserting  the  right  of  each  of  us  to

psychological individualism in this respect.

 

   The third, most striking and least comprehensible characteristic of

memory in dreams is shown in the choice of material reproduced. For

what is found worth remembering is not, as in waking life, only what is

most  important,  but  on  the  contrary  what  is  most  indifferent  and

insignificant as well. On this point I will quote those writers who have

given the strongest expression to their astonishment.

   Hildebrandt (1875, 11): ‘For the remarkable thing is that dreams

derive  their  elements  not  from  major  and  stirring  events  nor  the

powerful  and  compelling  interests  of  the  preceding  day,  but  from

incidental  details,  from  the  worthless  fragments,  one  might  say,  of

what has been recently experienced or of the remoter past. A family

bereavement,  which  has  moved  us  deeply  and  under  whoseimmediate shadow we have fallen asleep late at night, is blotted out of

our memory till with our first waking moment it returns to it again with

disturbing violence. On the other hand, a wart on the forehead of a

stranger whom we met in the street and to whom we owe no second

thought after passing him has a part to play in our dream. . . .’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        533

 

   Strümpell (1877, 39): ‘There are cases in which the analysis of a

dream shows that some of its components are indeed derived from

experiences of the previous day or its predecessor, but experiences

so  unimportant  and  trivial  from  the  point  of  view  of  waking

consciousness  that  they  were  forgotten  soon  after  they  occurred.

Experiences  of  this  kind  include,  for  instance,  remarks  accidentally

overheard,  or  another  person’s  actions  inattentively  observed,  or

passing glimpses of people or things, or odd fragments of what one

has read, and so on.’

   Havelock Ellis (1899, 727): ‘The profound emotions of waking life,

the questions and problems on which we spread our chief voluntary

mental  energy,  are  not  those  which  usually  present  themselves  at

once to dream consciousness. It is, so far as the immediate past is

concerned,  mostly  the  trifling,  the  incidental,  the  "forgotten"

impressions of daily life which reappear in our dreams. The psychic

activities  that  are  awake  most  intensely  are  those  that  sleep  most

profoundly.’

      Binz  (1878,  44-5)  actually  makes  this  particular  peculiarity  of

memory in dreams the occasion for expressing his dissatisfaction with

the explanations of dreams which he himself has supported: ‘And the

natural dream raises similar problems. Why do we not always dream

of  the  mnemic  impressions  of  the  day  we  have  just  lived  through?

Why do we often, without any apparent motive, plunge instead into the

remote and almost extinct past? Why does consciousness so often in

dreams receive the impression of indifferent mnemic images, while the

brain cells, just where they carry the most sensitive marks of what has

been  experienced,  lie  for  the  most  part  silent  and  still,  unless  theyhave been stirred into fresh activity shortly before, during waking life?’

      It  is  easy  to  see  how  the  remarkable  preference  shown  by  the

memory  in  dreams  for  indifferent,  and  consequently  unnoticed,

elements in waking experience is bound to lead people to overlook in

general the dependence of dreams upon waking life and at all events

to make it difficult in any particular instance to prove that dependence.

Thus Miss Whiton Galkins (1893, 315), in her statistical study of her

own and her collaborator’s dreams, found that in eleven per cent of

the total there was no visible connection with waking life. Hildebrandt

(1875, ) is unquestionably right in asserting that we should be able to

explain the genesis of every dream-image if we devoted enough time

and trouble to tracing its origin. He speaks of this as ‘an exceedingly

laborious and thankless task. For as a rule it ends in hunting out every

kind of utterly worthless psychical event from the remotest corners of

the chambers of one’s memory, and in dragging to light once again

every  kind  of  completely  indifferent  moment  of  the  past  from  the

oblivion  in  which  it  was  buried  in  the  very  hour,  perhaps,  after  it

occurred.’  I  can  only  regret  that  this  keen-sighted  author  allowed

himself  to  be  deterred  from  following  the  path  which  had  this

inauspicious beginning; if he had followed it, it would have led him to

the very heart of the explanation of dreams.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        534

 

 

   The way in which the memory behaves in dreams is undoubtedly of

the  greatest  importance  for  any  theory  of  memory  in  general.  It

teaches us that ‘nothing which we have once mentally possessed can

be entirely lost’ (Scholz, 1893, 59); or, as Delboeuf puts it, ‘que toute

impression  même  la  plus  insignifiante,  laisse  une  trace  inaltérable,

indéfiniment susceptible de reparâitre au jour.’ This is a conclusion to

which we are also driven by many pathological phenomena of mental

life. Certain theories about dreams which we shall mention later seek

to account for their absurdity and incoherence by a partial forgetting of

what we know during the day. When we bear in mind the extraordinaryefficiency that we have just seen exhibited by memory in dreams we

shall  have  a  lively  sense  of  the  contradiction  which  these  theories

involve.

   It might perhaps occur to us that the phenomenon of dreaming could

be reduced entirely to that of memory: dreams, it might be supposed,

are a manifestation of a reproductive activity which is at work even in

the night and which is an end in itself. This would tally with statements

such as those made by Pilcz (1899), according to which there is a

fixed relation observable between the time at which a dream occurs

and its content-impressions from the remotest past being reproduced

in dreams during deep sleep, while more recent impressions appear

towards  morning.  But  views  of  this  sort  are  inherently  improbable

owing to the manner in which dreams deal with the material that is to

be  remembered.  Strümpell  rightly  points  out  that  dreams  do  not

reproduce experiences. They take one step forward, but the next step

in the chain is omitted, or appears in an altered form, or is replaced by

something entirely extraneous. Dreams yield no more than fragments

of  reproductions;  and  this  is  so  general  a  rule  that  theoretical

conclusions may be based on it. It is true that there are exceptional

cases  in  which  a  dream  repeats  an  experience  with  as  much

completeness as is attainable by our waking memory. Delboeuf tells

how one of his university colleagues had a dream which reproduced in

all  its  details  a  dangerous  carriage  accident  he  had  had,  with  an

almost miraculous escape. Miss Calkins (1893) mentions two dreams

whose content was an exact reproduction of an event of the previous

day, and I shall myself have occasion later to report an example I

came  across  of  a  childhood  experience  re-appearing  in  a  dream

without modification.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] Subsequent experience leads me to add that it by no means

rarely happens that innocent and unimportant actions of the previous day are repeated in a
dream: such, for instance, as packing a trunk, preparing food in the kitchen, and so on. What
the dreamer is himself stressing in dreams of this kind is not, however, the content of the
memory but the fact of its being ‘real’: ‘I really did do all that yesterday.’
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        535

                                           (C)

 

                      THE STIMULI AND SOURCES OF DREAMS

 

   There is a popular saying that ‘dreams come from indigestion’ and

this  helps  us  to  see  what  is  meant  by  the  stimuli  and  sources  of

dreams.  Behind  these  concepts  lies  a  theory  according  to  which

dreams are a result of a disturbance of sleep: we should not have had

a dream unless something disturbing had happened during our sleep,

and the dream was a reaction to that disturbance.

   Discussions upon the exciting causes of dreams occupy a very large

space in the literature of the subject. The problem could obviously only

arise after dreams had become a subject of biological investigation.

The ancients, who believed that dreams were inspired by the gods,

had no need to look around for their stimulus: dreams emanated from

the will of divine or daemonic powers and their content arose from the

knowledge  or  purpose  of  those  powers.  Science  was  immediately

faced by the question of whether the stimulus to dreaming was always

the same or whether there could be many kinds of such stimuli; and

this  involved  the  consideration  of  whether  the  explanation  of  the

causation of dreams fell within the province of psychology or rather of

physiology.  Most  authorities  seem  to  agree  in  assuming  that  the

causes that disturb sleep - that is, the sources of dreaming - may be of

many kinds and that somatic stimuli and mental excitations alike may

come to act as instigators of dreams. Opinions differ widely, however,

in the preference they show for one or the other source of dreams and

in the order of importance which they assign to them as factors in the

production of dreams.

   Any complete enumeration of the sources of dreams leads to a

recognition of four kinds of source; and these have also been used for

the  classification  of  dreams  themselves.  They  are:  (1)  external

(objective)  sensory  excitations;  (2)  internal  (subjective)  sensory

excitations;  (3)  internal  (organic)  somatic  stimuli;  and  (4)  purely

psychical sources of stimulation.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        536 

 
                          1.  EXTERNAL SENSORY STIMULI

 

   The younger Strümpell, the son of the philosopher whose book on

dreams  has  already  given  us  several  hints  upon  their  problems,

published a well-known account of his observations upon one of his

patients who was afflicted with general anaesthesia of the surface of

his body and paralysis of several of his higher sense organs. If the few

of this man’s sensory channels which remained open to the external

world were closed, he would fall asleep. Now when we ourselves wish

to  go  to  sleep  we  are  in  the  habit  of  trying  to  produce  a  situation

similar to that of Strümpell’s experiment. We close our most important

sensory channels, our eyes, and try to protect the other senses from

all stimuli or from any modification of the stimuli acting on them. We

then fall asleep, even though our plan is never completely realized.

We cannot keep stimuli completely away from our sense organs nor

can we completely suspend the excitability of our sense organs. The

fact  that  a  fairly  powerful  stimulus  will  awaken  us  at  any  time  is

evidence that ‘even in sleep the soul is in constant contact with the

extracorporeal world’. The sensory stimuli that reach us during sleep

may very well become sources of dreams.

   Now there are a great number of such stimuli, ranging from the

unavoidable ones which the state of sleep itself necessarily involves

or must tolerate from time to time, to the accidental, rousing stimuli

which may or do put an end to sleep. A bright light may force its way

into  our  eyes,  or  a  noise  may  make  itself  heard,  or  some  strong-

smelling substance may stimulate the mucous membrane of our nose.

By unintentional movements during our sleep we may uncover some

part of our body and expose it to sensations of chill, or by a change in

posture  we  may  ourselves  bring  about  sensations  of  pressure  or

contact. We may be stung by a gnat, or some small mishap during the

night  may  impinge  upon  several  of  our  senses  at  once.  Attentive

observers have collected a whole series of dreams in which there has

been such a far-reaching correspondence between a stimulus noticed

on waking and a portion of the content of the dream that it has been

possible to identify the stimulus as the source of the dream .

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        537

 

   I will quote from Jessen (1855, 527 f.) a collection of dreams of this

kind  which  may  be  traced  back  to  objective,  and  more  or  less

accidental, sensory stimulation.

   ‘Every noise that is indistinctly perceived arouses corresponding

dream-images. A peal of thunder will set us in the midst of a battle; the

crowing of a cock may turn into a man’s cry of terror; the creaking of a

door may produce a dream of burglars. If our bed-clothes fall off in the

night, we may dream, perhaps, of walking about naked or of falling

into water. If we are lying cross-wise in bed and push our feet over the

edge, we may dream that we are standing on the brink of a frightful

precipice or that we are falling over a cliff. If our head happens to get

under the pillow, we dream of being beneath a huge overhanging rock

which is on the point of burying us under its weight. Accumulations of

semen lead to lascivious dreams, local pains produce ideas of being

ill-treated, attacked or injured. . . .’

   ‘Meier (1758, 33) once dreamt that he was overpowered by some

men who stretched him out on his back on the ground and drove a

stake into the earth between his big toe and the next one. While he

was imagining this in the dream he woke up and found that a straw

was  sticking  between  his  toes.  On  another  occasion,  according  to

Hennings (1784, 258), when Meier had fastened his shirt rather tight

round  his  neck,  he  dreamt  that  he  was  being  hanged.  Hoffbauer

dreamt when he was a young man of falling down from a high wall,

and when he woke up found that his bedstead had collapsed and that

he had really fallen on to the floor. . . . Gregory reports that once,

when he was lying with his feet on a hot-water bottle, he dreamt he

had climbed to the top of Mount Etna and that the ground there was

intolerably hot. Another man, who was sleeping with a hot poultice on

his head, dreamt that he was being scalped by a band of Red Indians;

while a third, who was wearing a damp night-shirt, imagined that he

was being dragged through a stream. An attack of gout that came on

suddenly  during  sleep  caused  the  patient  to  believe  he  was  in  the

hands of the Inquisition and being tortured on the rack. (Macnish.)'

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        538

 

   The argument based on the similarity between the stimulus and the

content of the dream gains in strength if it is possible deliberately to

convey a sensory stimulus to the sleeper and produce in him a dream

corresponding to that stimulus. According to Macnish (loc. cit.), quoted

by  Jessen  (1855,  529),  experiments  of  this  sort  had  already  been

made  by  Girou  de  Buzareingues.  ‘He  left  his  knee  uncovered  and

dreamt that he was travelling at night in a mail coach. He remarks

upon this that travellers will no doubt be aware how cold one’s knees

become at night in a coach. Another time he left his head uncovered

at the back and dreamt that he was taking part in a religious ceremony

in the open air. It must be explained that in the country in which he

lived it was the custom always to keep the head covered except in

circumstances such as these.’

      Maury  (1878)  brings  forward  some  new  observations  of  dreams

produced  in  himself.  (A  number  of  other  experiments  were

unsuccessful.)

   (1) His lips and the tip of his nose were tickled with a feather. - He

dreamt of a frightful form of torture: a mask made of pitch was placed

on his face and then pulled off, so that it took his skin off with it,

   (2) A pair of scissors was sharpened on a pair of pliers. -He heard

bells pealing, followed by alarm-bells, and he was back in the June

days of 1848.

   (3) He was given some eau-de-cologne to smell. -He was in Cairo,

in  Johann  Maria  Farina’s  shop.  Some  absurd  adventures  followed,

which he could not reproduce.

   (4) He was pinched lightly on the neck. - He dreamt he was being

given a mustard plaster and thought of the doctor who had treated him

as a child.

   (5) A hot iron was brought close to his face. - He dreamt that the

‘chauffeurs’¹ had made their way into the house and were forcing its

inhabitants to give up their money by sticking their feet into braziers of

hot coal. The Duchess of Abrantes, whose secretary he was in the

dream, then appeared.

   (8) A drop of water was dropped on his forehead. - He was in Italy,was sweating violently and was drinking white Orvieto wine.

   (9) Light from a candle was repeatedly shone upon him through a

sheet of red paper. - He dreamt of the weather and of the heat, and

was  once  again  in  a  storm  he  had  experienced  in  the  English

Channel.

 

   ¹ The ‘chauffeurs’ were bands of robbers in La Vendée, who made use of the method of

torture described above.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        539

 

      Other  attempts  at  producing  dreams  experimentally  have  been

reported by Hervey de Saint-Denys, Weygandt (1893), and others.

   Many writers have commented upon ‘the striking facility with which

dreams are able to weave a sudden impression from the world of the

senses into their own structure so that it comes as what appears to be

a  pre-arranged  catastrophe  that  his  been  gradually  led  up  to.’

(Hildebrandt,  1875,.)  ‘In  my  youth’,  the  author  goes  on,  ‘I  used  to

make use of an alarm-clock in order to be up regularly at a fixed hour.

It must have happened hundreds of times that the noise produced by

this instrument fitted into an ostensibly lengthy and connected dream

as though the whole dream had been leading up to that one event and

had reached its appointed end in what was a logically indispensable

climax.’

   I shall quote three of these alarm-clock dreams presently in another

connection.

   Volkelt (1875, 108 f.) writes: ‘A composer once dreamt that he was

giving a class and was trying to make a point clear to his pupils. When

he had done, he turned to one of the boys and asked him if he had

followed. The boy shouted back like a lunatic: "Oh ja! " He began to

reprove the boy angrily for shouting, but the whole class broke out into

cries first of "Orja!", then of "Eurjo!" and finally of "Feuerjo!" At this

point he was woken up by actual cries of "Feuerjo!" in the street.’

      Garnier  (1865)  tells  how  Napoleon  I  was  woken  by  a  bomb-

explosion while he was asleep in his carriage. He had a dream that he

was  once  more  crossing  the  Tagliamento  under  the  Austrianbombardment, and at last started up with a cry: ‘We are undermined!’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        540

 

   A dream dreamt by Maury (1878, 161) has become famous. He was

ill and lying in his room in bed, with his mother sitting beside him, and

dreamt  that  it  was  during  the  Reign  of  Terror.  After  witnessing  a

number of frightful scenes of murder, he was finally himself brought

before the revolutionary tribunal. There he saw Robespierre, Marat,

Fouquier-Tinville and the rest of the grim heroes of those terrible days.

He was questioned by them, and, after a number of incidents which

were  not  retained  in  his  memory,  was  condemned,  and  led  to  the

place of execution surrounded by an immense mob. He climbed on to

the scaffold and was bound to the plank by the executioner. It was

tipped  up.  The  blade  of  the  guillotine  fell.  He  felt  his  head  being

separated from his body, woke up in extreme anxiety and found that

the  top  of  the  bed  had  fallen  down  and  had  struck  his  cervical

vertebrae just in the way in which the blade of the guillotine would

actually have struck them.

   This dream was the basis of an interesting discussion between Le

Lorrain  (1894)  and  Egger  (1895)  in  the Revue  philosophique.  The

question raised was whether and how it was possible for a dreamer to

compress such an apparently superabundant quantity of material into

the short period elapsing between his perceiving the rousing stimulus

and his waking.

   Examples of this kind leave an impression that of all the sources of

dreams the best confirmed are objective sensory stimuli during sleep.

Moreover they are the only sources whatever taken into account by

laymen. If an educated man, who is unacquainted with the literature of

dreams, is asked how dreams arise, he will infallibly answer with a

reference to some instance he has come across in which a dream was

explained by an objective sensory stimulus discovered after waking.

Scientific enquiry, however, cannot stop there. It finds an occasion for

further questions in the observed fact that the stimulus which impinges

on the senses during sleep does not appear in the dream in its realshape but is replaced by another image in some way related to it. But

the relation connecting the stimulus of the dream to the dream which

is  its  result  is,  to  quote  Maury’s  words  (1854,  72);  ‘une  affinité

quelconque, mais qui n’est pas unique et exclusive.’ ¹ Let us consider

in this connection three of Hildebrandt’s alarm-clock dreams (1875, 37

f.).  The  question  they  raise  is  why  the  same  stimulus  should  have

provoked  three  such  different  dreams  and  why  it  should  have

provoked these rather than any other.

 

   ¹ [‘An affinity of some kind, but one which is not unique and exclusive.’]

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        541

 

   ‘I dreamt, then, that one spring morning I was going for a walk and

was  strolling  through  the  green  fields  till  I  came  to  a  neighbouring

village,  where  I  saw  the  villagers  in  their  best  clothes,  with  hymn-

books  under  their  arms,  flocking  to  the  church.  Of  course!  It  was

Sunday,  and  early  morning  service  would  soon  be  beginning.  I

decided I would attend it; but first, as I was rather hot from walking, I

went into the churchyard which surrounded the church, to cool down.

While I was reading some of the tombstones, I heard the bell-ringer

climbing up the church tower and at the top of it I now saw the little

village bell which would presently give the signal for the beginning of

devotions. For quite a while it hung there motionless, then it began to

swing, and suddenly its peal began to ring out clear and piercing - so

clear and piercing that it put an end to my sleep. But what was ringing

was the alarm-clock.

   ‘Here is another instance. It was a bright winter’s day and the streets

were covered with deep snow. I had agreed to join a party for a sleigh-

ride; but I had to wait a long time before news came that the sleigh

was at the door. Now followed the preparations for getting in - the fur

rug spread out, the foot muff put ready- and at last I was sitting in my

seat. But even then the moment of departure was delayed till a pull at

the reins gave the waiting horses the signal. Then off they started,

and, with a violent shake, the sleigh bells broke into their familiar jingle

- with such violence, in fact, that in a moment the cobweb of my dreamwas torn through. And once again it was only the shrill sound of the

alarm-clock.

   ‘And now yet a third example. I saw a kitchen-maid, carrying several

dozen plates piled on one another, walking along the passage to the

dining-room. The column of china in her arms seemed to me in danger

of  losing  its  balance.  "Take  care,"  I  exclaimed,  "or  you’ll  drop  the

whole  load."  The  inevitable  rejoinder  duly  followed:  she  was  quite

accustomed to that kind of job, and so on. And meanwhile my anxious

looks followed the advancing figure. Then - just as I expected -she

stumbled at the threshold and the fragile crockery slipped and rattled

and clattered in a hundred pieces on the floor. But the noise continued

without ceasing, and soon it seemed no longer to be a clattering; it

was turning into a ringing - and the ringing, as my waking self now

became aware, was only the alarm-clock doing its duty.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        542

 

      The  question  of  why  the  mind  mistakes  the  nature  of  objective

sensory  stimuli  in  dreams  receives  almost  the  same  answer  from

Strümpell (1877) as from Wundt (1874): the mind receives stimuli that

reach it during sleep under conditions favourable to the formation of

illusions.  A  sense  impression  is  recognized  by  us  and  correctly

interpreted - that is, it is placed in the group of memories to which, in

accordance with all our previous experiences, it belongs - provided the

impression  is  sufficiently  strong,  clear  and  lasting  and  provided  we

have sufficient time at our disposal for considering the matter. If these

conditions are not fulfilled, we mistake the object which is the source

of the impression: we form an illusion about it. ‘If someone goes for a

walk  in  the  open  country  and  has  in  indeterminate  perception  of  a

distant object, he may at first believe it to be a horse.’ On a closer

view he may be led to interpret it as a cow lying down, and the image

may finally resolve itself definitely into a group of people sitting on the

ground. The impressions received by the mind from external stimuli

during sleep are of a similarly indeterminate nature; and on their basis

the mind forms illusions, since a greater or smaller number of mnemicimages are aroused by the impression and it is through them that it

acquires  its  psychical  value.  From which  of  the  many  groups  of

memories concerned the related images shall be aroused and which

of the possible associative connections shall accordingly be put into

action - these questions too, on Strümpell’s theory, are indeterminable

and are, as it were, left open to the arbitrary decision of the mind.

 

   At this point we are faced with a choice between two alternatives.

We  may  admit  it  as  a  fact  that  it  is  impossible  to  follow  the  laws

governing  the  formation  of  dreams  any  further;  and  we  may

accordingly  refrain  from  enquiring  whether  there  may  not  be  other

determinants governing the interpretation put by the dreamer upon the

illusion called up by the sense-impression. Or, on the other hand, we

may have a suspicion that the sensory stimulus which impinges on the

sleeper plays only a modest part in generating his dream and that

other factors determine the choice of the mnemic images which are to

be  aroused  in  him.  In  fact,  if  we  examine  Maury’s  experimentally

produced  dreams  (which  I  have  related  in  such  detail  for  this  very

reason),  we  shall  be  tempted  to  say  that  the  experiment  in  fact

accounts for the origin of only one element of the dreams; the rest of

their content seems too self-contained, too definite in its details, to be

explicable  solely  by  the  necessity  for  fitting  in  with  the  element

experimentally introduced from outside. Indeed, one begins to have

doubts  about  the  illusion  theory  and  about  the  power  of  objective

impressions  to  give  a  shape  to  dreams  when  one  finds  that  those

impressions are sometimes subjected in dreams to the most peculiar

and far-fetched interpretations. Thus Simon (1888) tells us of a dream

in  which  he  saw  some  gigantic  figures  seated  at  table  and  clearly

heard the frightful snapping noise made by their jaws coming together

as  they  chewed.  When  he  awoke  he  heard  the  beat  of  a  horse’s

hooves  galloping  past  his  window.  The  noise  made  by  the  horse’s

hooves  may  have  suggested  ideas  from  a  group  of  memories

connected with Gulliver’s Travels - the giants of Brobdingnag and the

virtuous Houyhnhnms - if I may venture on an interpretation without

the dreamer’s assistance. Is it not probable, then, that the choice of

such  an  unusual  group  of  memories  as  these  was  facilitated  by

motives other than the objective stimulus alone!¹ 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1911:] The appearance of gigantic figures in a dream gives grounds for

supposing  that  some  scene  from  the  dreamer’s  childhood  is  involved.  -  [Added  1925:]
Incidentally,  the  interpretation  given  in  the  text,  pointing  to  a  reminiscence  of Gulliver’s
Travels, is a good example of what an interpretation ought not to be. The interpreter of a
dream should not give free play to his own ingenuity and neglect the dreamer’s associations.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        543

 

 
                2.  INTERNAL (SUBJECTIVE) SENSORY EXCITATIONS

 

   In spite of any objections to the contrary, it has to be admitted that

the  part  played  by  objective  sensory  excitations  during  sleep  in

provoking  dreams  remains  indisputable.  And  if  such  stimuli  may

appear, from their nature and frequency, insufficient to explain every

dream-image, we shall be encouraged to seek for other sources of

dreams analogous to them in their operation. I cannot say when the

idea first cropped up of taking internal (subjective) excitations of the

sense organs into account alongside of the external sensory stimuli. It

is, however, the case that this is done, more or less explicitly, in all the

more recent discussions of the aetiology of dreams. ‘An essential part

is also played, I believe’, writes Wundt (1874, 657), ‘in the production

of  the  illusions  that  occur  in  dreams  by  the  subjective  visual  and

auditory sensations which are familiar to us in the waking state as the

formless areas of luminosity which become visible to us when our field

of vision is darkened, as ringing or buzzing in the ears, and so on.

Especially important among these are the subjective excitations of the

retina. It is in this way that is to be explained the remarkable tendency

of dreams to conjure up before the eyes similar or identical objects in

large numbers. We see before us innumerable birds or butterflies or

fishes or coloured beads or flowers, etc. Here the luminous dust in the

darkened  field  of  vision  has  taken  on  a  fantastic  shape,  and  the

numerous specks of which it consists are incorporated into the dream

as an equal number of separate images; and these, on account of

their mobility, are regarded as moving objects. -This is no doubt also

the basis of the great fondness shown by dreams for animal figures ofevery  sort;  for  the  immense  variety  of  such  forms  can  adjust  itself

easily  to  the  particular  form  assumed  by  the  subjective  luminous

images.’

   As sources of dream-images, subjective sensory excitations have

the obvious advantage of not being dependent, like objective ones,

upon  external  chance.  They  are  ready  to  hand,  as  one  might  say,

whenever  they  are  needed  as  an  explanation.  But  they  are  at  a

disadvantage compared with objective sensory stimuli in that the part

they  play  in  instigating  a  dream  is  scarcely  or  not  at  all  open  to

confirmation, as is the case with objective stimuli, by observation and

experiment. The chief evidence in favour of the power of subjective

sensory excitations to instigate dreams is provided by what are known

as  ‘hypnagogic  hallucinations’,  or,  to  use  Johannes  Müller’s  term

(1826), ‘imaginative visual phenomena’. These are images, often very

vivid and rapidly changing, which are apt to appear - quite habitually,

in some people - during the period of falling asleep; and they may also

persist for a time after the eyes have been opened. Maury, who was

subject  to  them  in  a  high  degree,  has  made  an  exhaustive

examination of them and maintains (as did Müller before him) their

connection and indeed their identity with dream-images. In order to

produce  them,  he  says  (Maury,  1878,  59  f.),  a  certain  amount  of

mental passivity, a relaxation of the strain of attention, is necessary. It

is enough, however, to fall into a lethargic state of this kind for no

more  than  a  second  (provided  that  one  has  the  necessary

predisposition) in order to have a hypnagogic hallucination. After this

one may perhaps wake up again and the process may be repeated

several times until one finally falls asleep. Maury found that if he then

woke  up  once  more  after  not  too  long  an  interval,  he  was  able  to

detect in his dream the same images that had floated before his eyes

as hypnagogic hallucinations before he fell asleep. (Ibid., 134 f.) This

was the case on one occasion with a number of grotesque figures with

distorted faces and strange coiffures which pestered him with extreme

pertinacity while he was going to sleep and which he remembered

having  dreamt  about  after  he  woke.  Another  time,  when  he  was

suffering from hunger owing to having put himself on a light diet, he

had a hypnagogic vision of a plate and a hand armed with a fork which

was helping itself to some of the food from the plate. In the dreamwhich followed he was sitting at a well spread table and heard the

noise made by the diners with their forks. Yet another time, when he

went to sleep with his eyes in an irritated and painful state, he had a

hypnagogic hallucination of some microscopically small signs which

he could only decipher one by one with the greatest difficulty; he was

woken from his sleep an hour later and remembered a dream in which

here  was  an  open  book  printed  in  very  small  type  which  he  was

reading painfully.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

 544

 

   Auditory hallucinations of words, names, and so on can also occur

hypnagogically in the same way as visual images, and may then be

repeated  in  a  dream  -  just  as  an  overture  announces  the  principal

themes which are to be heard in the opera that is to follow.

   A more recent observer of hypnagogic hallucinations, G. Trumbull

Ladd (1892), has followed the same lines as Müller and Maury. After

some practice he succeeded in being able to wake himself suddenly

without  opening  his  eyes,  from  two  to  five  minutes  after  gradually

falling  asleep.  He  thus  had  an  opportunity  of  comparing  the  retinal

sensations  which  were  just  disappearing  with  the  dream-images

persisting in his memory. He declares that it was possible in every

case  to  recognize  an  internal  relation  between  the  two,  for  the

luminous points and lines of the idioretinal light provided, as it were,

an outline drawing or diagram of the figures mentally perceived in the

dream. For instance, an arrangement of the luminous points in the

retina in parallel lines corresponded to a dream in which he had been

seeing, clearly spread out in front of him, some lines of print which he

was engaged in reading. Or, to use his own words, ‘the clearly printed

page which I was reading in my dream faded away into an object that

appeared to my waking consciousness like a section of an actual page

of print when seen through an oval hole in a piece of paper at too

great a distance to distinguish more than an occasional fragment of a

word, and even that dimly.’ Ladd is of opinion (though he does not

underestimate the part played in the phenomenon by central factors)that scarcely a single visual dream, occurs without the participation of

material  provided  by  intraocular  retinal  excitation.  This  applies

especially  to  dreams  occurring  soon  after  falling  asleep  in  a  dark

room, while the source of stimulus for dreams occurring in the morning

shortly before waking is the objective light which penetrates the eyes

in  a  room  that  is  growing  light.  The  changing,  perpetually  shifting

character of the excitation of the idioretinal light corresponds precisely

to  the  constantly  moving  succession  of  images  shown  us  by  our

dreams. No one who attaches importance to these observations of

Ladd’s  will  underestimate  the  part  played  in  dreams  by  these

subjective  sources  of  stimulation,  for,  as  we  know,  visual  images

constitute the principal component of our dreams. The contributions

from the other senses, except for that of hearing, are intermittent and

of less importance.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

 545

 

                      3.  INTERNAL ORGANIC SOMATIC STIMULI

 

   Since we are now engaged in looking for sources of dreams inside

the organism instead of outside it, we must bear in mind that almost all

our internal organs, though they give us scarcely any news of their

working so long as they are in a healthy state, become a source of

what  are  mainly  distressing  sensations  when  they  are  in  what  we

describe as states of excitation, or during illnesses. These sensations

must be equated with the sensory or painful stimuli reaching us from

the  outside.  The  experience  of  ages  is  reflected  in  -  to  take  an

example  -  Strümpell’s  remarks  on  the  subject  (1877,  107):  ‘During

sleep the mind attains a far deeper and wider sensory consciousness

of somatic events than during the waking state. It is obliged to receive

and be affected by impressions of stimuli from parts of the body and

from changes in the body of which it knows nothing when awake.’ So

early  a  writer  as  Aristotle  regarded  it  as  quite  possible  that  the

beginnings of an illness might make themselves felt in dreams before

anything could be noticed of it in waking life, owing to the magnifyingeffect produced upon impressions by dreams. (See above, p. 518.)

Medical  writers,  too,  who  were  certainly  far  from  believing  in  the

prophetic  power  of  dreams,  have  not  disputed  their  significance  as

premonitors  of  illness.  (Cf.  Simon,  1888,  31,  and  many  earlier

writers.)¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] Apart from the diagnostic value ascribed to dreams (e.g. in the

works of Hippocrates), their therapeutic importance in antiquity must also be borne in mind. In
Greece  there  were  dream  oracles,  which  were  regularly  visited  by  patients  in  search  of
recovery. A sick man would enter the temple of Apollo or Aesculapius, would perform various
ceremonies there, would be purified by lustration, massage and incense, and then, in a state
of exaltation, would be stretched on the skin of a ram that had been sacrificed. He would then
fall asleep and would dream of the remedies for his illness. These would be revealed to him
either in their natural form or in symbols and pictures which would afterwards be interpreted
by  the  priests.  For  further  information  upon  therapeutic  dreams  among  the  Greeks  see
Lehmann  (1908,  1,  74),  Bouché-Leclercq  (1879-1882),  Hermann  (1858,  §41,  262  ff.,  and
1882, §38, 356), Böttinger (1795, 163 ff.), Lloyd (1877), Döllinger (1857, 130).

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        546

 

   Instances of the diagnostic power of dreams seem to be vouched for

in more recent times. Thus Tissié (1898, 62 f.) quotes from Artigues

(1884,  43)  the  story  of  a  forty-three-year  old  woman,  who,  while

apparently in perfect health, was for some years tormented by anxiety-

dreams.  She  was  then  medically  examined  and  found  to  be  in  the

early  stages  of  an  affection  of  the  heart,  to  which  she  eventually

succumbed.

      Pronounced  disorders  of  the  internal  organs  obviously  act  as

instigators of dreams in a whole number of cases. The frequency of

anxiety-dreams  in  diseases  of  the  heart  and  lungs  is  generally

recognized. Indeed, this side of dream-life is placed in the foreground

by so many authorities that I am content with a mere reference to the

literature:  Radestock,  Spitta,  Maury,  Simon  (1888),  Tissié.  Tissié  is

even  of  the  opinion  that  the  particular  organ  affected  gives  a

characteristic impress to the content of the dream. Thus the dreams of

those suffering from diseases of the heart are usually short and come

to  a  terrifying  end  at  the  moment  of  waking;  their  content  almost

always includes a situation involving a horrible death. Sufferers fromdiseases of the lungs dream of suffocation, crowding and fleeing, and

are remarkably subject to the familiar nightmare. (It may be remarked,

incidentally, that Börner (1855) has succeeded in provoking the latter

experimentally  by  lying  on  his  face  or  covering  the  respiratory

apertures.)  In the case of digestive disorders dreams contain ideas

connected with enjoyment of food or disgust. Finally, the influence of

sexual  excitement  on  the  content  of  dreams  can  be  adequately

appreciated by everyone from his own experience and provides the

theory  that  dreams  are  instigated  by  organic  stimuli  with  its  most

powerful support.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        547

 

   No one, moreover, who goes through the literature of the subject

can  fail  to  notice  that  some  writers,  such  as  Maury  and  Weygandt

(1893), were led to the study of dream problems by the effect of their

own illnesses upon the content of their dreams.

   Nevertheless, though these facts are established beyond a doubt,

their importance for the study of the sources of dreams is not so great

as might have been hoped. Dreams are phenomena which occur in

healthy people - perhaps in everyone, perhaps every night - and it is

obvious  that  organic  illness  cannot  be  counted  among  its

indispensable conditions. And what we are concerned with is not the

origin  of  certain  special  dreams  but  the  source  that  instigates  the

ordinary dreams of normal people.

   We need only go a step further, however, in order to come upon a

source of dreams more copious than any we have so far considered,

one  indeed  which  seems  as  though  it  could  never  run  dry.  If  it  is

established that the interior of the body when it is in a diseased state

becomes a source of stimuli for dreams, and if we admit that during

sleep the mind, being diverted from the external world, is able to pay

more attention to the interior of the body, then it seems plausible to

suppose that the internal organs do not need to be diseased before

they can cause excitations to reach the sleeping mind - excitations

which are somehow turned into dream-images. While we are awakewe are aware of a diffuse general sensibility or coenaesthesia, but

only  as  a  vague  quality  of  our  mood;  to  this  feeling,  according  to

medical opinion, all the organic systems contribute a share. At night,

however, it would seem that this same feeling, grown into a powerful

influence  and  acting  through  its  various  components,  becomes  the

strongest and at the same time the commonest source for instigating

dream-images. If this is so, it would only remain to investigate the laws

according to which the organic stimuli turn into dream-images.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        548

 

   We have here reached the theory of the origin of dreams which is

preferred  by  all  the  medical  authorities.  The  obscurity  in  which  the

centre of our being (the ‘moi splanchnique’, as Tissié calls it) is veiled

from  our  knowledge  and  the  obscurity  surrounding  the  origin  of

dreams tally too well not to be brought into relation to each other. The

line  of  thought  which  regards  vegetative  organic  sensation  as  the

constructor  of  dreams  has,  moreover,  a  particular  attraction  for

medical  men  since  it  allows  of  a  single  aetiology  for  dreams  and

mental diseases, whose manifestations have so much in common; for

coenaesthetic changes and stimuli arising from the internal organs are

also held largely responsible for the origin of the psychoses. It is not

surprising,  therefore,  that  the  origin  of  the  theory  of  somatic

stimulation may be traced back to more than one independent source.

   The line of argument developed by the philosopher Schopenhauer in

1851 has had a decisive influence on a number of writers. Our picture

of the universe, in his view, is arrived at by our intellect taking the

impressions that impinge on it from outside and remoulding them into

the forms of time, space and causality. During the daytime the stimuli

from  the  interior  of  the  organism,  from  the  sympathetic  nervous

system, exercise at the most an unconscious effect upon our mood.

But at night, when we are no longer deafened by the impressions of

the day, those which arise from within are able to attract attention just

as at night we can hear the murmuring of a brook which is drowned by

daytime  noise.  But  how  is  the  intellect  to  react  to  these  stimuliotherwise than by carrying out its own peculiar function on them? The

stimuli  are  accordingly  remodelled  into  forms  occupying  space  and

time  and  obeying  the  rules  of  causality,  and  thus  dreams  arise.

Scherner  (1861)  and  after  him  Volkelt  (1875)  endeavoured

subsequently  to  investigate  in  more  detail  the  relation  between

somatic  stimuli  and  dream-images,  but  I  shall  postpone  my

consideration of these attempts till we reach the section dealing with

the various theories about dreams.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        549

 

      Krauss,  the  psychiatrist,  in  an  investigation  carried  through  with

remarkable  consistency,  traces  the  origin  alike  of  dreams  and  of

deliria  and  delusions  to  the  same  factor,  namely  to  organically

determined sensations. It is scarcely possible to think of any part of

the organism which might not be the starting-point of a dream or of a

delusion. Organically determined sensations ‘may be divided into two

classes: (1) those constituting the general mood (coenaesthesia) and

(2) the specific sensations immanent in the principal systems of the

vegetative  organism.  Of  these  latter  five  groups  are  to  be

distinguished: (a) muscular, (b) respiratory, (c) gastric, (d) sexual and

(e) peripheral sensations.’ Krauss supposes that the process by which

dream-images arise on the basis of somatic stimuli is as follows. The

sensation  that  has  been  aroused  evokes  a  cognate  image,  in

accordance with some law of association. It combines with the image

into  an  organic  structure,  to  which,  however,  consciousness  reacts

abnormally. For it pays no attention to the sensation, but directs the

whole of it to the accompanying images - which explains why the true

facts were for so long misunderstood. Krauss has a special term for

describing  this  process:  the  ‘trans-substantiation’  of  sensations  into

dream-images.

      The  influence  of  organic  somatic  stimuli  upon  the  formation  of

dreams is almost universally accepted to-day; but the question of the

laws  that  govern  the  relation  between  them  is  answered  in  very

various ways, and often by obscure pronouncements. On the basis ofthe theory of somatic stimulation, dream-interpretation is thus faced

with the special problem of tracing back the content of a dream to the

organic stimuli which caused it; and, if the rules for interpretation laid

down by Scherner (1861) are not accepted, one is often faced with the

awkward  fact  that  the  only  thing  that  reveals  the  existence  of  the

organic stimulus is precisely the content of the dream itself.

      There  is  a  fair  amount  of  agreement,  however,  over  the

interpretation  of  various  forms  of  dreams  that  are  described  as

‘typical’, because they occur in large numbers of people and with very

similar content. Such are the familiar dreams of falling from a height,

of teeth falling out, of flying and of embarrassment at being naked or

insufficiently clad. This last dream is attributed simply to the sleeper’s

perceiving that he has thrown off his bedclothes in his sleep and is

lying exposed to the air. The dream of teeth falling out is traced back

to a ‘dental stimulus’, though this does not necessarily imply that the

excitation of the teeth is a pathological one. According to Strümpell the

flying dream is the image which is found appropriate by the mind as

an interpretation of the stimulus produced by the rising and sinking of

the  lobes  of  the  lungs  at  times  when  cutaneous  sensations  in  the

thorax have ceased to be conscious: it is this latter circumstance that

leads  to  the  feeling  which  is  attached  to  the  idea  of  floating.  The

dream of falling from a height is said to be due to an arm falling away

from the body or a flexed knee being suddenly extended at a time

when the sense of cutaneous pressure is beginning to be no longer

conscious; the movements in question cause the tactile sensations to

become conscious once more, and the transition to consciousness is

represented  psychically  by  the  dream  of  falling  (ibid.,  118).  The

obvious weakness of these attempted explanations, plausible though

they are, lies in the fact that, without any other evidence, they can

make  successive  hypotheses  that  this  or  that  group  of  organic

sensations  enters  or  disappears  from  mental  perception,  till  a

constellation has been reached which affords an explanation of the

dream. I shall later have occasion to return to the question of typical

dreams and their origin.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams                                                                                        550

 

   Simon (1888, 34 f.) has attempted to deduce some of the rules

governing  the  way  in  which  organic  stimuli  determine  the  resultant

dreams by comparing a series of similar dreams. He asserts that if an

organic apparatus which normally plays a part in the expression of an

emotion is brought by some extraneous cause during sleep into the

state of excitation which is usually produced by the emotion, then a

dream will arise which will contain images appropriate to the emotion

in question. Another rule lays it down that if during sleep an organ is in

a state of activity, excitation or disturbance, the dream will produce

images related to the performance of the function which is discharged

by  the  organ  concerned.  Mourly  Vold  (1896)  has  set  out  to  prove

experimentally in one particular field the effect on the production of

dreams which is asserted by the theory of somatic stimulation. His

experiment consisted in altering the position of a sleeper’s limbs and

comparing the resultant dreams with the alterations made. He states

his findings as follows:

    (1) The position of a limb in the dream corresponds approximately

to its position in reality. Thus, we dream of the limb being in a static

condition when it is so actually.

    (2) If we dream of a limb moving, then one of the positions passed

through  in  the  course  of  completing  the  movement  in  variably

corresponds to the limb’s actual position.

    (3) The position of the dreamer’s own limb may be ascribed in the

dream to some other person.

    (4) The dream may be of the movement in question being hindered.

    (5) The limb which is in the position in question may appear in the

dream as an animal or monster, in which case a certain analogy is

established between them.

    (6) The position of a limb may give rise in the dream to thoughts

which have some connection with the limb. Thus, if the fingers are

concerned, we dream of numbers.

   I should be inclined to conclude from findings such as these that

even  the  theory  of  somatic  stimulation  has  not  succeeded  in

completely doing away with the apparent absence of determination in

the choice of what dream-images are to be produced.¹ 

   ¹ [Footnote added  1914:]  This  author  has  since  produced  a  two-volume  report  on  his

experiments (1910 and 1912), which is referred to below.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        551

 

 
                    4.  PSYCHICAL SOURCES OF STIMULATION

 

   When we were dealing with the relations of dreams to waking life

and with the material of dreams, we found that the most ancient and

the most recent students of dreams were united in believing that men

dream of what they do during the daytime and of what interests them

while they are awake. Such an interest, carried over from waking life

into sleep, would not only be a mental bond, a link between dreams

and life, but would also provide us with a further source of dreams and

one not to be despised. Indeed, taken in conjunction with the interests

that develop during sleep - the stimuli that impinge on the sleeper - it

might be enough to explain the origin of all dream-images. But we

have also heard the opposite asserted, namely that dreams withdraw

the sleeper from the interests of daytime and that, as a rule, we only

start dreaming of the things that have most struck us during the day,

after they have lost the spice of actuality in waking life. Thus at every

step we take in our analysis of dream-life we come to feel that it is

impossible  to  make  generalizations  without  covering  ourselves  by

such qualifying phrases as ‘frequently’, ‘as a rule’ or ‘in most cases’,

and without being prepared to admit the validity of exceptions.

   If it were a fact that waking interests, along with internal and external

stimuli during sleep, sufficed to exhaust the aetiology of dreams, we

ought to be in a position to give a satisfactory account of the origin of

every element of a dream: the riddle of the sources of dreams would

be  solved,  and  it  would  only  remain  to  define  the  share  taken

respectively by psychical and somatic stimuli in any particular dream.

Actually no such complete explanation of a dream has ever yet been

achieved, and anyone who has attempted it has found portions (and

usually very numerous portions) of the dream regarding whose originhe could find nothing to say. Daytime interests are clearly not such far-

reaching psychical sources of dreams as might have been expected

from the categorical assertions that everyone continues to carry on his

daily business in his dreams.

   No other psychical sources of dreams are known. So it comes about

that all the explanations of dreams given in the literature of the subject

- with the possible exception of Scherner’s, which will be dealt with

later - leave a great gap when it comes to assigning an origin for the

ideational images which constitute the most characteristic material of

dreams. In this embarrassing situation, a majority of the writers on the

subject  have  tended  to  reduce  to  a  minimum  the  part  played  by

psychical factors in instigating dreams, since those factors are so hard

to come at. It is true that they divide dreams into two main classes -

those ‘due to nervous stimulation’ and those ‘due to association’, of

which  the  latter  have  their  source  exclusively  in  reproduction  (cf.

Wundt,  1874,  657  f.).  Nevertheless  they  cannot  escape  a  doubt

‘whether any dream can take place without being given an impetus by

some somatic stimulus’ (Volkelt, 1875, 127). It is difficult even to give

a  description  of  purely  associative  dreams.  ‘In  associative  dreams

proper, there can be no question of any such solid core. Even the very

centre  of  the  dream  is  only  loosely  put  together.  The  ideational

processes, which in any dream are ungoverned by reason or common

sense,  are  here  no  longer  even  held  together  by  my  relatively

important somatic or mental excitations, and are thus abandoned to

their own kaleidoscopic changes and to their own jumbled confusion.’

(Ibid., 118.) Wundt (1874, 656-7), too, seeks to minimize the psychical

factor in the instigation of dreams. He declares that there seems to be

no  justification  for  regarding  the  phantasms  of  dreams  as  pure

hallucinations; most dream-images are probably in fact illusions, since

they  arise  from  faint  sense-impressions,  which  never  cease  during

sleep. Weygandt (1893, 17) has adopted this same view and made its

application general. He asserts of all dream-images ‘that their primary

causes  are  sensory  stimuli  and  that  only  later  do  reproductive

associations become attached to them’. Tissié (1898, 183) goes even

further in putting a limit to the psychical sources of stimulation: ‘Les

rêves  d’origine  absolument  psychique  n’existent  pas’;  and  (ibid.,  6)

‘les pensées de nos rêves nous viennent du dehors. . . .’ ¹ 

   ¹ [‘Dreams of purely psychical origin do not exist.’ ‘The thoughts in our dreams reach us

from outside.’]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        552

 

   Those writers who, like that eminent philosopher Wundt, take up a

middle  position  do  not  fail  to  remark  that  in  most  dreams  somatic

stimuli and the psychical instigators (whether unknown or recognized

as daytime interests) work in co-operation.

   We shall find later that the enigma of the formation of dreams can be

solved  by  the  revelation  of  an  unsuspected  psychical  source  of

stimulation. Meanwhile we shall feel no surprise at the over-estimation

of the part played in forming dreams by stimuli which do not arise from

mental  life.  Not  only  are  they  easy  to  discover  and  even  open  to

experimental  confirmation;  but  the  somatic  view  of  the  origin  of

dreams  is  completely  in  line  with  the  prevailing  trend  of  thought  in

psychiatry to-day. It is true that the dominance of the brain over the

organism  is  asserted  with  apparent  confidence.  Nevertheless,

anything that might indicate that mental life is in any way independent

of demonstrable organic changes or that its manifestations are in any

way  spontaneous  alarms  the  modern  psychiatrist,  as  though  a

recognition of such things would inevitably bring back the days of the

Philosophy of Nature, and of the metaphysical view of the nature of

mind.  The  suspicions  of  the  psychiatrists  have  put  the  mind,  as  it

were, under tutelage, and they now insist that none of its impulses

shall be allowed to suggest that it has any means of its own. This

behaviour of theirs only shows how little trust they really have in the

validity of a causal connection between the somatic and the mental.

Even when investigation shows that the primary exciting cause of a

phenomenon is psychical, deeper research will one day trace the path

further and discover an organic basis for the mental event. But if at the

moment  we  cannot  see  beyond  the  mental,  that  is  no  reason  for

denying its existence.

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        553

 

                                          (D)

 

                  WHY DREAMS ARE FORGOTTEN AFTER WAKING

 

   It is a proverbial fact that dreams melt away in the morning. They

can, of course, be remembered; for we only know dreams from our

memory of them after we are awake. But we very often have a feeling

that we have only remembered a dream in part and that there was

more of it during the night; we can observe, too, how the recollection

of a dream, which was still lively in the morning, will melt away, except

for a few small fragments, in the course of the day; we often know we

have dreamt, without knowing what we have dreamt; and we are so

familiar with the fact of dreams being liable to be forgotten, that we

see no absurdity in the possibility of someone having had a dream in

the night and of his not being aware in the morning either of what he

has dreamt or even of the fact that he has dreamt at all. On the other

hand,  it  sometimes  happens  that  dreams  show  an  extraordinary

persistence in the memory. I have analysed dreams in my patients

which  occurred  twenty-five  and  more  years  earlier;  and  I  can

remember a dream of my own separated by at least thirty-seven years

from to-day and yet as fresh as ever in my memory. All of this is very

remarkable and not immediately intelligible.

   The most detailed account of the forgetting of dreams is the one

given  by  Strümpell.  It  is  evidently  a  complex  phenomenon,  for

Strümpell traces it back not to a single cause but to a whole number of

them.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        554

 

   In the first place, all the causes that lead to forgetting in waking life

are operative for dreams as well. When we are awake we regularly

forget  countless  sensations  and  perceptions  at  once,  because  they

were too weak or because the mental excitation attaching to them wastoo  slight.  The  same  holds  good  of  many  dream-images:  they  are

forgotten because they are too weak, while stronger images adjacent

to them are remembered. The factor of intensity, however, is certainly

not  in  itself  enough  to  determine  whether  a  dream-image  shall  be

recollected. Strümpell admits, as well as other writers (e.g. Calkins,

1893, 312), that we often forget dream-images which we know were

very vivid, while a very large number which are shadowy and lacking

in sensory force are among those retained in the memory. Moreover

when we are awake we tend easily to forget an event which occurs

only  once  and  more  readily  to  notice  what  can  be  perceived

repeatedly.¹  Now  most  dream-images  are  unique  experiences;  and

that  fact  will  contribute  impartially  towards  making  us  forget  all

dreams. Far more importance attaches to a third cause of forgetting. If

sensations, ideas, thoughts, and so on, are to attain a certain degree

of susceptibility to being remembered, it is essential that they should

not  remain  isolated  but  should  be  arranged  in  appropriate

concatenations and groupings. If a short line of verse is divided up into

its component words and these are mixed up, it becomes very hard to

remember. ‘If words are properly arranged and put into the relevant

order, one word will help another, and the whole, being charged with

meaning, will be easily taken up by the memory and retained for a

long  time.  It  is  in  general  as  difficult  and  unusual  to  retain  what  is

nonsensical as it is to retain what is confused and disordered.’ Now

dreams are in most cases lacking in intelligibility and orderliness. The

compositions  which  constitute  dreams  are  barren  of  the  qualities

which  would  make  it  possible  to  remember  them,  and  they  are

forgotten  because  as  a  rule  they  fall  to  pieces  a  moment  later.

Radestock (1879, 168), however, claims to have observed that it is the

most peculiar dreams that are best remembered, and this, it must be

admitted, would scarcely tally with what has just been said.

   Strümpell believes that certain other factors derived from the relation

between dreaming and waking life are of still greater importance in

causing dreams to be forgotten. The liability of dreams to be forgotten

by waking consciousness is evidently only the counterpart of the fact

which has been mentioned earlier that dreams scarcely ever take over

ordered recollections from waking life, but only details selected from

them, which they tear from the psychical context in which they areusually  remembered  in  the  waking  state.  Thus  dream-compositions

find no place in the company of the psychical sequences with which

the mind is filled. There is nothing that can help us to remember them.

‘In this way dream-structures are, as it were, lifted above the floor of

our  mental  life  and  float  in  psychical  space  like  clouds  in  the  sky,

scattered  by  the  first  breath  of  wind.’  (Strümpell,  1877,  87.)  After

waking, moreover, the world of the senses presses forward and at

once takes possession of the attention with a force which very few

dream-images  can  resist;  so  that  here  too  we  have  another  factor

tending  in  the  same  direction.  Dreams  give  way  before  the

impressions of a new day just as the brilliance of the stars yields to the

light of the sun.

 

   ¹ Dreams that recur periodically have often been observed. Cf. the collection given by

Chabaneix (1897).
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

 555

 

   Finally, there is another fact to be borne in mind as likely to lead to

dreams  being  forgotten,  namely  that  most  people  take  very  little

interest in their dreams. Anyone, such as a scientific investigator, who

pays  attention  to  his  dreams  over  a  period  of  time  will  have  more

dreams than usual - which no doubt means that he remembers his

dreams with greater ease and frequency.

   Two further reasons why dreams should be forgotten, which Benini

quotes as having been brought forward by Bonatelli as additions to

those mentioned by Strümpell, seem in fact to be already covered by

the latter. They are (1) that the alteration in coenaesthesia between

the  sleeping  and  waking  states  is  unfavourable  to  reciprocal

reproduction between them; and (2) that the different arrangement of

the  ideational  material  in  dreams  makes  them  untranslatable,  as  it

were, for waking consciousness.

   In view of all these reasons in favour of dreams being forgotten, it is

in fact (as Strümpell himself insists) very remarkable that so many of

them are retained in the memory. The repeated attempts by writers on

the subject to lay down the rules governing the recollection of dreamsamount  to  an  admission  that  here  too  we  are  faced  by  something

puzzling  and  unexplained.  Certain  particular  characteristics  of  the

recollection  of  dreams  have  been  rightly  emphasized  recently  (cf.

Radestock,  1879,  and  Tissié,  1898),  such  as  the  fact  that  when  a

dream  seems  in  the  morning  to  have  been  forgotten,  it  may

nevertheless be recollected during the course of the day, if its content,

forgotten though it is, is touched upon by some chance perception.

   But the recollection of dreams in general is open to an objection

which is bound to reduce their value very completely in critical opinion.

Since so great a proportion of dreams is lost altogether, we may well

doubt whether our memory of what is left of them may not be falsified.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

 556

 

   These doubts as to the accuracy of the reproduction of dreams are

also expressed by Strümpell (1877): ‘Thus it may easily happen that

waking consciousness unwittingly makes interpolations in the memory

of a dream: we persuade ourselves that we have dreamt all kinds of

things that were not contained in the actual dreams.’

      Jessen  (1855,  547)  writes  with  special  emphasis  on  this  point:

‘Moreover,  in  investigating  and  interpreting  coherent  and  consistent

dreams a particular circumstance must be borne in mind which, as it

seems to me, has hitherto received too little attention. In such cases

the truth is almost always obscured by the fact that when we recall

dreams of this kind to our memory we almost always - unintentionally

and without noticing the fact - fill in the gaps in the dream-images. It is

seldom or never that a coherent dream was in fact as coherent as it

seems to us in memory. Even the most truth-loving of men is scarcely

able  to  relate  a  noteworthy  dream  without  some  additions  or

embellishments. The tendency of the human mind to see everything

connectedly is so strong that in memory it unwittingly fills in any lack of

coherence there may be in an incoherent dream.’

   Some remarks made by Egger, though they were no doubt arrived

at independently, read almost like a translation of this passage from

Jessen: ‘. . . L’observation des rêves a ses ifficultés spéciales et leseul moyen d’éviter tout erreur en pareille matière est de confier au

papier  sans  le  moindre  retard  ce  que  l’on  vient  d’éprouver  et  de

remarquer; sinon, l’oubli vient vite ou total ou partiel; l’oubli total est

sans gravité; mais l’oubli partiel est perfide; car si l’on se met ensuite

à raconter ce que l’on n’a pas oublié, on est exposé à compléter par

imagination  les  fragments  incohérents  et  disjoints  fournis  par  la

mémoire . . .; on devient artiste à son insu, et le récit périodiquement

répété  s’impose  à  la  créance  de  son  auteur,  qui,  de  bonne  foi,  le

présente comme un fait authentique, dûment établi selon les bonnes

méthodes. . . .’ ¹

   Very similar ideas are expressed by Spitta (1882, 338), who seems

to  believe  that  it  is  not  until  we  try  to  reproduce  a  dream  that  we

introduce order of any kind into its loosely associated elements: we

‘change things that are merely juxtaposed into sequences or causal

chains, that is to say, we introduce a process of logical connection

which is lacking in the dream.’

   Since the only check that we have upon the validity of our memory is

objective  confirmation,  and  since  that  is  unobtainable  for  dreams,

which are our own personal experience and of which the only source

we  have  is  our  recollection,  what  value  can  we  still  attach  to  our

memory of dreams?

 

   ¹ [‘There are peculiar difficulties in observing dreams, and the only way of escaping all

errors in such matters is to put down upon paper with the least possible delay what we have
just  experienced  or  observed.  Otherwise  forgetfulness,  whether  total  or  partial,  quickly
supervenes. Total forgetfulness is not serious; but partial forgetfulness is treacherous. For if
we then proceed to give an account of what we have not forgotten, we are liable to fill in from
our  imagination  the  incoherent  and  disjointed  fragments  furnished  by  memory.  .  .  .  We
unwittingly become creative artists; and the tale, if it is repeated from time to time, imposes
itself on its author’s own belief, and he ends by offering it in good faith as an authentic fact
duly and legitimately established.’]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        557

 

                                          (E)

 

      THE DISTINGUISHING PSYCHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF DREAMS

    Our scientific consideration of dreams starts off from the assumption

that they are products of our own mental activity. Nevertheless the

finished dream strikes us as something alien to us. We are so little

obliged  to  acknowledge  our  responsibility  for  it  that  we  are  just  as

ready to say ‘mir hat geträumt’ [‘I had a dream’, literally ‘a dream came

to me’] as ‘ich habe geträumt’ [‘I dreamt’]. What is the origin of this

feeling  that  dreams  are  extraneous  to  our  minds?    In  view  of  our

discussion upon the sources of dreams, we must conclude that the

strangeness cannot be due to the material that finds its way into their

content, since that material is for the most part common to dreaming

and waking life. The question arises whether in dreams there may not

be  modifications  in  the  processes  of  the  mind  which  produce  the

impression we are discussing; and we shall therefore make an attempt

at drawing a picture of the psychological attributes of dreams.

      No  one  has  emphasized  more  sharply  the  essential  difference

between  dreaming  and  waking  life  or  drawn  more  far-reaching

conclusions from it than G. T. Fechner in a passage in his Elemente

der Psychophysik (1889, 2, 520-1). In his opinion, ‘neither the mere

lowering of conscious mental life below the main threshold’, nor the

withdrawal of attention from the influences of the external world, are

enough to explain the characteristics of dream-life as contrasted with

waking life. He suspects, rather, that the scene of action of dreams is

different from that of waking ideational life. ‘If the scene of action of

psychophysical  activity  were  the  same  in  sleeping  and  waking,

dreams could, in my view, only be a prolongation at a lower degree of

intensity of waking ideational life and, moreover, would necessarily be

of the same material and form. But the facts are quite otherwise.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        558

 

   It is not clear what Fechner had in mind in speaking of this change

of location of mental activity; nor, so far as I know, has anyone else

pursued the path indicated by his words. We may, I think, dismiss the

possibility  of  giving  the  phrase  an  anatomical  interpretation  and

supposing it to refer to physiological cerebral localization or even tothe histological layers of the cerebral cortex. It may be, however, that

the suggestion will eventually prove to be sagacious and fertile, if it

can be applied to a mental apparatus built up of a number of agencies

arranged in a series one behind the other.

   Other writers have contented themselves with drawing attention to

the  more  tangible  of  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  dream-life

and  with  taking  them  as  a  starting-point  for  attempts  at  more  far

reaching explanations.

   It has justly been remarked that one of the principal peculiarities of

dream-life  makes  its  appearance  during  the  very  process  of  falling

asleep  and  may  be  described  as  a  phenomenon  heralding  sleep.

According  to  Schleiermacher  (1862,  351),  what  characterizes  the

waking state is the fact that thought-activity takes place in concepts

and not in images. Now dreams think essentially in images; and with

the approach of sleep it is possible to observe how, in proportion as

voluntary activities become more difficult, involuntary ideas arise, all of

which fall into the class of images. Incapacity for ideational work of the

kind  which  we  feel  as  intentionally  willed  and  the  emergence

(habitually  associated  with  such  states  of  abstraction)  of  images  -

these are two characteristics which persevere in dreams and which

the  psychological  analysis  of  dreams  forces  us  to  recognize  as

essential  features  of  dream-life.  We  have  already  seen  that  these

images - hypnagogic hallucinations - are themselves identical in their

content with dream-images.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1911:] Silberer (1909) has given some nice examples of the way in

which,  in  a  drowsy  state,  even  abstract  thoughts  become  converted  into  pictorial  plastic
images which seek to express the same meaning. [Added 1925:] I shall have occasion to
return to this discovery in another connection.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        559

 

      Dreams,  then,  think  predominantly  in  visual  images  -  but  not

exclusively.  They  make  use  of  auditory  images  as  well,  and,  to  a

lesser  extent,  of  impressions  belonging  to  the  other  senses.  Many

things, too, occur in dreams (just as they normally do in waking life)simply as thoughts or ideas - probably, that is to say, in the form of

residues  of  verbal  presentations.  Nevertheless,  what  are  truly

characteristic  of  dreams  are  only  those  elements  of  their  content

which behave like images, which are more like perceptions, that is,

than they are like mnemic presentations. Leaving on one side all the

arguments, so familiar to psychiatrists, on the nature of hallucinations,

we  shall  be  in  agreement  with  every  authority  on  the  subject  in

asserting  that  dreams hallucinate  -  that  they  replace  thoughts  by

hallucinations. In this respect there is no distinction between visual

and  acoustic  presentations:  it  has  been  observed  that  if  one  falls

asleep with the memory of a series of musical notes in one’s mind, the

memory  becomes  transformed  into  an  hallucination  of  the  same

melody; while, if one then wakes up again - and the two states may

alternate more than once during the process of dropping asleep - the

hallucination gives way in turn to the mnemic presentation, which is at

once fainter and qualitatively different from it.

      The  transformation  of  ideas  into  hallucinations  is  not  the  only

respect in which dreams differ from corresponding thoughts in waking

life. Dreams construct a situation out of these images; they represent

an event which is actually happening; as Spitta (1882, 145) puts it,

they ‘dramatize’ an idea. But this feature of dream-life can only be fully

understood if we further recognize that in dreams - as a rule, for there

are exceptions which require special examination - we appear not to

think but to experience; that is to say, we attach complete belief to the

hallucinations. Not until we wake up does the critical comment arise

that we have not experienced anything but have merely been thinking

in a peculiar way, or in other words dreaming. It is this characteristic

that  distinguishes  true  dreams  from  day-dreaming,  which  is  never

confused with reality.

   Burdach (1838, 502 f.) summarizes the features of dream-life which

we have so far discussed in the following words: ‘These are among

the essential features of dreams: (a) In dreams the subjective activity

of our minds appears in an objective form, for our perceptive faculties

regard  the  products  of  our  imagination  as  though  they  were  sense

impressions . . . (b) Sleep signifies an end of the authority of the self.

Hence falling asleep brings a certain degree of passivity along with

it. . . . The images that accompany sleep can occur only on conditionthat the authority of the self is reduced.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        560

 

   The next thing is to try to explain the belief which the mind accords

to dream-hallucinations, a belief which can only arise after some kind

of  ‘authoritative’  activity  of  the  self  has  ceased.  Strümpell  (1877)

argues that in this respect the mind is carrying out its function correctly

and  in  conformity  with  its  own  mechanism.  Far  from  being  mere

presentations,  the  elements  of  dreams  are  true  and  real  mental

experiences of the same kind as arise in a waking state through the

agency of the senses. (Ibid., 34.) The waking mind produces ideas

and thoughts in verbal images and in speech; but in dreams it does so

in  true  sensory  images.  (Ibid.,  35.)  Moreover,  there  is  a  spatial

consciousness in dreams, since sensations and images are assigned

to an external space, just as they are in waking. (Ibid., 36.) It must

therefore be allowed that in dreams the mind is in the same relation to

its  images  and  perceptions  as  it  is  in  waking.  (Ibid.,  43.)  If  it  is

nevertheless in error in so doing, that is because in the state of sleep

it  lacks  the  criterion  which  alone  makes  it  possible  to  distinguish

between sense-perceptions arising from without and from within. It is

unable to submit its dream-images to the only tests which could prove

their objective reality, In addition to this, it disregards the distinction

between images which are only interchangeable arbitrarily and cases

where the element of arbitrariness is absent. It is in error because it is

unable to apply the law of causality to the content of its dreams. (Ibid.,

50-1.)  In short, the fact of its having turned away from the external

world is also the reason for its belief in the subjective world of dreams.

   Delboeuf (1885, 84) arrives at the same conclusion after somewhat

different psychological arguments. We believe in the reality of dream-

images, he says, because in our sleep we have no other impressions

with  which  to  compare  them,  because  we  are  detached  from  the

external world. But the reason why we believe in the truth of these

hallucinations is not because it is impossible to put them to the test

within the dream. A dream can seem to offer us such tests: it can letus  touch  the  rose  that  we  see  -  and  yet  we  are  dreaming.  In

Delboeuf’s opinion there is only one valid criterion of whether we are

dreaming or awake, and that is the purely empirical one of the fact of

waking up. I conclude that everything I experienced between falling

asleep and waking up was illusory, when, on awaking, I find that I am

lying undressed in bed. During sleep I took the dream images as real

owing to my mental habit (which cannot be put to sleep) of assuming

the existence of an external world with which I contrast my own ego.¹

 

   ¹ Haffner (1887, 243) attempts, like Delboeuf, to explain the activity of dreaming by the

modification which the introduction of an abnormal condition must inevitably produce in the
otherwise correct functioning of an intact mental apparatus; but he gives a somewhat different
account of that condition. According to him the first mark of a dream is its independence of
space and time, i. e. the fact of a presentation being emancipated from the position occupied
by the subject in the spatial and temporal order of events. The second basic feature of dreams
is  connected  with  this  -  namely,  the  fact  that  hallucinations,  phantasies  and  imaginary
combinations are confused with external perceptions. ‘All the higher powers of the mind - in
particular the formation of concepts and the powers of judgement and inference on the one
hand and free self-determination on the other hand - are attached to sensory images and
have  at  all  times  a  background  of  such  images.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  these  higher
activities too take their part in the disorderliness of the dream-images. I say "take their part",
since in them selves our powers of judgement and of will are in no way altered in sleep. Our
activities are just as clear-sighted and just as free as in waking life. Even in his dreams a man
cannot violate the laws of thought as such - he cannot, for instance, regard as identical things
that appear to him as contraries, and so on. So too in dreams he can only desire what he
looks upon as a good (sub ratione boni). But the human spirit is led astray in dreams in its
application of the laws of thought and of will through confusing one idea with another. Thus it
comes about that we are guilty of the grossest contradictions in dreams, while at the same
time we can make the clearest judgements, draw the most logical inferences and come to the
most virtuous and saintly decisions. . . . Lack of orientation is the whole secret of the flights
taken by our imagination in dreams, and lack of critical reflection and of communication with
other people is the main source of the unbridled extravagance exhibited in dreams by our
judgements as well as by our hopes and wishes.’ (Ibid., 18.)
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        561

 

   Detachment from the external world seems thus to be regarded as

the factor determining the most marked features of dream-life. It is

therefore worth while quoting some penetrating remarks made long

ago  by  Burdach  which  throw  light  on  the  relations  between  the

sleeping  mind  and  the  external  world  and  which  are  calculated  to

prevent our setting too great store by the conclusions drawn in the lastfew pages. ‘Sleep’, he writes, ‘can occur only on condition that the

mind is not irritated by sensory stimuli. . . . But the actual ‘recondition

of sleep is not so much absence of sensory stimuli as absence of

interest in them.¹ Some sense impressions may actually be necessary

in order to calm the mind. Thus the miller can only sleep so long as he

hears the clacking of his mill; and anyone who feels that burning a

night-light is a necessary precaution, finds it impossible to get to sleep

in the dark.’ (Burdach, 1838, 482.)

      ‘In  sleep  the  mind  isolates  itself  from  the  external  world  and

withdraws from its own periphery. . . . Nevertheless connection is not

broken off entirely. If we could not hear or feel while we were actually

asleep, but only after we had woken up, it would be impossible to

wake us at all. . . . The persistence of sensation is proved even more

clearly by the fact that what rouses us is not always the mere sensory

strength of an impression but its psychical context: a sleeping man is

not aroused by an indifferent word, but if he is called by name he

wakes.  .  .  .  Thus  the  mind  in  sleep  distinguishes  between

sensations. . . . It is for that reason that the absence of a sensory

stimulus can wake a man if it is related to something of ideational

importance to him; so it is that the man with the night-light wakes if it is

extinguished and the miller is roused if his mill comes to a stop. He is

awakened,  that  is,  by  the  cessation  of  a  sensory  activity;  and  this

implies  that  that  activity  was  perceived  by  him,  but,  since  it  was

indifferent, or rather satisfying, did not disturb his mind.’ (Ibid., 485-6.)

   Even if we disregard these objections - and they are by no means

trifling ones -, we shall have to confess that the features of dream-life

which we have considered hitherto, and which have been ascribed to

its detachment from the external world, do not account completely for

its strange character. For it should be possible otherwise to turn the

hallucinations  in  a  dream  back  into  ideas,  and  its  situations  into

thoughts, and in that way to solve the problem of dream-interpretation.

And  that  in  fact  is  what  we  are  doing  when,  after  waking,  we

reproduce a dream from memory; but, whether we succeed in making

this re-translation wholly or only in part, the dream remains no less

enigmatic than before.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] Cf. the ‘désintérêt’ which Claparède (1905, 306 f.) regards as themechanism of falling asleep.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        562

 

   And indeed all the authorities unhesitatingly assume that yet other

and  more  deep-going  modifications  of  the  ideational  material  of

waking  life  take  place  in  dreams.  Strümpell  (1877,  27-8)  has

endeavoured to put his finger on one such modification in the following

passage: ‘With the cessation of sensory functioning and of normal vital

consciousness, the mind loses the soil in which its feelings, desires,

interests and activities are rooted. The psychical states, too - feelings,

interests, judgements of value - which are linked to mnemic images in

waking life, are subjected to . . . an obscuring pressure, as a result of

which  their  connection  with  those  images  is  broken;  perceptual

images of things, persons, places, events and actions in waking life

are reproduced separately in great numbers, but none of them carries

its psychical value along with it. That value is detached from them and

they thus float about in the mind at their own sweet will. . . .’ According

to Strümpell, the fact of images being denuded of their psychical value

(which in turn goes back to detachment from the external world) plays

a  principal  part  in  creating  the  impression  of  strangeness  which

distinguishes dreams from actual life in our memory.

   We have seen that falling asleep at once involves the loss of one of

our mental activities, namely our power of giving intentional guidance

to the sequence of our ideas. We are now faced by the suggestion,

which is in any case a plausible one, that the effects of the state of

sleep may extend over all the faculties of the mind. Some of these

seem to be entirely suspended; but the question now arises whether

the  rest  continue  to  operate  normally  and  whether  under  such

conditions they are capable of normal work. And here it may be asked

whether the distinguishing features of dreams cannot be explained by

the  lowering  of  psychical  efficiency  in  the  sleeping  state  -  a  notion

which finds support in the impression made by dreams on our waking

judgement.  Dreams  are  disconnected,  they  accept  the  most  violent

contradictions without the least objection, they admit impossibilities,

they disregard knowledge which carries great weight with us in thedaytime, they reveal us as ethical and moral imbeciles. Anyone who

when  he  was  awake  behaved  in  the  sort  of  way  that  is  shown  in

situations in dreams would be considered insane. Anyone who when

he was awake talked in the sort of way that people talk in dreams or

described the sort of thing that happens in dreams would give us the

impression of being muddle-headed or feeble minded. It seems to be

no more than putting the truth into words when we express our very

low opinion of mental activity in dreams and assert that in dreams the

higher intellectual faculties in particular are suspended or at all events

gravely impaired.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        563

 

      The  authorities  display  unusual  unanimity  -  exceptions  will  be

treated later - in expressing opinions of this kind on dreams; and these

judgements  lead  directly  to  a  particular  theory  or  explanation  of

dream-life.  But  it  is  time  for  me  to  leave  generalities  and  to  give

instead a series of quotations from various writers - philosophers and

physicians - upon the psychological characteristics of dreams.

   According to Lemoine (1855), the ‘incoherence’ of dream images is

the one essential characteristic of dreams.

      Maury  (1878,  163)  agrees  with  him:  ‘II  n’y  a  pas  de  rêves

absolument raisonnables et qui ne contiennent quelque incohérence,

quelque anachronisme, quelque absurdité.’ ¹

      Spitta  quotes  Hegel  as  saying  that  dreams  are  devoid  of  all

objectives and reasonable coherence.

      Dugas  writes:  ‘Le  rêve  c’est  l’anarchie  psychique  affective  et

mentale, c’est le jeu des fonctions livrées à ellesmêmes et s’exerçant

sans  contrôle  et  sans  but;  dans  le  rêve  l’esprit  est  un  automate

spirituel.’ ²

      Even  Volkelt  (1875,  14),  whose  theory  is  far  from  regarding

psychical activity during sleep as purposeless, speaks of ‘the relaxing,

disconnecting  and  confusing  of  ideational  life,  which  in  the  waking

state is held together by the logical force of the central ego.’

   The absurdity  of  the  associations  of  ideas  that  occur  in  dreamscould scarcely be criticized more sharply than it was by Cicero (De

divinatione, II): ‘Nihil tam praepostere, tam in condite, tam monstruose

cogitari potest, quod non possimus somniare.’ ³

   Fechner (1889, 2, 522) writes: ‘It is as though psychological activity

had been transported from the brain of a reasonable man into that of a

fool.’

 

   ¹ [‘There are no dreams that are absolutely reasonable and that do not contain some

incoherence, anachronism or absurdity.’]

   ² [‘A dream is psychical, emotional and mental anarchy; it is the play of functions left to their

own devices and acting without control or purpose; in dreams the spirit becomes a spiritual
automaton.’]

   ³ [‘There is no imaginable thing too absurd, too involved, or too abnormal for us to dream

about it.’]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        564

 

   Radestock (1879, 145): ‘In fact it seems impossible to detect any

fixed  laws  in  this  crazy  activity.  After  withdrawing  from  the  strict

policing exercised over the course of waking ideas by the rational will

and  the  attention,  dreams  melt  into  a  mad  whirl  of  kaleidoscopic

confusion.’

      Hildebrandt  (1875,  45):  ‘What  astonishing  leaps  a  dreamer  may

make, for instance, in drawing inferences! How calmly he is prepared

to see the most familiar lessons of experience turned upside down.

What laughable contradictions he is ready to accept in the laws of

nature and society before, as we say, things get beyond a joke and

the excessive strain of nonsense wakes him up. We calculate without

a qualm that three times three make twenty; we are not in the least

surprised when a dog quotes a line of poetry, or when a dead man

walks to his grave on his own legs, or when we see a rock floating on

the water; we proceed gravely on an important mission to the Duchy

of Bernburg or to the Principality of Liechtenstein to inspect their naval

forces; or we are persuaded to enlist under Charles XII shortly before

the battle of Poltava.’

   Binz (1878, 33), having in mind the theory of dreams which is based

upon such impressions as these, writes: ‘The content of at least nineout of ten dreams is nonsensical. We bring together in them people

and things that have no connection whatever with one another. Next

moment there is a shift in the kaleidoscope and we are faced by a new

grouping, more senseless and crazy, if possible, than the last. And so

the changing play of the incompletely sleeping brain goes on, till we

awake and clasp our forehead and wonder whether we still possess

the capacity for rational ideas and thoughts.’

   Maury (1878, 50) finds a parallel to the relation between dream-

images  and  waking  thoughts  which  will  be  highly  significant  to

physicians: ‘La production de ces images que chez l’homme éveillé

fait le plus souvent naître la volonté, correspond, pour l’intelligence, à

ce que sont pour la motilité certains mouvements que nous offre la

choreé et les affections paralytiques. . .’ He further regards dreams as

‘toute  une  série  de  dégradations  de  la  faculté  pensante  et

raisonnante.’ (Ibid., 27.)

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        565

 

   It is scarcely necessary to quote the writers who repeat Maury’s

opinion in relation to the various higher mental functions. Strümpell

(1877, 26), for instance, remarks that in dreams - even, of course,

where there is no manifest nonsense - there is an eclipse of all the

logical  operations  of  the  mind  which  are  based  on  relations  and

connections.  Spitta  (1882,  148)  declares  that  ideas  that  occur  in

dreams seem to be completely withdrawn from the law of causality.

Radestock  (1879,  )  and  other  writers  insist  upon  the  weakness  of

judgement and inference characteristic of dreams. According to Jodl

(1896,  123),  there  is  no  critical  faculty  in  dreams,  no  power  of

correcting one set of perceptions by reference to the general content

of  consciousness.  The  same  author  remarks  that  ‘every  kind  of

conscious  activity  occurs  in  dreams,  but  only  in  an  incomplete,

inhibited  and  isolated  fashion.’  The  contradictions  with  our  waking

knowledge  in  which  dreams  are  involved  are  explained  by  Stricker

(1879, 98) and many others as being due to facts being forgotten in

dreams or to logical relations between ideas having disappeared. Andso on, and so on.

   Nevertheless, the writers who in general take so unfavourable a

view of psychical functioning in dreams allow that a certain remnant of

mental  activity  still  remains  in  them.  This  is  explicitly  admitted  by

Wundt, whose theories have had a determining influence on so many

other workers in this field. What, it may be asked, is the nature of the

remnant of normal mental activity which persists in dreams? There is

fairly  general  agreement  that  the  reproductive  faculty,  the  memory,

seems  to  have  suffered  least,  and  indeed  that  it  shows  a  certain

superiority to the same function in waking life (see Section B above),

though  some  part  of  the  absurdities  of  dreaming  seems  to  be

explicable by its forgetfulness. In the opinion of Spitta (1882, 84 f.) the

part  of  the  mind  which  is  not  affected  by  sleep  is  the  life  of  the

sentiments and it is this which directs dreams. By ‘sentiment’ [‘Gemüt’]

he  means  ‘the  stable  assemblage  of  feelings  which  constitutes  the

innermost subjective essence of a human being’.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        566

 

   Scholz (1893, 64) believes that one of the mental activities operating

in  dreams  is  a  tendency  to  subject  the  dream  material  to  ‘re-

interpretation  in  allegorical  terms’.  Siebeck  too  (1877,  11)  sees  in

dreams  a  faculty  of  the  mind  for  ‘wider  interpretation’,  which  is

exercised  upon  all  sensations  and  perceptions.  There  is  particular

difficulty in assessing the position in dreams of what is ostensibly the

highest of the psychical functions, that of consciousness. Since all that

we know of dreams is derived from consciousness, there can be no

doubt of its persisting in them; yet Spitta (1882, 84-5) believes that

what  persists  in  dreams  is  only  consciousness  and  not self-

consciousness. Delboeuf (1885, 19), however, confesses that he is

unable to follow the distinction.

   The laws of association governing the sequence of ideas hold good

of dream-images, and indeed their dominance is even more clearly

and strongly expressed in dreams. ‘Dreams’, says Strümpell (1877,

70), ‘run their course, as it seems, according to the laws either of bareideas or of organic stimuli accompanying such ideas - that is, without

being in any way affected by reflection or common-sense or aesthetic

taste or moral judgement.’

   The authors whose views I am now giving picture the process of

forming dreams in some such way as this. The totality of the sensory

stimuli generated during sleep from the various sources which I have

already enumerated arouse in the mind in the first place a number of

ideas,  which  are  represented  in  the  form  of  hallucinations  or  more

properly, according to Wundt, of illusions, in view of their derivation

from external and internal stimuli. These ideas become linked together

according  to  the  familiar  laws  of  association  and,  according  to  the

same laws, call up a further series of ideas (or images). The whole of

this material is then worked over, so far as it will allow, by what still

remain  in  operation  of  the  organizing  and  thinking  faculties  of  the

mind.  (See,  for  instance,  Wundt  and  Weygandt.)  All  that  remain

undiscovered are the motives which decide whether the calling up of

images  arising  from  non-external  sources  shall  proceed  along  one

chain of associations or another.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        567

 

      It  has  often  been  remarked,  however,  that  the  associations

connecting dream-images with one another are of a quite special kind

and differ from those which operate in waking thought. Thus Volkelt

(1875, 15) writes: ‘In dreams the associations seem to play at catch-

as-catch-can in accordance with chance similarities and connections

that are barely perceptible. Every dream is stuffed full of slovenly and

perfunctory associations of this kind.’ Maury (1878, 126) attaches very

great importance to this feature of the way in which ideas are linked in

dreams, since it enables him to draw a close analogy between dream-

life and certain mental disorders. He specifies two main features of a

‘délire’: ‘(1) une action spontanée et comme automatique de l’esprit;

(2) une association vicieuse et irrégulière des idées.’ ¹ Maury himself

gives two excellent instances of dreams of his own in which dream-

images were linked together merely through a similarity in the soundof words. He once dreamt that he was on a pilgrimage (pélerinage) to

Jerusalem or Mecca; after many adventures he found himself visiting

Pelletier, the chemist, who, after some conversation, gave him a zinc

shovel (pelle); in the next part of the dream this turned into a great

broad-sword. (Ibid., 137.) In another dream he was walking along a

highway and reading the number of kilometres on the milestones; then

he was in a grocer’s shop where there was a big pair of scales, and a

man was putting kilogramme weights into the scale in order to weigh

Maury; the grocer then said to him: ‘You’re not in Paris but on the

island of Gilolo.’ Several other scenes followed, in which he saw a

Lobelia flower, and then General Lopez, of whose death he had read

shortly before. Finally, while he was playing a game of lotto, he woke

up. (Ibid., 126.)²

      We  shall  no  doubt  be  prepared  to  find,  however,  that  this  low

estimate of psychical functioning in dreams has not been allowed to

pass without contradiction - though contradiction on this point would

seem to be no easy matter. For instance, Spitta (1882, 118), one of

the disparagers of dream-life, insists that the same psychological laws

which  regulate  waking  life  also  hold  good  in  dreams;  and  another,

Dugas (1897a),  declares  that  ‘le  rêve  n’est  pas  déraison  ni  même

irraison pure’.³ But such assertions carry little weight so long as their

authors make no attempt to reconcile them with their own descriptions

of the psychical anarchy and disruption of every function that prevail in

dreams. It seems, however, to have dawned upon some other writers

that  the  madness  of  dreams  may  not  be  without  method  and  may

even be simulated, like that of the Danish prince on whom this shrewd

judgement was passed. These latter writers cannot have judged by

appearances; or the appearance presented to them by dreams must

have been a different one.

 

   ¹ [‘(1) A mental act which is spontaneous and as it were automatic; (2) an invalid and

irregular association of ideas.’]

   ² [Footnote added  1909:]  At  later  stage  we  shall  come  to  understand  the  meaning  of

dreams such as this which are filled with alliterations and similar-sounding first syllables.

   ³ [`Dreams are not contrary to reason or even entirely lacking in reason.’]

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams                                                                                        568

 

   Thus Havelock Ellis (1899, 721), without dwelling on the apparent

absurdity  of  dreams,  speaks  of  them  as  ‘an  archaic  world  of  vast

emotions and imperfect thoughts’, the study of which might reveal to

us primitive stages in the evolution of mental life.

      The  same  view  is  expressed  by  James  Sully  (1893,  362)  in  a

manner that is both more sweeping and more penetrating. His words

deserve all the more attention when we bear in mind that he was more

firmly convinced, perhaps, than any other psychologist that dreams

have  a  disguised  meaning.  ‘Now  our  dreams  are  a  means  of

conserving these successive personalities. When asleep we go back

to  the  old  ways  of  looking  at  things  and  of  feeling  about  them,  to

impulses and activities which long ago dominated us.’

      The  sagacious  Delboeuf  (1885,  222)  declares  (though  he  puts

himself in the wrong by not giving any refutation of the material which

contradicts his thesis): ‘Dans le sommeil, hormis la perception, toutes

les  facultés  de  l’esprit,  intelligence,  imagination,  mêmoire,  volonté,

moralité,  restent  intactes  dans  leur  essence;  seulement  elles

s’appliquent à des objets imaginaires et mobiles. Le songeur est un

acteur qui joue à volontà les fous et les sages, les bourreaux et les

victimes, les nains et les géants, les démons et les anges.’ ¹

 

   ¹ [‘In  sleep,  all  the  mental  faculties  (except  for  perception)  -  intelligence,  imagination,

memory, will and morality - remain essentially intact; they are merely applied to imaginary and
unstable objects. A dreamer is an actor who at his own will plays the parts of madmen and
philosophers, of executioners and their victims, of dwarfs and giants, of demons and angels.’]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        569

 

      The  most  energetic  opponent  of  those  who  seek  to  depreciate

psychical functioning in dreams seems to be the Marquis d’Hervey de

Saint-Denys, with whom Maury carried on a lively controversy, and

whose  book,  in  spite  of  all  my  efforts,  I  have  not  succeeded  in

procuring. Maury (1878, 19) writes of him: ‘M. le Marquis d’Hervey

prête  à  l’intelligence  durant  le  sommeil,  toute  sa  liberté  d’action  et

d’attention  et  il  ne  semble  faire  consister  le  sommeil  que  dansl’occlusion des sens, dans leur fermeture au monde extérieur; en sorte

que l’homme qui dort ne se distingue guère, selon sa manière de voir,

de l’homme qui laisse vaguer sa pensée en se bouchant les sens;

toute la différence qui sépare alors la pensée ordinaire de celle du

dormeur  c’est  que,  chez  celui-ci,  l’idée  prend  une  forme  visible,

objective et ressemble, à s’y méprendre, à la sensation déterminée

par les objets extérieurs; le souvenir revêt l’apparence du fait présent.’

¹ To this Maury adds ‘qu’il y a une différence de plus et capitale à

savoir  que  les  facultés  intellectuelles  de  l’homme  endormi  n’offrent

pas l’équilibre qu’elles gardent chez l’homme éveillé.’ ²

   Vaschide (1911, 146 f.) gives us a clearer account of Hervey de

Saint-Denys’ book and quotes a passage from it upon the apparent

incoherence of dreams: ‘L’image du rêve est la copie de l’idée. Le

principal  est  l’idée;  la  vision  n’est  qu’accessoire.  Ceci  établi,  il  faut

savoir suivre la marche des idées, il faut savoir analyser le tissu des

rêves; l’incohérence devient alors compréhensible, les conceptions les

plus  fantasques  deviennent  des  faits  simples  et  parfaitement

logiques.  .  .  .  Les  rêves  les  plus  bizarres  trouvent  même  une

explication des plus logiques quand on sait les analyser.’ ³

 

     ¹ [‘The  Marquis  d’Hervey  attributes  complete  liberty  of  action  and  attention  to  the

intelligence during sleep, and he seems to think that sleep consists merely in the blocking of
the senses, in their being closed to the external world. So that on his view a sleeping man
would hardly be different from a man who shut off his senses and allowed his thought to
wander; the only distinction between ordinary thoughts and those of a sleeper would be that,
in  the  latter,  ideas  assume  a  visible  and  objective  shape  and  are  indistinguishable  from
sensations  determined  by  external  objects,  while  memories  take  on  the  appearance  of
present events.’]

   ² [‘There is a further distinction and one of capital importance: namely, that the intellectual

faculties of a sleeping man do not exhibit the balance maintained in a man who is awake.’]

   ³ [ ‘Dream-images are copies of ideas. The essential thing is the idea, the vision is a mere

accessory. When this is once established, we must know how to follow the sequence of the
ideas, we must know how to analyse the texture of dreams; their incoherence then becomes
intelligible, and the most fantastic notions become simple and perfectly logical facts. . . . We
can even find a most logical explanation for the strangest dreams if we know how to analyse
them.’]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        570

    Johan Stärcke (1913, 243) has pointed out that a similar explanation

of the incoherence of dreams was put forward by an earlier writer,

Wolf Davidson (1799, 136), whose work was unknown to me: ‘The

remarkable leaps taken by our ideas in dreams all have their basis in

the law of association; sometimes, however, these connections occur

in the mind very obscurely, so that our ideas often seem to have taken

a leap when in fact there has been none.’

 

      The  literature  of  the  subject  thus  shows  a  very  wide  range  of

variation  in  the  value  which  it  assigns  to  dreams  as  psychical

products. This range extends from the deepest disparagement, of the

kind  with  which  we  have  become  familiar,  through  hints  at  a  yet

undisclosed worth, to an overvaluation which ranks dreams far higher

than any of the functions of waking life. Hildebrandt (1875, 19 f.), who,

as we have heard, has summed up the whole of the psychological

features  of  dream-life  in  three  antinomies,  makes  use  of  the  two

extreme  ends  of  this  range  of  values  for  his  third  paradox:  ‘it  is  a

contrast between an intensification of mental life, an enhancement of it

that not infrequently amounts to virtuosity, and, on the other hand, a

deterioration and enfeeblement which often sinks below the level of

humanity. As regards the former, there are few of us who could not

affirm, from our own experience, that there emerges from time to time

in  the  creations  and  fabrics  of  the  genius  of  dreams  a  depth  and

intimacy  of  emotion,  a  tenderness  of  feeling,  a  clarity  of  vision,  a

subtlety of observation, and a brilliance of wit such as we should never

claim to have at our permanent command in our waking lives. There

lies in dreams a marvellous poetry, an apt allegory, an incomparable

humour,  a  rare  irony.  A  dream  looks  upon  the  world  in  a  light  of

strange idealism and often enhances the effects of what it sees by its

deep understanding of their essential nature. It pictures earthly beauty

to our eyes in a truly heavenly splendour and clothes dignity with the

highest  majesty,  it  shows  us  our  everyday  fears  in  the  ghastliest

shape and turns our amusement into jokes of indescribable pungency.

And sometimes, when we are awake and still under the full impact of

an experience like one of these, we cannot but feel that never in our

life has the real world offered us its equal.’

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        571

 

   We may well ask whether the disparaging remarks quoted on earlier

pages and this enthusiastic eulogy can possibly relate to the same

thing.  Is  it  that  some  of  our  authorities  have  overlooked  the

nonsensical dreams and others the profound and subtle ones? And if

dreams of both kinds occur, dreams that justify both estimates, may it

not  be  a  waste  of  time  to  look  for  any  distinguishing  psychological

feature  of  dreams?  Will  it  not  be  enough  to  say  that  in  dreams

anything is possible - from the deepest degradation of mental life to an

exaltation of it which is rare in waking hours? However convenient a

solution of this kind might be, what lies against it is the fact that all of

the efforts at research into the problem of dreams seem to be based

on a conviction that some distinguishing feature does exist, which is

universally valid in its essential outline and which would clear these

apparent contradictions out of the way.

   There can be no doubt that the psychical achievements of dreams

received readier and warmer recognition during the intellectual period

which  has  now  been  left  behind,  when  the  human  mind  was

dominated  by  philosophy  and  not  by  the  exact  natural  sciences.

Pronouncements such as that by Schubert (1814, 20 f.) that dreams

are  a  liberation  of  the  spirit  from  the  power  of  external  nature,  a

freeing of the soul from the bonds of the senses, and similar remarks

by  the  younger  Fichte  (1864,  1,  143  f.)¹  and  others,  all  of  which

represent dreams as an elevation of mental life to a higher level, seem

to us now to be scarcely intelligible; today they are repeated only by

mystics and pietists.² The introduction of the scientific mode of thought

has  brought  along  with  it  a  reaction  in  the  estimation  of  dreams.

Medical writers in especial tend to regard psychical activity in dreams

as  trivial  and  valueless;  while  philosophers  and  non-professional

observers  -  amateur  psychologists  -  whose  contributions  to  this

particular subject are not to be despised, have (in closer alignment

with popular feeling) retained a belief in the psychical value of dreams.

Anyone who is inclined to take a low view of psychical functioning in

dreams  will  naturally  prefer  to  assign  their  source  to  somatic

stimulation; whereas those who believe that the dreaming mind retainsthe greater part of its waking capacities have of course no reason for

denying that the stimulus to dreaming can arise within the dreaming

mind itself.

 

   ¹ Cf. Haffner (1887) and Spitta (1882, 11 f.).

   ² [Footnote added 1914:] That brilliant mystic Du Prel, one of the few authors for whose

neglect in earlier editions of this book I should wish to express my regret, declares that the
gateway to metaphysics, so far as men are concerned, lies not in waking life but in the dream.
(Du Prel, 1885, 59.)
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        572

 

   Of the superior faculties which even a sober comparison may be

inclined to attribute to dream-life, the most marked is that of memory;

we have already discussed at length the not uncommon evidence in

favour  of  this  view.  Another  point  of  superiority  in  dream-life,  often

praised by earlier writers - that it rises superior to distance in time and

space  - may easily be shown to have no basis in fact. As Hildebrandt

(1875, ) points out, this advantage is an illusory one; for dreaming

rises superior to time and space in precisely the same way as does

waking thought, and for the very reason that it is merely a form of

thought. It has been claimed for dreams that they enjoy yet another

advantage  over  waking  life  in  relation  to  time  -  that  they  are

independent of the passage of time in yet another respect. Dreams

such as the one dreamt by Maury of his own guillotining (see above,

p. 539 f.) seem to show that a dream is able to compress into a very

short space of time an amount of perceptual matter far greater than

the amount of ideational matter that can be dealt with by our waking

mind.  This  conclusion  has  however  been  countered  by  various

arguments; since the papers by Le Lorrain (1894) and Egger (1895)

on the apparent duration of dreams, a long and interesting discussion

on the subject has developed, but it seems unlikely that the last word

has yet been said on this subtle question and the deep implications

which it involves.¹

      Reports  of  numerous  cases  seem  to  put  it  beyond  dispute  that

dreams can carry on the intellectual work of daytime and bring it toconclusions which had not been reached during the day, and that they

can resolve doubts and problems and be the source of new inspiration

for poets and musical composers. But though the fact may be beyond

dispute, its implications are open to many doubts, which raise matters

of principle.²

   Lastly, dreams are reputed to have the power of divining the future.

Here we have a conflict in which almost insuperable scepticism is met

by obstinately repeated assertions. No doubt we shall be acting rightly

in not insisting that this view has no basis at all in fact, since it is

possible that before long a number of the instances cited may find an

explanation within the bounds of natural psychology.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] A further bibliography and a critical discussion of these problems

will be found in Tobowolska (1900).

   ² [Footnote added 1914:] Cf. the criticism in Havelock Ellis (1911, 265).

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        573

 

                                          (F)

 

                            THE MORAL SENSE IN DREAMS

 

      For  reasons  which  will  only  become  apparent  after  my  own

investigations  into  dreams  have  been  taken  into  account,  I  have

isolated  from  the  subject  of  the  psychology  of  dreams  the  special

problem of whether and to what extent moral dispositions and feelings

extend into dream-life. Here too we are met by the same contradictory

views which, curiously enough, we have found adopted by different

authors in regard to all the other functions of the mind during dreams.

Some assert that the dictates of morality have no place in dreams,

while  others  maintain  no  less  positively  that  the  moral  character  of

man persists in his dream-life.

   Appeal to the common experience of dreams seems to establish

beyond  any  doubt  the  correctness  of  the  former  of  these  views.

Jessen (1855, 553) writes: ‘Nor do we become better or more virtuous

in sleep. On the contrary, conscience seems to be silent in dreams, forwe  feel  no  pity  in  them  and  may  commit  the  worst  crimes  -  theft,

violence  and  murder  -  with  complete  indifference  and  with  no

subsequent feelings of remorse.’

   Radestock (1879, 164): ‘It should be borne in mind that associations

occur and ideas are linked together in dreams without any regard for

reflection,  common  sense,  aesthetic  taste  or  moral  judgement.

Judgement  is  extremely  weak  and  ethical  indifference  reigns

supreme.’

   Volkelt (1875, 23): ‘In dreams, as we are all aware, proceedings are

especially unbridled in sexual matters. The dreamer himself is utterly

shameless and devoid of any moral feeling or judgement; moreover,

he sees everyone else, including those for whom he has the deepest

respect, engaged in acts with which he would be horrified to associate

them while he was awake, even in his thoughts.’

      In  diametrical  opposition  to  these,  we  find  statements  such  as

Schopenhauer’s  that  everyone  who  figures  in  a  dream  acts  and

speaks  in  complete  accordance  with  his  character.  K.  P.  Fischer

(1850, 72 f.), quoted by Spitta (1882, 188), declares that subjective

feelings and longings, or affects and passions, reveal themselves in

the freedom of dream-life, and that people’s moral characteristics are

reflected in their dreams.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        574

 

   Haffner (1884, 251): ‘With rare exceptions . . . a virtuous man will be

virtuous in his dreams as well; he will resist temptations and will keep

himself aloof from hatred, envy, anger and all other vices. But a sinful

man will as a rule find in his dreams the same images that he had

before his eyes while he was awake.’

   Scholz: ‘In dreams is truth: in dreams we learn to know ourselves as

we are in spite of all the disguises we wear to the world, . . . . The

honourable man cannot commit a crime in dreams, or if he does he is

horrified over it as over something contrary to his nature. The Roman

Emperor  who  put  a  man  to  death  who  had  dreamt  that  he  had

assassinated the ruler, was justified in so doing if he reasoned that thethoughts one has in dreams, one has, too, when awake. The common

expression "I wouldn’t dream of such a thing" has a doubly correct

significance when it refers to something which can have no lodgement

in our hearts or mind.’ (Plato, on the contrary, thought that the best

men are those who only dream what other men do in their waking life.)

   Pfaff (1868 ), quoted by Spitta (1882, 192), alters the wording of a

familiar saying: ‘Tell me some of your dreams, and I will tell you about

your inner self.’

   The problem of morality in dreams is taken as the centre of interest

by Hildebrandt, from whose small volume I have already quoted so

much - for, of all the contributions to the study of dreams which I have

come across, it is the most perfect in form and the richest in ideas.

Hildebrandt too lays it down as a rule that the purer the life the purer

the dream, and the more impure the one the more impure the other.

He believes that man’s moral nature persists in dreams. ‘Whereas’, he

writes,  ‘even  the  grossest  mistake  in  arithmetic,  even  the  most

romantic  reversal  of  scientific  laws,  even  the  most  ridiculous

anachronism fails to upset us or even to arouse our suspicions, yet we

never  lose  sight  of  the  distinction  between  good  and  evil,  between

right and wrong or between virtue and vice. However much of what

accompanies us in the daytime may drop away in our sleeping hours,

Kant’s categorical imperative is a companion who follows so close at

our heels that we cannot be free of it even in sleep. . . . But this can

only be explained by the fact that what is fundamental in man’s nature,

his moral being, is too firmly fixed to be affected by the kaleidoscopic

shuffling to which the imagination, the reason, the memory and other

such faculties must submit in dreams.’ (Ibid., 45 f.)

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        575

 

   As the discussion of this subject proceeds, however, both groups of

writers begin to exhibit remarkable shifts and inconsistencies in their

opinions.  Those  who  maintain  that  the  moral  personality  of  man

ceases to operate in dreams should, in strict logic, lose all interest in

immoral dreams. They could rule out any attempt at holding a dreamerresponsible for his dreams, or at deducing from the wickedness of his

dreams that he had an evil streak in his character, just as confidently

as they would reject a similar attempt at deducing from the absurdity

of  his  dreams  that  his  intellectual  activities  in  waking  life  were

worthless.  The  other  group,  who  believe  that  the  ‘categorical

imperative’  extends  to  dreams,  should  logically  accept  unqualified

responsibility for immoral dreams. We could only hope for their sake

that they would have no such reprehensible dreams of their own to

upset their firm belief in their own moral character.

   It appears, however, that no one is as confident as all that of how far

he  is  good  or  bad,  and  that  no  one  can  deny  the  recollection  of

immoral dreams of his own. For writers in both groups, irrespective of

the opposition between their opinions on dream-morality, make efforts

at explaining the origin of immoral dreams; and a fresh difference of

opinion develops, according as their origin is sought in the functions of

the mind or in deleterious effects produced on the mind by somatic

causes. Thus the compelling logic of facts forces the supporters of

both the responsibility and the irresponsibility of dream-life to unite in

recognizing  that  the  immorality  of  dreams  has  a  specific  psychical

source.

   Those who believe that morality extends to dreams are, however, all

careful  to  avoid  assuming complete  responsibility  for  their  dreams.

Thus  Haffner  (1887,  250)  writes:  ‘We  are  not  responsible  for  our

dreams, since our thought and will have been deprived in them of the

basis upon which alone our life possesses truth and reality . . . For

that  reason  no  dream-wishes  or  dream-actions  can  be  virtuous  or

sinful.’ Nevertheless, he goes on, men are responsible for their sinful

dreams in so far as they cause them indirectly. They have the duty of

morally cleansing their minds not only in their waking life but more

especially before going to sleep.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        576

 

   Hildebrandt presents us with a far deeper analysis of this mingled

rejection  and  acceptance  of  responsibility  for  the  moral  content  ofdreams.  He  argues  that  in  considering  the  immoral  appearance  of

dreams allowance must be made for the dramatic form in which they

are couched, for their compression of the most complicated processes

of reflection into the briefest periods of time, as well as for the way in

which, as even he admits, the ideational elements of dreams become

confused and deprived of their significance. He confesses that he has

the greatest hesitation, nevertheless, in thinking that all responsibility

for sins and faults in dreams can be repudiated.

   ‘When we are anxious to disown some unjust accusation, especially

one that relates to our aims and intentions, we often use the phrase "I

should never dream of such a thing", we are in that way expressing,

on the one hand, our feeling that the region of dreams is the most

remote  and  furthest  in  which  we  are  answerable  for  our  thoughts,

since  thoughts  in  that  region  are  so  loosely  connected  with  our

essential  self  that  they  are  scarcely  to  be  regarded  as  ours;  but

nevertheless, since we feel obliged expressly to deny the existence of

these  thoughts  in  this  region,  we  are  at  the  same  time  admitting

indirectly  that  our  self-justification  would  not  be  complete  unless  it

extended so far. And I think that in this we are speaking, although

unconsciously, the language of truth.’ ( Ibid., 49.)

   ‘It is impossible to think of any action in a dream for which the

original motive has not in some way or other - whether as a wish, or

desire or impulse - passed through the waking mind.’ We must admit,

Hildebrandt proceeds, that this original impulse was not invented by

the  dream;  the  dream  merely  copied  it  and  spun  it  out,  it  merely

elaborated in dramatic form a scrap of historical material which it had

found  in  us;  it  merely  dramatized  the  Apostle’s  words:  ‘Whosoever

hateth his brother is a murderer’. And although after we have awoken,

conscious of our moral strength, we may smile at the whole elaborate

structure of the sinful dream, yet the original material from which the

structure was derived will fail to raise a smile. We feel responsible for

the dreamer’s errors - not for the whole amount of them, but for a

certain  percentage.  ‘In  short,  if  we  understand  in  this  scarcely

disputable sense Christ’s saying that "out of the heart proceed evil

thoughts", we can hardly escape the conviction that a sin committed in

a  dream  bears  with  it  at  least  an  obscure  minimum  of  guilt.’

(Hildebrandt, 1875, 51 ff.) 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        577

 

   Thus Hildebrandt finds the source of immorality in dreams in the

germs and hints of evil impulses which, in the form of temptations,

pass through our minds during the day; and he does not hesitate to

include these immoral elements in his estimate of a person’s moral

value. These same thoughts, as we know, and this same estimate of

them, are what have led the pious and saintly in every age to confess

themselves miserable sinners.¹

   There can of course be no doubt as to the general existence of such

incompatible ideas; they occur in most people and in spheres other

than that of ethics. Sometimes, however, they have been judged less

seriously. Spitta (1882, 194) quotes some remarks by Zeller, which

are relevant in this connection: ‘A mind is seldom so happily organized

as to possess complete power at every moment and not to have the

regular and clear course of its thoughts constantly interrupted not only

by  inessential  but  by  positively  grotesque  and  nonsensical  ideas.

Indeed, the greatest thinkers have had to complain of this dreamlike,

teasing  and  tormenting  rabble  of  ideas,  which  have  disturbed  their

deepest reflections and their most solemn and earnest thoughts.’

   A more revealing light is thrown upon the psychological position of

these incompatible thoughts by another remark of Hildebrandt’s (1875,

55),  to  the  effect  that  dreams  give  us  an  occasional  glimpse  into

depths  and  recesses  of  our  nature  to  which  we  usually  have  no

access  in  our  waking  state.  Kant  expresses  the  same  idea  in  a

passage in his Anthropologie in which he declares that dreams seem

to exist in order to show us our hidden natures and to reveal to us, not

what we are, but what we might have been if we had been brought up

differently. Radestock (1879, 84), too, says that dreams often do no

more than reveal to us what we would not admit to ourselves and that

it is therefore unfair of us to stigmatize them as liars and deceivers.

Erdmann writes: ‘Dreams have never shown me what I ought to think

of a man; but I have occasionally learnt from a dream, greatly to my

own astonishment, what I do think of a man and how I feel towardshim.’ Similarly I. H. Fichte (1864, I, 539) remarks: ‘The nature of our

dreams  gives  a  far  more  truthful  reflection  of  our  whole  disposition

than we are able to learn of it from self-observation in waking life.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] It is of some interest to learn the attitude of the Inquisition to our

problem.  In  Caesar  Carena’s Tractatus  de  Officio  sanctissimae  Inquisitionis,  1659,  the
following passage occurs: ‘If anyone speaks heresies in a dream, the inquisitors should take
occasion to enquire into his way of life, for what occupies a man during the day is wont to
come again in his sleep.’ (Communicated by Dr. Ehniger, St. Urban, Switzerland.)
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        578

 

   It will be seen that the emergence of impulses which are foreign to

our  moral  consciousness  is  merely  analogous  to  what  we  have

already learnt - the fact that dreams have access to ideational material

which is absent in our waking state or plays but a small part in it. Thus

Benini  (1898)  writes:  ‘  Certe  nostre  inclinazioni  che  si  credevano

soffocate  e  spente  da  un  pezzo,  si  ridestano;  passioni  vecchie  e

sepolte rivivono; cose e persone a cui non pensiamo mai, ci vengono

dinanzi.’ ¹ And Volkelt (1875, 105): ‘Ideas, too, which have entered

waking  consciousness  almost  unnoticed  and  have  perhaps  never

again  been  called  to  memory,  very  frequently  announce  their

presence in the mind through dreams.’ At this point, finally, we may

recall  Schleiermacher’s  assertion  that  the  act  of  falling  asleep  is

accompanied by the appearance of ‘involuntary ideas’ or images.

   We may, then, class together under the heading of  ‘involuntary

ideas’ the whole of the ideational material the emergence of which,

alike  in  immoral  and  in  absurd  dreams,  causes  us  so  much

bewilderment. There is, however, one important point of difference:

involuntary ideas in the moral sphere contradict our usual attitude of

mind, whereas the others merely strike us as strange. No step has yet

been  taken  towards  a  deeper  knowledge  which  would  resolve  this

distinction.

 

   ¹ [`Certain of our desires which have seemed for a time to be stifled and extinguished are

re-awakened; old and buried passions come to life again; things and persons of whom we
never think appear before us.’] 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        579

 

   The question next arises as to the significance of the appearance of

involuntary  ideas  in  dreams,  as  to  the  light  which  the  emergence

during the night of these morally incompatible impulses throws upon

the psychology of the waking and dreaming mind. And here we find a

fresh  division  of  opinion  and  yet  another  different  grouping  of  the

authorities. The line of thought adopted by Hildebrandt and others who

share  his  fundamental  position  inevitably  leads  to  the  view  that

immoral impulses possess a certain degree of power even in waking

life, though it is an inhibited power, unable to force its way into action,

and that in sleep something is put out of action which acts like an

inhibition in the daytime and has prevented us from being aware of the

existence of such impulses. Thus dreams would reveal the true nature

of man, though not his whole nature, and they would constitute one

means of rendering the hidden interior of the mind accessible to our

knowledge. Only upon some such premises as these can Hildebrandt

base  his  attribution  to  dreams  of  warning  powers,  which  draw  our

attention to moral infirmities in our mind, just as physicians admit that

dreams  can  bring  unobserved  physical  illnesses  to  our  conscious

notice. So, too, Spitta must be adopting this view when, in speaking of

the sources of excitation which impinge upon the mind (at puberty, for

instance), he consoles the dreamer with the assurance that he will

have done all that lies within his power if he leads a strictly virtuous life

in his waking hours, and if he takes care to suppress sinful thoughts

whenever they arise and to prevent their maturing and turning into

acts. According to this view we might define the ‘involuntary ideas’ as

ideas which had been ‘suppressed’ during the day, and we should

have to regard their emergence as a genuine mental phenomenon.

   Other writers, however, regard this last conclusion as unjustifiable.

Thus Jessen (1855) believes that involuntary ideas, both in dreams

and in waking, and in feverish and other delirious conditions, ‘have the

character of a volitional activity that has been put to rest and of a more

or  less  mechanical  succession  of  images  and  ideas  provoked  by

internal  impulses’.  All  that  an  immoral  dream  proves  as  to  thedreamer’s mental life is, in Jessen’s view, that on some occasion he

had cognizance of the ideational content in question; it is certainly no

evidence of a mental impulse of the dreamer’s own.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        580

 

  As regards another writer, Maury, it would almost seem as though he

too attributes to the dreaming condition a capacity, not for the arbitrary

destruction of mental activity, but for analysing it into its components.

He  writes  as  follows  of  dreams  which  transgress  the  bounds  of

morality: ‘Ce sont nos penchants qui parlent et qui nous font agir, sans

que la conscicnce nous retienne, bien que parfois elle nous avertisse.

J’ai mes défauts et mes penchants vicieux; à l’état de veille je tâche

de  lutter  contre  eux,  et  il  m’arrive  assez  souvent  de  n’y  pas

succomber.  Mais  dans  mes  songes  j’y  succombe  toujours  ou  pour

mieux dire j’agis par leur impulsion, sans crainte et sans remords. . . .

Evidemment  les  visions  qui  se  déroulent  devant  ma  pensée  et  qui

constituent  le  rêve,  me  sont  suggérées  par  les  incitations  que  je

ressens  et  que  ma  volonté  absente  ne  cherche  pas  à  refouler.’

(Maury, 1878, 113.)¹

   No one who believes in the capacity of dreams to reveal an immoral

tendency of the dreamer’s which is really present though suppressed

or concealed, could express his view more precisely than in Maury’s

words: ‘En rêve l’homme se révèle donc tout entier à soi-même dans

sa  nudité  et  sa  misère  natives.  Dès  qu’il  suspend  l’exercice  de  sa

volonté, il devient le jouet de toutes les passions contres lesquelles, à

l’état  de  veille,  la  conscience,  le  sentiment  de  l’honneur,  la  crainte

nous  défendent.’  (Ibid.,  165.)²  In  another  passage  we  find  these

pertinent sentences: ‘Dans le songe, c’est surtout l’homme instinctif

qui se révèle. . . . L’homme revient pour ainsi dire à l’eéat de nature

quand il rêve; mais moins les idées acquises ont pénétré dans son

esprit, plus les penchants en désaccord avec elles conservent encore

sur lui l’influence dans le rêve.’ (Ibid., 462.)³ He goes on to relate by

way of example how in his dreams he is not infrequently the victim of

the very superstition which he has been attacking in his writings withparticular vehemence.

 

   ¹ [‘It is our impulses that are speaking and making us act, while our conscience does not

hold us back, though it sometimes warns us. I have my faults and my vicious impulses; while I
am awake I try to resist them, and quite often I succeed in not yielding to them. But in my
dreams I always yield to them, or rather I act under their pressure without fear or remorse.  . 
.    .  The  visions  which  unroll  before  my  mind  and  which  constitute  a  dream  are  clearly
suggested by the urges which I feel and which my absent will does not attempt to repress.’]

   ² [‘Thus in dreams a man stands self-revealed in all his native nakedness and poverty. As

soon as he suspends the exercise of his will, he becomes the plaything of all the passions
against which he is defended while he is awake by his conscience, his sense of honour and
his fears.’]

   ³ [‘What is revealed in dreams is primarily the man of instinct.  .  .  . Man may be said to

return  in  his  dreams  to  a  state  of  nature.  But  the  less  his  mind  has  been  penetrated  by
acquired ideas, the more it remains influenced in dreams by impulses of a contrary nature.’]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        581

 

   These penetrating reflections of Maury’s, however, lose their value

in the investigation of dream-life owing to the fact that he regards the

phenomena which he has observed with such accuracy as no more

than  proofs  of  an  ‘automatisme  psychologique’  which,  in  his  view,

dominates dreams and which he looks upon as the exact opposite of

mental activity.

   Stricker (1879) writes: ‘Dreams do not consist solely of illusions. If,

for instance, one is afraid of robbers in a dream, the robbers, it is true,

are imaginary - but the fear is real.’ This calls our attention to the fact

that affects  in  dreams  cannot  be  judged  in  the  same  way  as  the

remainder of their content; and we are faced by the problem of what

part of the psychical processes occurring in dreams is to be regarded

as real, that is to say, has a claim to be classed among the psychical

processes of waking life.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        582

 

                                          (G) 

                    THEORIES OF DREAMING AND ITS FUNCTION

 

   Any disquisition upon dreams which seeks to explain as many as

possible  of  their  observed  characteristics  from  a  particular  point  of

view, and which at the same time defines the position occupied by

dreams  in  a  wider  sphere  of  phenomena,  deserves  to  be  called  a

theory of dreams. The various theories will be found to differ in that

they select one or the other characteristic of dreams as the essential

one and take it as the point of departure for their explanations and

correlations. It need not necessarily be possible to infer a function of

dreaming  (whether  utilitarian  or  otherwise)  from  the  theory.

Nevertheless,  since  we  have  a  habit  of  looking  for  teleological

explanations, we shall be more ready to accept theories which are

bound up with the attribution of a function to dreaming.

   We have already made the acquaintance of several sets of views

which deserve more or less to be called theories of dreams in this

sense of the term. The belief held in antiquity that dreams were sent

by  the  gods  in  order  to  guide  the  actions  of  men  was  a  complete

theory  of  dreams,  giving  information  on  everything  worth  knowing

about  them.  Since  dreams  have  become  an  object  of  scientific

research  a  considerable  number  of  theories  have  been  developed,

including some that are extremely incomplete.

      Without  attempting  any  exhaustive  enumeration,  we  may  try  to

divide  theories  of  dreams  into  the  following  three  rough  groups,

according  to  their  underlying  assumptions  as  to  the  amount  and

nature of psychical activity in dreams.

 

    (1) There are the theories, such as that of Delboeuf, according to

which the whole of psychical activity continues in dreams. The mind,

they assume, does not sleep and its apparatus remains intact; but,

since it falls under the conditions of the state of sleep, which differ

from those of waking life, its normal functioning necessarily produces

different results during sleep. The question arises in regard to these

theories  whether  they  are  capable  of  deriving  all  the  distinctions

between dreams and waking thought from the conditions of the state

of  sleep.  Moreover,  there  is  no  possibility  of  their  being  able  tosuggest  any  function  for  dreaming;  they  offer  no  reason  why  we

should  dream,  why  the  complicated  mechanism  of  the  mental

apparatus should continue to operate even when set in circumstances

for  which  it  appears  undesigned.  Either  dreamless  sleep  or,  if

disturbing  stimuli  intervene,  awakening,  would  seem  to  be  the  only

expedient reactions - rather than the third alternative of dreaming.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        583

 

 

   (2) There are the theories which, on the contrary, presuppose that

dreams  imply  a  lowering  of  psychical  activity,  a  loosening  of

connections, and an impoverishment of the material accessible. These

theories  must  imply  the  attribution  to  sleep  of  characteristics  quite

different  from  those  suggested,  for  instance,  by  Delboeuf.  Sleep,

according  to  such  theories,  has  a  far  reaching  influence  upon  the

mind; it does not consist merely in the mind being shut off from the

external world; it forces its way, rather, into the mental mechanism

and throws it temporarily out of use. If I may venture on a simile from

the sphere of psychiatry, the first group of theories construct dreams

on  the  model  of  paranoia,  while  the  second  group  make  them

resemble mental deficiency or confusional states.

   The theory according to which only a fragment of mental activity

finds expression in dreams, since it has been paralysed by sleep, is by

far the most popular with medical writers and in the scientific world

generally. In so far as any general interest may be supposed to exist

in  the  explanation  of  dreams,  this  may  be  described  as  the  ruling

theory. It is to be remarked how easily this theory avoids the worst

stumbling-block in the way of any explanation of dreams - the difficulty

of dealing with the contradictions involved in them. It regards dreams

as a result of a partial awakening  - ‘a gradual, partial and at the same

time highly abnormal awakening’, to quote a remark of Herbart’s upon

dreams (1892, 307). Thus, this theory can make use of a series of

conditions  of  ever-increasing  wakefulness,  culminating  in  the

completely waking state, in order to account for the series of variationsin  efficiency  of  mental  functioning  in  dreams,  ranging  from  the

inefficiency  revealed  by  their  occasional  absurdity  up  to  fully

concentrated intellectual functioning.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        584

 

   Those who find that they cannot dispense with a statement in terms

of  physiology,  or  to  whom  a  statement  in  such  terms  seems  more

scientific, will find what they want in the account given by Binz (1878,

43): ‘This condition’ (of torpor) ‘comes to an end in the early hours of

the morning, but only by degrees. The products of fatigue which have

accumulated in the albumen of the brain gradually diminish; more and

more of them are decomposed or eliminated by the unceasing flow of

the blood stream. Here and there separate groups of cells begin to

emerge into wakefulness, while the torpid state still persists all around

them. The isolated work of these separate groups now appears before

our clouded consciousness, unchecked by other portions of the brain

which govern the process of association. For that reason the images

produced, which correspond for the most part to material impressions

of the more recent past, are strung together in a wild and irregular

manner. The number of the liberated brain-cells constantly grows and

the senselessness of the dreams correspondingly diminishes.’

   This view of dreaming as an incomplete, partial waking state is no

doubt to be found in the writings of every modern physiologist and

philosopher.  The  most  elaborate  exposition  of  it  is  given  by  Maury

(1878, 6 f.). It often appears as though that author imagined that the

waking or sleeping state could be shifted from one anatomical region

to  another,  each  particular  anatomical  region  being  linked  to  one

particular  psychical  function.  I  will  merely  remark  at  this  point  that,

even if the theory of partial waking were confirmed, its details would

still remain very much open to discussion.

   This view naturally leaves no room for assigning any function to

dreaming. The logical conclusion that follows from it as to the position

and  significance  of  dreams  is  correctly  stated  by  Binz  (1878,  35):

‘Every  observed  fact  forces  us  to  conclude  that  dreams  must  becharacterized as somatic processes, which are in every case useless

and in many cases positively pathological. . . .’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        585

 

   The application to dreams of the term ‘somatic’, which is italicized by

Binz himself, has more than one bearing. It alludes, in the first place,

to the aetiology of dreams which seemed particularly plausible to Binz

when he studied the experimental production of dreams by the use of

toxic substances. For theories of this kind involve a tendency to limit

the instigation of dreams so far as possible to somatic causes. Put in

its  most  extreme  form  the  view  is  as  follows.  Once  we  have  put

ourselves to sleep by excluding all stimuli, there is no need and no

occasion for dreaming until the morning, when the process of being

gradually awakened by the impact of fresh stimuli might be reflected in

the phenomenon of dreaming. It is impracticable, however, to keep

our sleep free from stimuli; they impinge upon the sleeper from all

sides - like the germs of life of which Mephistopheles complained -

from without and from within and even from parts of his body which

are quite unnoticed in waking life. Thus sleep is disturbed; first one

corner of the mind is shaken into wakefulness and then another; the

mind functions for a brief moment with its awakened portion and is

then  glad  to  fall  asleep  once  more.  Dreams  are  a  reaction  to  the

disturbance  of  sleep  brought  about  by  a  stimulus  -  a  reaction,

incidentally, which is quite superfluous.

   But the description of dreaming - which, after all is said and done,

remains a function of the mind - as a somatic process implies another

meaning as well. It is intended to show that dreams are unworthy to

rank as psychical processes. Dreaming has often been compared with

‘the ten fingers of a man who knows nothing of music wandering over

the keys of a piano’ ; and this simile shows as well as anything the

sort of opinion that is usually held of dreaming by representatives of

the exact sciences. On this view a dream is something wholly and

completely incapable of interpretation; for how could the ten fingers of

an unmusical player produce a piece of music?   Even in the distant past there was no lack of critics of the theory of

partial waking. Thus Burdach (1838, 508 f.) wrote: ‘When it is said that

dreams are a partial waking, in the first place this throws no light either

on waking or on sleeping, and in the second place it says no more

than that some mental forces are active in dreams while others are at

rest. But variability of this kind occurs throughout life.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        586

 

   This ruling theory, which regards dreams as a somatic process,

underlies a most interesting hypothesis put forward for the first time by

Robert in 1886. It is particularly attractive since it is able to suggest a

function,  a  utilitarian  purpose,  for  dreaming.  Robert  takes  as  the

groundwork  of  his  theory  two  facts  of  observation  which  we  have

already considered in the course of our examination of the material of

dreams (see above, p. 532 ff.), namely that we dream so frequently of

the most trivial daily impressions and that we so rarely carry over into

our dreams our important daily interests. Robert (1886, 10) asserts

that it is universally true that things which we have thoroughly thought

out never become instigators of dreams but only things which are in

our  minds  in  an  uncompleted  shape  or  which  have  merely  been

touched upon by our thoughts in passing: ‘The reason why it is usually

impossible to explain dreams is precisely because they are caused by

sensory  impressions  of  the  preceding  day  which  failed  to  attract

enough  of  the  dreamer’s  attention.’  Thus  the  condition  which

determines whether an impression shall find its way into a dream is

whether the process of working over the impression was interrupted or

whether  the  impression  was  too  unimportant  to  have  a  right  to  be

worked over at all.

      Robert  describes  dreams  as  ‘a  somatic  process  of  excretion  of

which  we  become  aware  in  our  mental  reaction  to  it’.  Dreams  are

excretions of thought that have been stifled at birth. ‘A man deprived

of the capacity for dreaming would in course of time become mentally

deranged,  because  a  great  mass  of  uncompleted,  unworked-out

thoughts  and  superficial  impressions  would  accumulate  in  his  brainand  would  be  bound  by  their  bulk  to  smother  the  thoughts  which

should be assimilated into his memory as completed wholes.’ Dreams

serve as a safety-valve for the over-burdened brain. They possess the

power to heal and relieve. (Ibid., 32.)

   We should be misunderstanding Robert if we were to ask him how it

can come about that the mind is relieved through the presentation of

ideas in dreams. What Robert is clearly doing is to infer from these

two features of the material of dreams that by some means or other an

expulsion of worthless impressions is accomplished during sleep as a

somatic process, and that dreaming is not a special sort of psychical

process  but  merely  the  information  we  receive  of  that  expulsion.

Moreover, excretion is not the only event which occurs in the mind at

night. Robert himself adds that, besides this, the suggestions arising

during the previous day are worked out and that ‘whatever parts of the

undigested  thoughts  are  not  excreted  are  bound  together  into  a

rounded whole by threads of thought borrowed from the imagination

and thus inserted in the memory as a harmless imaginative picture.’

(Ibid., 23.)

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        587

 

   But Robert’s theory is diametrically opposed to the ruling one in its

estimate  of  the  nature  of  the sources  of  dreams.  According  to  the

latter, there would be no dreaming at all if the mind were not being

constantly wakened by external and internal sensory stimuli. But in

Robert’s view the impulsion to dreaming arises in the mind itself - in

the  fact  of  its  becoming  overloaded  and  requiring  relief;  and  he

concludes  with  perfect  logic  that  causes  derived  from  somatic

conditions  play  a  subordinate  part  as  determinants  of  dreams,  and

that such causes would be quite incapable of provoking dreams in a

mind in which there was no material for the construction of dreams

derived from waking consciousness. The only qualification he makes

is  to  admit  that  the  phantasy-images  arising  in  dreams  out  of  the

depths  of  the  mind  may  be  affected  by  nervous  stimuli.  (Ibid.,  48.)

After all, therefore, Robert does not regard dreams as so completelydependent upon somatic events. Nevertheless, in his view dreams are

not  psychical  processes,  they  have  no  place  among  the  psychical

processes of waking life; they are somatic processes occurring every

night in the apparatus that is concerned with mental activity, and they

have  as  their  function  the  task  of  protecting  that  apparatus  from

excessive  tension  -  or,  to  change  the  metaphor  -  of  acting  as

scavengers of the mind.

   Another writer, Yves Delage, bases his theory on the same features

of  dreams,  as  revealed  in  the  choice  of  their  material;  and  it  is

instructive to notice the way in which a slight variation in his view of

the same things leads him to conclusions of a very different bearing.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        588

 

   Delage (1891, 41) tells us that he experienced in his own person, on

the occasion of the death of someone of whom he was fond, the fact

that we do not dream of what has occupied all our thoughts during the

day, or not until it has begun to give place to other daytime concerns.

His investigations among other people confirmed him in the general

truth of this fact. He makes what would be an interesting observation

of this kind, if it should prove to have general validity, on the dreams of

young married couples: ‘S’ils ont été fortement épris, presque jamais

ils n’ont rêvé l’un de l’autre avant le mariage ou pendant la lune de

miel; et s’ils ont rêvé d’amour c’est pour être infidèles avec quelque

personne  indifférente  ou  odieuse.’  What,  then,  do  we  dream  of?

Delage identifies the material that occurs in our dreams as consisting

of fragments and residues of the preceding days and of earlier times.

Everything that appears in our dreams, even though we are inclined at

first to regard it as a creation of our dream-life, turns out, when we

have  examined  it  more  closely,  to  be  unrecognized  reproduction  -

‘souvenir  inconscient’.  But  this  ideational  material  possesses  a

common characteristic: it originates from impressions which probably

affected our senses more strongly than our intelligence or from which

our  attention  was  diverted  very  soon  after  they  emerged.  The  less

conscious and at the same time the more powerful an impression hasbeen, the more chance it has of playing a part in the next dream.

      Here  we  have  what  are  essentially  the  same  two  categories  of

impressions as are stressed by Robert: the trivial ones and those that

have  not  been  dealt  with.  Delage,  however,  gives  the  situation  a

different turn, for he holds that it is because these impressions have

not been dealt with that they are capable of producing dreams, not

because  they  are  trivial.  It  is  true  in  a  certain  sense  that  trivial

impressions, too, have not been dealt with completely; being in the

nature of fresh impressions, they are ‘autant de ressorts tendus’ which

are released during sleep. A powerful impression which happens to

have met with some check in the process of being worked over or

which has been purposely held under restraint has more claim to play

a  part  in  dreams  than  an  impression  which  is  weak  and  almost

unnoticed. The psychical energy which has been stored up during the

daytime by being inhibited and suppressed becomes the motive force

for  dreams  at  night.  Psychical  material  that  has  been  suppressed

comes to light in dreams.¹

   At this point, unluckily, Delage interrupts his train of thought. He can

attribute  only  the  smallest  share  in  dreams  to  any  independent

psychical activity; and thus he brings his theory into line with the ruling

theory of the partial awakening of the brain: ‘En somme le rêve est le

produit  de  la  pensée  errante,  sans  but  et  sans  direction,  se  fixant

successivement  sur  les  souvenirs,  qui  ont  gardé  assez  d’intensité

pour se placer sur sa route et l’arrêter au passage, établissant entre

eux un lien tantôt faible et indécis, tantôt plus fort et plus serré, selon

que  l’activité  actuelle  du  cerveau  est  plus  ou  moins  abolie  par  le

sommeil.’ ²

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] Anatole France expresses exactly the same idea in Le lys rouge:

‘Ce que nous voyons la nuit, ce sont les restes malheureux de ce que nous avons négligé
dans la veille. Le rêve est souvent la revanche des choses qu’on méprise ou le reproche des
êtres abandonnés.’ [‘What we see during the night are the miserable remnants of what we
have neglected during the previous day. A dream is often a retaliation on the part of what we
despise or a reproach on the part of those we have deserted.’]

   ² [‘In short, dreams are the product of thought wandering without purpose or direction,

attaching itself in turn to memories which have retained enough intensity to stand in its way
and interrupt its course, and linking them together by a bond which is sometimes weak and
vague and sometimes stronger and closer, according as the brain’s activity at the moment is
abolished by sleep to a greater or less extent.’]
                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        589

 

 

   (3) We may place in a third group those theories which ascribe to

the dreaming mind a capacity and inclination for carrying out special

psychical activities of which it is largely or totally incapable in waking

life. The putting of these faculties into force usually provides dreaming

with a utilitarian function. Most of the estimates formed of dreaming by

earlier  writers  on  psychology  fall  into  this  class.  It  will  be  enough,

however,  for  me  to  quote  a  sentence  from  Burdach  (1838,  512).

Dreaming,  he  writes,  ‘is  a  natural  activity  of  the  mind  which  is  not

limited by the power of individuality, which is not interrupted by self-

consciousness  and  which  is  not  directed  by  self-determination,  but

which is the freely operating vitality of the sensory centres.’

      This  revelling  of  the  mind  in  the  free  use  of  its  own  forces  is

evidently regarded by Burdach and the rest as a condition in which the

mind is refreshed and collects new strength for the day’s work - in

which, in fact, it enjoys a sort of holiday. Thus Burdach quotes with

approval the charming words in which the poet Novalis praises the

reign of dreams: ‘Dreams are a shield against the humdrum monotony

of life; they set imagination free from its chains so that it may throw

into con fusion all the pictures of everyday existence and break into

the unceasing gravity of grown men with the joyful play of a child.

Without dreams we should surely grow sooner old; so we may look on

them  -  not,  perhaps  as  a  gift  from  on  high-  but  as  a  precious

recreation, as friendly companions on our pilgrimage to the grave.’

   The reviving and healing function of dreams is described with still

more  insistence  by  Purkinje  (1846,  456):  ‘These  functions  are

performed especially by productive dreams. They are the easy play of

the imagination and have no connection with the affairs of daytime.

The mind has no wish to prolong the tensions of waking life; it seeks

to  relax  them  and  to  recover  from  them.  It  produces  above  all

conditions contrary to the waking ones. It cures sorrow by joy, cares

by  hopes  and  pictures  of  happy  distraction,  hatred  by  love  and

friendliness,  fear  by  courage  and  foresight;  it  allays  doubt  by

conviction and firm faith, and vain expectation by fulfilment. Many ofthe spirit’s wounds which are being constantly re-opened during the

day are healed by sleep, which covers them and shields them from

fresh injury. The healing action of time is based partly on this.’ We all

have a feeling that sleep has a beneficial effect upon mental activities,

and the obscure working of the popular mind refuses to let itself be

robbed of its belief that dreaming is one of the ways in which sleep

dispenses its benefits.

 

   The most original and far-reaching attempt to explain dreaming as a

special activity of the mind, capable of free expansion only during the

state of sleep, was that undertaken by Scherner in 1861. His book is

written in a turgid and high-flown style and is inspired by an almost

intoxicated enthusiasm for his subject which is bound to repel anyone

who cannot share in his fervour. It puts such difficulties in the way of

an analysis of its contents that we turn with relief to the clearer and

briefer  exposition  of  Scherner’s  doctrines  given  by  the  philosopher

Volkelt. ‘Suggestive gleams of meaning proceed like lightning flashes

out  of  these  mystical  agglomerations,  these  clouds  of  glory  and

splendour - but they do not illuminate a philosopher’s path.’ It is in

these terms that Scherner’s writings are judged even by his disciple.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        590

 

   Scherner is not one of those who believe that the capacities of the

mind continue undiminished in dream-life. He himself shows how the

centralized core of the ego - its spontaneous energy - is deprived of its

nervous force in dreams, how as a result of this decentralization the

processes of cognition, feeling, willing and ideation are modified, and

how the remnants of these psychical functions no longer possess a

truly mental character but become nothing more than mechanisms.

But by way of contrast, the mental activity which may be described as

‘imagination’, liberated from the domination of reason and from any

moderating  control,  leaps  into  a  position  of  unlimited  sovereignty.

Though dream-imagination makes use of recent waking memories for

its  building  material,  it  erects  them  into  structures  bearing  not  theremotest  resemblance  to  those  of  waking  life;  it  reveals  itself  in

dreams as possessing not merely reproductive but productive powers.

Its characteristics are what lend their peculiar features to dreams. It

shows  a  preference  for  what  is  immoderate,  exaggerated  and

monstrous. But at the same time, being freed from the hindrances of

the categories of thought, it gains in pliancy, agility and versatility. It is

susceptible in the subtlest manner to the shades of the tender feelings

and to passionate emotions, and promptly incorporates our inner life

into  external  plastic  pictures.  Imagination  in  dreams  is  without  the

power of conceptual speech. It is obliged to paint what it has to say

pictorially, and, since there are no concepts to exercise an attenuating

influence, it makes full and powerful use of the pictorial form. Thus,

however clear its speech may be, it is diffuse, clumsy and awkward.

The clarity of its speech suffers particularly from the fact that it has a

dislike of representing an object by its proper image, and prefers some

extraneous image which will express only that particular one of the

object’s attributes which it is seeking to represent. Here we have the

‘symbolizing activity’ of the imagination. . . . Another very important

point is that dream-imagination never depicts things completely, but

only  in  outline  and  even  so  only  in  the  roughest  fashion.  For  this

reason  its  paintings  seem  like  inspired  sketches.  It  does  not  halt,

however,  at  the  mere  representation  of  an  object;  it  is  under  an

internal necessity to involve the dream-ego to a greater or less extent

with  the  object  and  thus  produce  an event.  For  instance,  a  dream

caused by a visual stimulus may represent gold coins in the street; the

dreamer will pick them up delightedly and carry them off.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        591

 

   The material with which dream-imagination accomplishes its artistic

work  is  principally,  according  to  Scherner,  provided  by  the  organic

somatic stimuli which are so obscure during the daytime. (See above,

p. 544 ff.) Thus the excessively fantastic hypothesis put forward by

Scherner and the perhaps unduly sober doctrines of Wundt and other

physiologists, which are poles asunder in other respects, are entirelyat  one  in  regard  to  their  theory  of  the  sources  and  instigators  of

dreams.  According  to  the  physiological  view,  however,  the  mental

reaction to the internal somatic stimuli is exhausted with the provoking

of  certain  ideas  appropriate  to  the  stimuli;  these  ideas  give  rise  to

others along associative lines and at this point the course of psychical

events in dreams seems to be at an end. According to Scherner, on

the other hand, the somatic stimuli do no more than provide the mind

with material of which it can make use for its imaginative purposes.

The formation of dreams only begins, in Scherner’s eyes, at the point

which the other writers regard as its end.

      What  dream-imagination  does  to  the  somatic  stimuli  cannot,  of

course, be regarded as serving any useful purpose. It plays about with

them and pictures the organic sources, from which the stimuli of the

dream  in  question  have  arisen,  in  some  kind  of  plastic  symbolism.

Scherner is of the opinion - though here Volkelt and others refuse to

follow him - that dream imagination has one particular favourite way of

representing  the  organism  as  a  whole:  namely  as  a  house.

Fortunately, however, it does not seem to be restricted to this one

method of representation On the other hand, it may make use of a

whole row of houses to indicate a single organ; for instance, a very

long street of houses may represent a stimulus from the intestines.

Again, separate portions of a house may stand for separate portions

of the body; thus, in a dream caused by a headache, the head may be

represented by the ceiling of a room covered with disgusting, toad-like

spiders.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        592

 

   Leaving this house-symbolism on one side, any number of other

kinds of things may be used to represent the parts of the body from

which the stimulus to the dream has arisen. ‘Thus the breathing lung

will  be  symbolically  represented  by  a  blazing  furnace,  with  flames

roaring  with  a  sound  like  the  passage  of  air;  the  heart  will  be

represented by hollow boxes or baskets, the bladder by round, bag-

shaped objects or, more generally, by hollow ones. A dream causedby stimuli arising from the male sexual organs may cause the dreamer

to find the top part of a clarinet in the street or the mouth-piece of a

tobacco-pipe,  or  again,  a  piece  of  fur.  Here  the  clarinet  and  the

tobacco-pipe  represent  the  approximate  shape  of  the  male  organ,

while the fur stands for the pubic hair. In the case of a sexual dream in

a woman, the narrow space where the thighs come together may be

represented by a narrow courtyard surrounded by houses, while the

vagina may be symbolized by a soft, slippery and very narrow foot-

path leading across the yard, along which the dreamer has to pass, in

order, perhaps, to take a gentleman a letter.’ (Ibid., 34.) It is of special

importance that, at the end of dreams with a somatic stimulus, such as

these, the dream imagination often throws aside its veil, as it were, by

openly revealing the organ concerned or its function. Thus a dream

‘with a dental stimulus’ usually ends by the dreamer picturing himself

pulling a tooth out of his mouth.

   Dream-imagination may, however, not merely direct its attention to

the form of the stimulating organ; it may equally well symbolize the

substance  contained  in  that  organ.  In  this  way,  a  dream  with  an

intestinal stimulus may lead the dreamer along muddy streets, or one

with  a  urinary  stimulus  may  lead  him  to  a  foaming  stream.  Or  the

stimulus  as  such,  the  nature  of  the  excitement  it  produces,  or  the

object it desires, may be symbolically represented. Or the dream-ego

may enter into concrete relations with the symbols of its own state; for

instance, in the case of painful stimuli the dreamer may engage in a

desperate struggle with fierce dogs or savage bulls, or a woman in a

sexual dream may find herself pursued by a naked man. Quite apart

from the wealth of the means that it employs, the symbolizing activity

of the imagination remains the central force in every dream. The task

of penetrating more deeply into the nature of this imagination and of

finding a place for it in a system of philosophical thought is attempted

by Volkelt in the pages of his book. But, though it is well and feelingly

written, it remains excessively hard to understand for anyone whose

early education has not prepared him for a sympathetic grasp of the

conceptual constructions of philosophy.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams                                                                                        593

 

   There is no utilitarian function attached to Scherner’s symbolizing

imagination. The mind plays in its sleep with the stimuli that impinge

upon  it.  One  might  almost  suspect  that  it  plays  with  them

mischievously.  But  I  might  also  be  asked  whether  my  detailed

examination of Scherner’s theory of dreams can serve any utilitarian

purpose, since its arbitrary character and its disobedience to all the

rules of research seem only too obvious. By way of rejoinder, I might

register  a  protest  against  the  arrogance  which  would  dismiss

Scherner’s theory unexamined. His theory is built upon the impression

made  by  his  dreams  upon  a  man  who  considered  them  with  the

greatest  attention  and  seems  to  have  had  a  great  personal  gift  for

investigating the obscure things of the mind. Moreover it deals with a

subject that for thousands of years has been regarded by mankind as

enigmatic, no doubt, but also as important in itself and its implications

-  a  subject  to  the  elucidation  of  which  exact  science,  on  its  own

admission,  has  contributed  little  apart  from  an  attempt  (in  direct

opposition to popular feeling) to deny it any meaning or significance.

And finally it may honestly be said that in attempting to explain dreams

it is not easy to avoid being fantastic. Ganglion cells can be fantastic

too. The passage which I quoted on p. 584 from a sober and exact

investigator like Binz, and which describes the way in which the dawn

of awakening steals over the mass of sleeping cells in the cerebral

cortex, is no less fantastic - and no less improbably - than Scherner’s

attempts at interpretation. I hope to be able to show that behind the

latter there is an element of reality, though it has only been vaguely

perceived  and  lacks  the  attribute  of  universality  which  should

characterize  a  theory  of  dreams.  Meanwhile  the  contrast  between

Scherner’s  theory  and  the  medical  one  will  show  us  the  extremes

between which explanations of dream-life doubtfully oscillate to this

very day.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        594

 

                                          (H) 

            THE RELATIONS BETWEEN DREAMS AND MENTAL DISEASES

 

   When we speak of the relation of dreams to mental disorders we

may  have  three  things  in  mind:  (1)  aetiological  and  clinical

connections,  as  when  a  dream  represents  a  psychotic  state,  or

introduces it, or is left over from it; (2) modifications to which dream-

life is subject in cases of mental disease; and (3) intrinsic connections

between  dreams  and  psychoses,  analogies  pointing  to  their  being

essentially akin . These numerous relations between the two groups of

phenomena were a favourite topic among medical writers in earlier

times and have become so once again to-day, as is shown by the

bibliographies  of  the  subject  collected  by  Spitta,  Radestock,  Maury

and Tissié. Quite recently Sante de Sanctis has turned his attention to

this subject.¹ It will be enough for the purpose of my thesis if I do no

more than touch upon this important question.

 

   As regards the clinical and aetiological connections between dreams

and psychoses, the following observations may be given as samples.

Hohnbaum,  quoted  by  Krauss,  reports  that  a  first  outbreak  of

delusional insanity often originates in an anxious or terrifying dream,

and that the dominant idea is connected with the dream. Sante de

Sanctis brings forward similar observations in cases of paranoia and

declares  that  in  some  of  these  the  dream  was  the  ‘vraie  cause

déterminante de la folie’. The psychosis, says de Sanctis, may come

to life at a single blow with the appearance of the operative dream

which brings the delusional material to light; or it may develop slowly

in a series of further dreams, which have still to overcome a certain

amount  of  doubt.  In  one  of  his  cases  the  significant  dream  was

followed by mild hysterical attacks and later by a condition of anxious

melancholia. Férée (quoted by Tissié, 1898) reports a dream which

resulted in a hysterical paralysis. In these instances the dreams are

represented as the aetiology of the mental disorder; but we should be

doing  equal  justice  to  the  facts  if  we  said  that  the  mental  disorder

made its first appearance in dream-life, that it first broke through in a

dream.  In  some  further  examples  the  pathological  symptoms  are

contained in dream-life, or the psychosis is limited to dream-life. ThusThomayer (1897) draws attention to certain anxiety-dreams which he

thinks  should  be  regarded  as  equivalents  of  epileptic  fits.  Allison

(quoted by Radestock, 1879) has described a ‘nocturnal insanity’, in

which the patient appears completely healthy during the day but is

regularly subject at night to hallucinations, fits of frenzy, etc. Similar

observations  are  reported  by  de  Sanctis  (a  dream  of  an  alcoholic

patient which was equivalent to a paranoia, and which represented

voices  accusing  his  wife  of  unfaithfulness)  and  Tissié.  The  latter

(1898) gives copious recent examples in which acts of a pathological

nature, such as conduct based on delusional premises and obsessive

impulses,  were  derived  from  dreams.  Guislain  describes  a  case  in

which sleep was replaced by an intermittent insanity.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] Among later writers who deal with these relations are Féré, Ideler,

Lasègue, Pichon, Régis, Vespa, Giessler, Kazowsky, Pachantoni, etc.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        595

 

 

   There can be no doubt that alongside of the psychology of dreams

physicians  will  some  day  have  to  turn  their  attention  to  a

psychopathology of dreams.

   In cases of recovery from mental diseases it can often be quite

clearly  observed  that,  while  functioning  is  normal  during  the  day,

dream-life is still under the influence of the psychosis. According to

Krauss (1859, 270), Gregory first drew attention to this fact. Macario,

quoted  by  Tissié,  describes  how  a  manic  patient,  a  week  after  his

complete recovery was still subject in his dreams to the flight of ideas

and the violent passions which were characteristic of his illness.

 

      Very  little  research  has  hitherto  been  carried  out  into  the

modifications occurring in dream-life during chronic psychoses. On the

other hand, attention was long ago directed to the underlying kinship

between dreams and mental disorders, exhibited in the wide measure

of agreement between their manifestations. Maury (1854, 124) tells us

that Cabanis (1802) was the first to remark on them, and after himLélut,  J.  Moreau  (1855)  and,  in  particular,  Maine  de  Biran  the

philosopher.  No  doubt  the  comparison  goes  back  still  earlier.

Radestock (1879, 217) introduces the chapter in which he deals with it

by a number of quotations drawing an analogy between dreams and

madness.  Kant  writes  somewhere:  ‘The  madman  is  a  waking

dreamer.’  Krauss  (1859,  270)  declares  that  ‘insanity  is  a  dream

dreamt while the senses are awake’. Schopenhauer calls dreams a

brief madness and madness a long dream. Hagen describes delirium

as dream-life induced not by sleep but by illness. Wundt writes: ‘We

ourselves,  in  fact,  can  experience  in  dreams  almost  all  the

phenomena to be met with in insane asylums.’

      Spitta  (1882,  199),  in  much  the  same  way  as  Maury  (1854),

enumerates  as  follows  the  different  points  of  agreement  which

constitute  the  basis  for  this  comparison:  ‘(1)  Self-consciousness  is

suspended or at least retarded, which results in a lack of insight into

the nature of the condition, with consequent inability to feel surprise

and loss of moral consciousness. (2) Perception by the sense organs

is modified: being diminished in dreams but as a rule greatly increased

in insanity. (3) Interconnection of ideas occurs exclusively according to

the  laws  of  association  and  reproduction;  ideas  thus  fall  into

sequences automatically and there is a consequent lack of proportion

in  the  relation  between  ideas  (exaggerations  and  illusions).  All  this

leads to (4) an alteration or in some cases a reversal of personality

and occasionally of character traits (perverse conduct).’

      Radestock  (1879,  219)  adds  a  few  more  features  -  analogies

between the material in the two cases: ‘The majority of hallucinations

and illusions occur in the region of the senses of sight and hearing

and of coenaesthesia. As in the case of dreams, the senses of smell

and  taste  provide  the  fewest  elements.  -  Both  in  patients  suffering

from fever and in dreamers memories arise from the remote past; both

sleeping and sick men recollect things which waking and healthy men

seem to have forgotten.’ The analogy between dreams and psychoses

is only fully appreciated when it is seen to extend to the details of

expressive  movement  and  to  particular  characteristics  of  facial

expression.

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        596

 

   ‘A man tormented by physical and mental suffering obtains from

dreams  what  reality  denies  him:  health  and  happiness.  So  too  in

mental  disease  there  are  bright  pictures  of  happiness,  grandeur,

eminence and wealth. The supposed possession of property and the

imaginary fulfilment of wishes - the withholding or destruction of which

actually affords a psychological basis for insanity - often constitute the

chief  content  of  a  delirium.  A  woman  who  has  lost  a  loved  child

experiences the joys of motherhood in her delirium; a man who has

lost his money believes himself immensely rich; a girl who has been

deceived feels that she is tenderly loved.’

   (This passage from Radestock is actually a summary of an acute

observation made by Griesinger (1861, 106), who shows quite clearly

that  ideas  in  dreams  and  in  psychoses  have  in  common  the

characteristic of being fulfilments of wishes. My own researches have

taught me that in this fact lies the key to a psychological theory of both

dreams and psychoses.)

   ‘The chief feature of dreams and of insanity lies in their eccentric

trains of thought and their weakness of judgement.’ In both states we

find an over-valuation of the subject’s own mental achievements which

seems  senseless  to  a  sober  view;  the  rapid  sequence  of  ideas  in

dreams is paralleled by the flight of ideas in psychoses. In both there

is a complete lack of sense of time. In dreams the personality may be

split  -  when,  for  instance,  the  dreamer’s  own  knowledge  is  divided

between two persons and when, in the dream, the extraneous ego

corrects the actual one. This is precisely on a par with the splitting of

the  personality  that  is  familiar  to  us  in  hallucinatory  paranoia;  the

dreamer  too  hears  his  own  thoughts  pronounced  by  extraneous

voices.  Even  chronic  delusional  ideas  have  their  analogy  in

stereotyped recurrent pathological dreams (le rêve obsédant). - It not

infrequently happens that after recovering from a delirium patients will

say that the whole period of their illness seems to them like a not

unpleasant dream: indeed they will sometimes tell us that even during

the  illness  they  have  occasionally  had  a  feeling  that  they  are  only

caught up in a dream - as is often the case in dreams occurring insleep.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        597

 

   After all this, it is not surprising that Radestock sums up his views,

and those of many others, by declaring that ‘insanity, an abnormal

pathological phenomenon, is to be regarded as an intensification of

the periodically recurrent normal condition of dreaming’. (Ibid., 228.)

   Krauss (1859, 270 f.) has sought to establish what is perhaps a still

more intimate connection between dreams and insanity than can be

demonstrated by an analogy between these external manifestations.

This connection he sees in their aetiology or rather in the sources of

their excitation. The fundamental element common to the two states

lies  according  to  him,  as  we  have  seen,  in  organically  determined

sensations,  in  sensations  derived  from  somatic  stimuli,  in  the

coenaesthesia which is based upon contributions arising from all the

organs. (Cf. Peisse, 1857, 2, 21, quoted by Maury, 1878, 52.)

 

   The indisputable analogy between dreams and insanity, extending

as  it  does  down  to  their  characteristic  details,  is  one  of  the  most

powerful  props  of  the  medical  theory  of  dream-life,  which  regards

dreaming as a useless and disturbing process and as the expression

of a reduced activity of the mind. Nevertheless it is not to be expected

that we shall find the ultimate explanation of dreams in the direction of

mental disorders; for the unsatisfactory state of our knowledge of the

origin  of  these  latter  conditions  is  generally  recognized.  It  is  quite

likely,  on  the  contrary,  that  a  modification  of  our  attitude  towards

dreams  will  at  the  same  time  affect  our  views  upon  the  internal

mechanism of mental disorders and that we shall be working towards

an explanation of the psychoses while we are endeavouring to throw

some light on the mystery of dreams.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        598

                                     POSTSCRIPT, 1909

 

      The  fact  that  I  have  not  extended  my  account  of  the  literature

dealing with the problems of dreams to cover the period between the

first and second editions of this book stands in need of a justification.

It may strike the reader as an unsatisfactory one, but for me it was

none the less decisive. The motives which led me to give any account

at all of the way in which earlier writers have dealt with dreams were

exhausted with the completion of this introductory chapter; to continue

the task would have cost me an extraordinary effort - and the result

would have been of very little use or instruction. For the intervening

nine years have produced nothing new or valuable either in factual

material or in opinions that might throw light on the subject. In the

majority  of  publications  that  have  appeared  during  the  interval  my

work has remained unmentioned and unconsidered. It has, of course,

received  least  attention  from  those  who  are  engaged  in  what  is

described as ‘research’ into dreams, and who have thus provided a

shining example of the repugnance to learning anything new which is

characteristic  of  men  of  science.  In  the  ironical  words  of  Anatole

France, ‘les savants ne sont pas curieux’. If there were such a thing in

science as a right to retaliate, I should certainly be justified in my turn

in  disregarding  the  literature  that  has  been  issued  since  the

publication of this book. The few notices of it that have appeared in

scientific  periodicals  show  so  much lack  of  understanding  and  so

much misunderstanding that my only reply to the critics would be to

suggest their reading the book again - or perhaps, indeed, merely to

suggest their reading it.

   A large number of dreams have been published and analysed in

accordance  with  my  directions  in  papers  by  physicians  who  have

decided to adopt the psycho-analytic therapeutic procedure, as well as

by other authors. In so far as these writings have gone beyond a mere

confirmation of my views I have included their findings in the course of

my exposition. I have added a second bibliography at the end of the

volume  containing  a  list  of  the  most  important  works  that  have

appeared  since  this  book  was  first  published.  The  extensive

monograph  on  dreams  by  Sante  de  Sanctis  (1899),  of  which  a

German  translation  appeared  soon  after  its  issue,  was  publishedalmost  simultaneously  with  my Interpretation  of  Dreams,  so  that

neither I nor the Italian author was able to comment upon each other’s

work. I have unfortunately been unable to escape the conclusion that

his painstaking volume is totally deficient in ideas- so much so, in fact,

that  it  would  not  even  lead  one  to  suspect  the  existence  of  the

problems with which I have dealt.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        599 

 

   Only two publications require to be mentioned which come near to

my  own  treatment  of  the  problems  of  dreams.  Hermann  Swoboda

(1904), a youthful philosopher, has undertaken the task of extending

to psychical events the discovery of a biological periodicity (in 23-day

and  28-day  periods)  made  by  Wilhelm  Fliess.  In  the  course  of  his

highly imaginative work he has endeavoured to use this key for the

solution, among other problems, of the riddle of dreams. His findings

would seem to underestimate the significance of dreams; the subject

matter of a dream, on his view, is to be explained as an assemblage

of all the memories which, on the night on which it is dreamt, complete

one of the biological periods, whether for the first or for the nth time. A

personal communication from the author led me at first to suppose

that he himself no longer took this theory seriously, but it seems that

this was a mistaken conclusion on my part. At a later stage I shall

report  upon  some  observations  which  I  made  in  connection  with

Swoboda’s suggestion but which led me to no convincing conclusion. I

was the more pleased when, in an unexpected quarter, I made the

chance discovery of a view of dreams which coincides entirely with the

core of my own theory. It is impossible, for chronological reasons, that

the statement in question can have been influenced by my book. I

must  therefore  hail  it  as  the  single  discoverable  instance  in  the

literature of the subject of an independent thinker who is in agreement

with the essence of my theory of dreams. The book which contains the

passage upon dreaming which I have in mind appeared in its second

edition  in  1900  under  the  title  of Phantasien  eines  Realisten  by

‘Lynkeus’.¹ 

                                    POSTSCRIPT, 1914

 

   The preceding plea of justification was written in 1909. I am bound

to admit that since then the situation has changed; my contribution to

the interpretation of dreams is no longer neglected by writers on the

subject. The new state of affairs, however, has now made it quite out

of the question for me to extend my previous account of the literature.

The  Interpretation  of  Dreams  has  raised  a  whole  series  of  fresh

considerations and problems which have been discussed in a great

variety of ways. I cannot give an account of these works, however,

before I have expounded those views of my own on which they are

based. I have therefore dealt with whatever seems to me of value in

the  latest  literature  at  its  appropriate  place  in  the  course  of  the

discussion which now follows.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1930:] Cf. my paper on Josef Popper-Lynkeus and the theory of dreams

(1923f).
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        600

 

                                      CHAPTER II

 

              THE METHOD OF INTERPRETING DREAMS:

                AN ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN DREAM

 

The title that I have chosen for my work makes plain which of the

traditional  approaches  to  the  problem  of  dreams  I  am  inclined  to

follow. The aim which I have set before myself is to show that dreams

are capable of being interpreted; and any contributions I may be able

to make towards the solution of the problems dealt with in the last

chapter will only arise as by products in the course of carrying out my

proper task. My presumption that dreams can be interpreted at once

puts me in opposition to the ruling theory of dreams and in fact to

every theory of dreams with the single exception of Scherner’s; for

‘interpreting’  a  dream  implies  assigning  a  ‘meaning’  to  it  -  that  is,replacing it by something which fits into the chain of our mental acts

as a link having a validity and importance equal to the rest. As we

have seen, the scientific theories of dreams leave no room for any

problem  of  interpreting  them,  since  in  their  view  a  dream  is  not  a

mental act at all, but a somatic process signalizing its occurrence by

indications registered in the mental apparatus. Lay opinion has taken

a  different  attitude  throughout  the  ages.  It  has  exercised  its

indefeasible right to behave inconsistently; and, though admitting that

dreams are unintelligible and absurd, it cannot bring itself to declare

that they have no significance at all. Led by some obscure feeling, it

seems  to  assume  that,  in  spite  of  everything,  every  dream  has  a

meaning, though a hidden one, that dreams are designed to take the

place of some other process of thought, and that we have only to undo

the substitution correctly in order to arrive at this hidden meaning.

   Thus the lay world has from the earliest times concerned itself with

‘interpreting’ dreams and in its attempts to do so it has made use of

two essentially different methods.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        601

 

   The first of these procedures considers the content of the dream as

a whole and seeks to replace it by another content which is intelligible

and  in  certain  respects  analogous  to  the  original  one.  This  is

‘symbolic’  dream-interpreting;  and  it  inevitably  breaks  down  when

faced by dreams which are not merely unintelligible but also confused.

An  example  of  this  procedure  is  to  be  seen  in  the  explanation  of

Pharaoh’s dream propounded by Joseph in the Bible. The seven fat

kine followed by seven lean kine that ate up the fat kine - all this was a

symbolic substitute for a prophecy of seven years of famine in the land

of Egypt which should consume all that was brought forth in the seven

years  of  plenty.  Almost  of  the  artificial  dreams  constructed  by

imaginative writers are designed for a symbolic interpretation of this

sort: they reproduce the writer’s thoughts under a disguise which is

regarded  as  harmonizing  with  the  recognized  characteristics  of

dreams.¹ The idea of dreams being chiefly concerned with the futureand  being  able  to  foretell  it  -  a  remnant  of  the  old  prophetic

significance  of  dreams  -  provides  a  reason  for  transposing  the

meaning  of  the  dream,  when  it  has  been  arrived  at  by  symbolic

interpretation, into the future tense. It is of course impossible to give

instructions upon the method of arriving at a symbolic interpretation.

Success  must  be  a  question  of  hitting  on  a  clever  idea,  of  direct

intuition, and for that reason it was possible for dream-interpretation

by  means  of  symbolism  to  be  exalted  into  an  artistic  activity

dependent on the possession of peculiar gifts.²

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] I found by chance in Gradiva, a story written by Wilhelm Jensen,

a  number  of  artificial  dreams  which  were  perfectly  correctly  constructed  and  could  be
interpreted just as though they had not been invented but had been dreamt by real people. In
reply to an enquiry, the author confirmed the fact that he had no knowledge of my theory of
dreams. I have argued that the agreement between my researches and this writer’s creations
is evidence in favour of the correctness of my analysis of dreams. (See Freud, 1907a.)

   ² [Footnote added 1914:] Aristotle remarked in this connection that the best interpreter of

dreams was the man who could best grasp similarities; for dream-pictures, like pictures on
water, are pulled out of shape by movement, and the most successful interpreter is the man
who can detect the truth from the misshapen picture. (Büchenschütz, 1868, 65.)
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        602

 

   The second of the two popular methods of interpreting dreams is far

from making any such claims. It might be described as the ‘decoding’

method, since it treats dreams as a kind of cryptography in which each

sign can be translated into another sign having a known meaning, in

accordance with a fixed key. Suppose, for instance, that I have dreamt

of a letter and also of a funeral. If I consult a ‘dream-book’, I find that

‘letter’  must  be  translated  by  ‘trouble’  and  ‘funeral’  by  ‘betrothal’.  It

then  remains  for  me  to  link  together  the  key  words  which  I  have

deciphered in this way and, once more, to transpose the result into the

future tense. An interesting modification of the process of decoding,

which to some extent corrects the purely mechanical character of its

method of transposing, is to be found in the book written upon the

interpretation of dreams by Artemidorus of Daldis.¹ This method takes

into account not only the content of the dream but also the character

and circumstances of the dreamer; so that the same dream-elementwill have a different meaning for a rich man, a married man or, let us

say,  an  orator,  from  what  it  has  for  a  poor  man,  a  bachelor  or  a

merchant. The essence of the decoding procedure, however, lies in

the fact that the work of interpretation is not brought to bear on the

dream  as  a  whole  but  on  each  portion  of  the  dream’s  content

independently, as though the dream were a geological conglomerate

in  which  each  fragment  of  rock  required  a  separate  assessment.

There can be no question that the invention of the decoding method of

interpretation was suggested by disconnected and confused dreams.²

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] Artemidorus of Daldis, who was probably born at the beginning of

the  second  century  A.D.,  has  left  us  the  most  complete  and  painstaking  study  of  dream-
interpretation as practised in the Graeco-Roman world. As Theodor Gomperz (1866, 7 f.)
points out, he insisted on the importance of basing the interpretation of dreams on observation
and  experience,  and  made  a  rigid  distinction  between  his  own  art  and  others  that  were
illusory. The principle of his interpretative art, according to Gomperz, is identical with magic,
the principle of association. A thing in a dream means what it recalls to the mind - to the
dream-interpreter’s mind, it need hardly be said. An insuperable source of arbitrariness and
uncertainty  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  dream-element  may  recall  various  things  to  the
interpreter’s mind and may recall something different to different interpreters. The technique
which I describe in the pages that follow differs in one essential respect from the ancient
method: it imposes the task of interpretation upon the dreamer himself. It is not concerned
with what occurs to the interpreter in connection with a particular element of the dream, but
with what occurs to the dreamer. - Recent reports, however, from a missionary, Father Tfinkdji
(1913), show that modern dream-interpreters in the East also make free use of the dreamer’s
collaboration. He writes as follows of dream-interpreters among the Arabs of Mesopotamia:
‘Pour  interprêter  exactement  un  songe,  les  oniromanciens  les  plus  habiles  s’informent  de
ceux qui les consultent de toutes les circonstances qu’ils regardent nécessaires pour la bonne
explication. . . . En un mot, nos oniromanciens ne laissent aucune circonstance leur échapper
et  ne  donnent  l’interprétation  désirée  avant  d’avoir  parfaitement  saisi  et  reçu  toutes  les
interrogations désirables.’ [‘In order to give a precise interpretation of a dream, the most skilful
dream-diviners  find  out  from  those  who  consult  them  all  the  circumstances  which  they
consider essential in order to arrive at a right explanation. . . . In short, these dream-diviners
do not allow a single point to escape them and only give their interpretation after they have
completely mastered the replies to all the necessary enquiries.’] Among these enquiries are
habitually included questions as to the dreamer’s closest family relations - his parents, wife
and  children  -  as  well  as  such  a  typical  formula  as:  ‘Habuistine  in  hac  nocte  copulam
conjugam ante vel post somnium?’ [‘Did you copulate with your wife that night before or after
you had the dream?’] -’L’idée dominante dans l’interprétation des songes consiste à expliquer
le rêve par son opposée.’ [‘The principal idea in interpreting dreams lies in explaining a dream
by its opposite.’]

   ² [Footnote added 1909:] Dr. Alfred Robitsek has pointed out to me that the oriental ‘dream-

books’ (of which ours are wretched imitations) base the greater number of their interpretations
of dream-elements upon similarity of sounds and resemblance between words. The fact that
these connections inevitably disappear in translation accounts for the unintelligibility of the
renderings  in  our  own  popular  dream-books.  The  extraordinarily  important  part  played  bypunning and verbal quibbles in the ancient civilizations of the East may be studied in the
writings of Hugo Winckler. - [Added 1911:] The nicest instance of a dream-interpretation which
has reached us from ancient times is based on a play upon words. It is told by Artemidorus: ‘I
think too that Aristander gave a most happy interpretation to Alexander of Macedon when he
had surrounded Tyre and was besieging it but was feeling uneasy and disturbed because of
the length of time the siege was taking. Alexander dreamt he saw a satyr dancing on his
shield. Aristander happened to be in the neighbourhood of Tyre, in attendance on the king

during his Syrian campaign. By dividing the word for satyr into σάand τύρος he encouraged

the king to press home the siege so that he became master of the city.’ (σά Τύρος = Tyre is

thine.) - Indeed, dreams are so closely related to linguistic expression that Ferenczi has truly
remarked that every tongue has its own dream-language. It is impossible as a rule to translate
a dream into a foreign language and this is equally true, I fancy, of a book such as the present
one. [Added 1930:] Nevertheless, Dr. A. A. Brill of New York, and others after him, have
succeeded in translating The Interpretation of Dreams.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        603

 

   It cannot be doubted for a moment that neither of the two popular

procedures for interpreting dreams can be employed for a scientific

treatment  of  the  subject.  The  symbolic  method  is  restricted  in  its

application and incapable of being laid down on general lines. In the

case  of  the  decoding  method  everything  depends  on  the

trustworthiness of the ‘key’ - the dream-book, and of this we have no

guarantee.  Thus  one  might  feel  tempted  to  agree  with  the

philosophers and the psychiatrists and, like them, rule out the problem

of dream-interpretation as a purely fanciful task.¹

   But I have been taught better. I have been driven to realize that here

once more we have one of those not infrequent cases in which an

ancient and jealously held popular belief seems to be nearer the truth

than the judgement of the prevalent science of today. I must affirm

that dreams really have a meaning and that a scientific procedure for

interpreting them is possible.

 

      My  knowledge  of  that  procedure  was  reached  in  the  following

manner. I have been engaged for many years (with a therapeutic aim

in  view)  in  unravelling  certain  psychopathological  structures  -

hysterical phobias, obsessional ideas, and so on. I have been doing

so, in fact, ever since I learnt from an important communication by

Josef Breuer that as regards these structures (which are looked on aspathological  symptoms)  unravelling  these  coincides  with  removing

them. (Cf. Breuer and Freud, 1895.)  If a pathological idea of this sort

can be traced back to the elements in the patient’s mental life from

which it originated, it simultaneously crumbles away and the patient is

freed  from  it.  Considering  the  impotence  of  our  other  therapeutic

efforts and the puzzling nature of these disorders, I felt tempted to

follow the path marked out by Breuer, in spite of every difficulty, till a

complete explanation was reached. I shall have on another occasion

to report at length upon the form finally taken by this procedure and

the results of my labours. It was in the course of these psycho-analytic

studies  that  I  came  upon  dream-interpretation.  My  patients  were

pledged to communicate to me every idea or thought that occurred to

them in connection with some particular subject; amongst other things

they  told  me  their  dreams  and  so  taught  me  that  a  dream  can  be

inserted into the psychical chain that has to be traced backwards in

the memory from a pathological idea. It was then only a short step to

treating the dream itself as a symptom and to applying to dreams the

method of interpretation that had been worked out for symptoms.

 

   ¹ After I had completed my manuscript I came across a work by Stumpf (1889) which

agrees  with  my  views  in  seeking  to  prove  that  dreams  have  a  meaning  and  can  be
interpreted. He effects his interpretation, however, by means of a symbolism of an allegorical
character without any guarantee of the general validity of his procedure.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        604

 

   This involves some psychological preparation of the patient. In the

attention he pays to his own psychical perceptions and the elimination

of the criticism by which he normally sifts the thoughts that occur to

him. In order that he may be able to concentrate his attention on his

self-observation it is an advantage for him to lie in a restful attitude

and shut his eyes. It is necessary to insist explicitly on his renouncing

all criticism of the thoughts that he perceives. We therefore tell him

that the success of the psycho-analysis depends on his noticing and

reporting  whatever  comes  into  his  head  and  not  being  misled,  for

instance,  into  suppressing  an  idea  because  it  strikes  him  asunimportant or irrelevant or because it seems to him meaningless. He

must adopt a completely impartial attitude to what occurs to him, since

it  is  precisely  his  critical  attitude  which  is  responsible  for  his  being

unable,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things,  to  achieve  the  desired

unravelling of his dream or obsessional idea or whatever it may be.

   I have noticed in my psycho-analytical work that the whole frame of

mind of a man who is reflecting is totally different from that of a man

who is observing his own psychical processes. In reflection there is

one more psychical activity at work than in the most attentive self-

observation,  and  this  is  shown  amongst  other  things  by  the  tense

looks and wrinkled forehead of a person pursuing his reflections as

compared with the restful expression of a self-observer. In both cases

attention must be concentrated, but the man who is reflecting is also

exercising his critical faculty; this leads him to reject some of the ideas

that occur to him after perceiving them, to cut short others without

following the trains of thought which they would open up to him, and to

behave  in  such  a  way  towards  still  others  that  they  never  become

conscious  at  all  and  are  accordingly  suppressed  before  being

perceived. The self-observer on the other hand need only take the

trouble to suppress his critical faculty. If he succeeds in doing that,

innumerable  ideas  come  into  his  consciousness  of  which  he  could

otherwise  never  have  got  hold.  The  material  which  is  in  this  way

freshly obtained for his self-perception makes it possible to interpret

both  his  pathological  ideas  and  his  dream-structures.  What  is  in

question, evidently, is the establishment of a psychical state which, in

its distribution of psychical energy (that is, of mobile attention), bears

some analogy to the state before falling asleep - and no doubt also to

hypnosis. As we fall asleep, ‘involuntary ideas’ emerge, owing to the

relaxation of a certain deliberate (and no doubt also critical) activity

which  we  allow  to  influence  the  course  of  our  ideas  while  we  are

awake.  (We  usually  attribute  this  relaxation  to  ‘fatigue’.)  As  the

involuntary  ideas  emerge  they  change  into  visual  and  acoustic

images. (Cf. the remarks by Schleiermacher and others quoted above

on p.  559  f.)¹  In  the  state  used  for  the  analysis  of  dreams  and

pathological ideas, the patient purposely and deliberately abandons

this activity and employs the psychical energy thus saved (or a portion

of  it)  in  attentively  following  the  involuntary  thoughts  which  nowemerge, and which - and here the situation differs from that of falling

asleep  -  retain  the  character  of  ideas. In  this  way  the  ‘involuntary’

ideas are transformed into voluntary ones.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1919:] Silberer (1909, 1910 and 1912) has made important contributions

to dream-interpretation by directly observing this transformation of ideas into visual images.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        605

 

   The adoption of the required attitude of mind towards ideas that

seem to emerge ‘of their own free will’ and the abandonment of the

critical function that is normally in operation against them seem to be

hard of achievement for some people. The ‘involuntary thoughts’ are

liable  to  release  a  most  violent  resistance,  which  seeks  to  prevent

their  emergence.  If  we  may  trust  that  great  poet  and  philosopher

Friedrich Schiller, however, poetic creation must demand an exactly

similar attitude. In a passage in his correspondence with Körner - we

have  to  thank  Otto  Rank  for  unearthing  it  -  Schiller  (writing  on

December  1,  1788)  replies  to  his  friend’s  complaint  of  insufficient

productivity: ‘The ground for your complaint seems to me to lie in the

constraint imposed by your reason upon your imagination. I will make

my  idea  more  concrete  by  a  simile.  It  seems  a  bad  thing  and

detrimental to the creative work of the mind if Reason makes too close

an examination of the ideas as they come pouring in - at the very

gateway, as it were. Looked at in isolation, a thought may seem very

trivial  or  very  fantastic;  but  it  may  be  made  important  by  another

thought that comes after it, and, in conjunction with other thoughts that

may seem equally absurd, it may turn out to form a most effective link.

Reason  cannot  form  any  opinion  upon  all  this  unless  it  retains  the

thought long enough to look at it in connection with the others. On the

other hand, where there is a creative mind, Reason - so it seems to

me - relaxes its watch upon the gates, and the ideas rush in pell-mell,

and only then does it look them through and examine them in a mass.

- You critics, or whatever else you may call yourselves, are ashamed

or frightened of the momentary and transient extravagances which are

to be found in all truly creative minds and whose longer or shorterduration  distinguishes  the  thinking  artist  from  the  dreamer.  You

complain  of  your  unfruitfulness  because  you  reject  too  soon  and

discriminate too severely.’

   Nevertheless, what Schiller describes as a relaxation of the watch

upon the gates of Reason, the adoption of an attitude of uncritical self-

observation, is by no means difficult. Most of my patients achieve it

after their first instructions. I myself can do so very completely, by the

help of writing down my ideas as they occur to me. The amount of

psychical energy by which it is possible to reduce critical activity and

increase  the  intensity  of  self-observation  varies  considerably

according to the subject on which one is trying to fix one’s attention.

   Our first step in the employment of this procedure teaches us that

what we must take as the object of our attention is not the dream as a

whole but the separate portions of its content. If I say to a patient who

is still a novice: ‘What occurs to you in connection with this dream?’,

as a rule his mental horizon becomes a blank. If, however, I put the

dream  before  him  cut  up  into  pieces,  he  will  give  me  a  series  of

associations  to  each  piece,  which  might  be  described  as  the

‘background thoughts’ of that particular part of the dream. Thus the

method of dream interpretation which I practise already differs in this

first important respect from the popular, historic and legendary method

of  interpretation  by  means  of  symbolism  and  approximates  to  the

second or ‘decoding’ method. Like the latter, it employs interpretation

en détail and not en masse; like the latter, it regards dreams from the

very first as being of a composite character, as being conglomerates

of psychical formations.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        606

 

 

   In the course of my psycho-analyses of neurotics I must already

have analysed over a thousand dreams; but I do not propose to make

use of this material in my present introduction to the technique and

theory of dream-interpretation. Apart from the fact that such a course

would  be  open  to  the  objection  that  these  are  the  dreams  ofneuropaths, from which no valid inferences could be made as to the

dreams of normal people, there is quite another reason which forces

this  decision  upon  me.  The  subject  to  which  these  dreams  of  my

patients lead up is always, of course, the case history which underlies

their  neurosis.  Each  dream  would  therefore  necessitate  a  lengthy

introduction  and  an  investigation  of  the  nature  and  aetiological

determinants  of  the  psychoneuroses.  But  these  questions  are  in

themselves  novelties  and  highly  bewildering  and  would  distract

attention  from  the  problem  of  dreams.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  my

intention  to  make  use  of  my  present  elucidation  of  dreams  as  a

preliminary  step  towards  solving  the  more  difficult  problems  of  the

psychology  of  the  neuroses.  If,  however,  I  forego  my  principal

material,  the  dreams  of  my  neurotic  patients,  I  must  not  be  too

particular about what is left to me. All that remains are such dreams as

have been reported to me from time to time by normal persons of my

acquaintance, and such others as have been quoted as instances in

the  literature  dealing  with  dream-life.  Unluckily,  however,  none  of

these dreams are accompanied by the analysis without which I cannot

discover a dream’s meaning. My procedure is not so convenient as

the popular decoding method which translates any given piece of a

dream’s content by a fixed key. I, on the contrary, am prepared to find

that the same piece of content may conceal a different meaning when

it occurs in various people or in various contexts. Thus it comes about

that I am led to my own dreams, which offer a copious and convenient

material, derived from an approximately normal person and relating to

multifarious occasions of daily life. No doubt I shall be met by doubts

of the trustworthiness of ‘self-analyses’ of this kind; and I shall be told

that  they  leave  the  door  open  to  arbitrary  conclusions.  In  my

judgement the situation is in fact more favourable in the case of self-

observation than in that of other people; at all events we may make

the  experiment  and  see  how  far  self-analysis  takes  us  with  the

interpretation  of  dreams.  But  I  have  other  difficulties  to  overcome,

which  lie  within  myself.  There  is  some  natural  hesitation  about

revealing so many intimate facts about one’s mental life; nor can there

be any guarantee against misinterpretation by strangers. But it must

be possible to overcome such hesitations. ‘Tout psychologiste’, writes

Delboeuf, ‘est obligé de faire l’aveu même de ses faiblesses s’il croitpar là jeter du jour sur quelque problème obscur.’¹ And it is safe to

assume that my readers too will very soon find their initial interest in

the indiscretions which I am bound to make replaced by an absorbing

immersion in the psychological problems upon which they throw light.²

 

   ¹ [‘Every psychologist is under an obligation to confess even his own weaknesses, if he

thinks that it may throw light upon some obscure problem.’]

   ² I am obliged to add, however, by way of qualification of what I have said above, that in

scarcely any instance have I brought forward the complete interpretation of one of my own
dreams, as it is known to me. I have probably been wise in not putting too much faith in my
readers’ discretion.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        607

 

   Accordingly I shall proceed to choose out one of my own dreams

and demonstrate upon it my method of interpretation. In the case of

every  such  dream  some  remarks  by  way  of  preamble  will  be

necessary. - And now I must ask the reader to make my interests his

own for quite a while, and to plunge, along with me, into the minutest

details  of  my  life;  for  a  transference  of  this  kind  is  peremptorily

demanded by our interest in the hidden meaning of dreams.

 

                                        PREAMBLE

 

      During  the  summer  of  1895  I  had  been  giving  psycho-analytic

treatment to a young lady who was on very friendly terms with me and

my family. It will be readily understood that a mixed relationship such

as this may be a source of many disturbed feelings in a physician and

particularly  in  a  psychotherapist.  While  the  physician’s  personal

interest is greater, his authority is less; any failure would bring a threat

to  the  old-established  friendship  with  the  patient’s  family.  This

treatment had ended in a partial success; the patient was relieved of

her hysterical anxiety but did not lose all her somatic symptoms. At

that  time  I  was  not  yet  quite  clear  in  my  mind  as  to  the  criteria

indicating  that  a  hysterical  case  history  was  finally  closed,  and  I

proposed  a  solution  to  the  patient  which  she  seemed  unwilling  to

accept.  While  we  were  thus  at  variance,  we  had  broken  off  thetreatment for the summer vacation. - One day I had a visit from a

junior colleague, one of my oldest friends, who had been staying with

my patient, Irma, and her family at their country resort. I asked him

how he had found her and he answered: ‘She’s better, but not quite

well.’ I was conscious that my friend Otto’s words, or the tone in which

he spoke them, annoyed me. I fancied I detected a reproof in them,

such as to the effect that I had promised the patient too much; and,

whether  rightly  or  wrongly,  I  attributed  the  supposed  fact  of  Otto’s

siding against me to the influence of my patient’s relatives, who, as it

seemed  to  me,  had  never  looked  with  favour  on  the  treatment.

However, my disagreeable impression was not clear to me and I gave

no  outward  sign  of  it.  The  same  evening  I  wrote  out  Irma’s  case

history, with the idea of giving it to Dr. M. (a common friend who was

at that time the leading figure in our circle) in order to justify myself.

That night (or more probably the next morning) I had the following

dream, which I noted down immediately after waking.¹

 

     ¹ [Footnote  added  1914:]  This  is  the  first  dream  which  I  submitted  to  a  detailed

interpretation.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        608

 

                            DREAM OF JULY 23RD-24TH, 1895

 

   A large hall - numerous guests, whom we were receiving. -Among

them was Irma. I at once took her on one side, as though to answer

her letter and to reproach her for not having accepted my ‘solution’

yet. I said to her: ‘If you still get pains, its really only your fault.’ She

replied: ‘If you only knew what pains I’ve got now in my throat and

stomach and abdomen - its choking me’ -I was alarmed and looked at

her. She looked pale and puffy. I thought to myself that after all I must

be missing some organic trouble. I took her to the window and looked

down her throat, and she showed signs of recalcitrance, like women

with  artificial  dentures.  I  thought  to  myself  that  there  was  really  no

need for her to do that. - She then opened her mouth properly and on

the right I found a big white patch; at another place I saw extensivewhitish grey scabs upon some remarkable curly structures which were

evidently modelled on the turbinal bones of the nose. - I at once called

in Dr. M., and he repeated the examination and confirmed it . . . . Dr

M. looked quite different from usual; he was very pale, he walked with

a limp and his chin was clean-shaven. . . . My friend Otto was now

standing beside her as well, and my friend Leopold was percussing

her through her bodice and saying: ‘She has a dull area low down on

her  left.’  He  also  indicated  that  a  portion  of  the  skin  on  the  left

shoulder was infiltrated. (I noticed this, just as he did, in spite of her

dress.) . . . M. said ‘There’s no doubt its an infection, but no matter;

dysentery will supervene and the toxin will eliminated’ . . . We were

directly aware, too, of the origin of her infection. Not long before, when

she was feeling unwell, my friend Otto had given her an injection of a

preparation of propyl, propyls . . . propionic acid. . . . trimethylamin

(and I saw before me the formula for this printed in heavy type). . . .

Injections of that sort ought not to be made so thoughtlessly . . . . And

probably the syringe had not been clean.

 

      This  dream  has  one  advantage  over  many  others.  It  was

immediately  clear  what  events  of  the  previous  day  provided  its

starting-point. My preamble makes that plain. The news which Otto

had given me of Irma’s condition and the case history which I had

been engaged in writing till far into the night continued to occupy my

mental activity even after I was asleep. Nevertheless, no one who had

only read the preamble and the content of the dream itself could have

the slightest notion of what the dream meant. I myself had no notion. I

was astonished at the symptoms of which Irma complained to me in

the dream, since they were not the same as those for which I had

treated her. I smiled at the senseless idea of an injection of propionic

acid and at Dr. M.’s consoling reflections. Towards its end the dream

seemed to me to be more obscure and compressed than it was at the

beginning. In order to discover the meaning of all this it was necessary

to undertake a detailed analysis.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        609 

 
                                        ANALYSIS

 

   The hall - numerous guests whom we were receiving. We were

spending that summer at Bellevue, a house standing by itself on one

of the hills adjoining the Kahlenberg. The house had formerly been

designed as a place of entertainment and its reception-rooms were in

consequence unusually lofty and hall like. It was at Bellevue that I had

the dream, a few days before my wife’s birthday. On the previous day

my  wife  had  told  me  that  she  expected  that  a  number  of  friends,

including Irma, would be coming out to visit us on her birthday. My

dream was thus anticipating this occasion: it was my wife’s birthday

and a number of guests, including Irma, were being received by us in

the large hall at Bellevue.

   I reproached Irma for not having accepted my solution. I said: ‘If you

still  get  pains,  it’s  your  own  fault.’  I  might  have  said  this  to  her  in

waking life, and I may actually have done so. It was my view at that

time (though I have since recognized it as a wrong one) that my task

was fulfilled when I had informed a patient of the hidden meaning of

his symptoms: I considered that I was not responsible for whether he

accepted the solution or not - though this was what success depended

on. I owe it to this mistake, which I have now fortunately corrected,

that  my  life  was  made  easier  at  a  time  when,  in  spite  of  all  my

inevitable  ignorance,  I  was  expected  to  produce  therapeutic

successes. -I noticed, however, that the words which I spoke to Irma

in  the  dream  showed  that  I  was  specially  anxious  not  to  be

responsible for the pains which she still had. If they were her fault they

could not be mine. Could it be that the purpose of the dream lay in this

direction?

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        610

 

   Irma’s complaint: pains in her throat and abdomen and stomach; it

was  choking  her.  Pains  in  the  stomach  were  among  my  patient’s

symptoms  but  were  not  very  prominent;  she  complained  more  offeelings of nausea and disgust. Pains in the throat and abdomen and

constriction  of  the  throat  played  scarcely  any  part  in  her  illness.  I

wondered why I decided upon this choice of symptoms in the dream

but could not think of an explanation at the moment.

     She  looked  pale  and  puffy.  My  patient  always  had  a  rosy

complexion.  I  began  to  suspect  that  someone  else  was  being

substituted for her.

   I was alarmed at the idea that I had missed an organic illness. This,

as  may  well  be  believed,  is  a  perpetual  source  of  anxiety  to  a

specialist  whose  practice  is  almost  limited  to  neurotic  patients  and

who  is  in  the  habit  of  attributing  to  hysteria  a  great  number  of

symptoms which other physicians treat as organic. On the other hand,

a faint doubt crept into my mind - from where, I could not tell - that my

alarm was not entirely genuine. If Irma’s pains had an organic basis,

once  again  I  could  not  be  held  responsible  for  curing  them;  my

treatment only set out to get rid of hysterical pains. It occurred to me,

in  fact,  that  I  was  actually wishing  that  there  had  been  a  wrong

diagnosis; for, if so, the blame for my lack of success would also have

been got rid of.

   I took her to the window to look down her throat. She showed some

recalcitrance,  like  women  with  false  teeth.  I  thought  to  myself  that

really  there  was  no  need  for  her  to  do  that.  I  had  never  had  any

occasion to examine Irma’s oral cavity. What happened in the dream

reminded me of an examination I had carried out some time before of

a governess: at a first glance she had seemed a picture of youthful

beauty,  but  when  it  came  to  opening  her  mouth  she  had  taken

measures  to  conceal  her  plate.  This  led  to  recollections  of  other

medical examinations and of little secrets revealed in the course of

them - to the satisfaction of neither party.‘There was really no need for

her  to  do  that’  was  no  doubt  intended  in  the  first  place  as  a

compliment  to  Irma;  but  I  suspected  that  it  had  another  meaning

besides. (If one carries out an analysis attentively, one gets a feeling

of whether or not one has exhausted all the background thoughts that

are  to  be  expected.)  The  way  in  which  Irma  stood  by  the  window

suddenly reminded me of another experience. Irma had an intimate

woman friend of whom I had a very high opinion. When I visited this

lady  one  evening  I  had  found  her  by  a  window  in  the  situationreproduced in the dream, and her physician, the same Dr. M., had

pronounced that she had a diphtheritic membrane. The figure of Dr.

M. and the membrane reappear later in the dream. It now occurred to

me that for the last few months I had had every reason to suppose

that  this  other  lady  was  also  a  hysteric.  Indeed,  Irma  herself  had

betrayed the fact to me. What did I know of her condition? One thing

precisely: that, like my Irma of the dream, she suffered from hysterical

choking. So in the dream I had replaced my patient by her friend. I

now  recollected  that  I  had  often  played  with  the  idea  that  she  too

might ask me to relieve her of her symptoms. I myself, however, had

thought this unlikely, since she was of a very reserved nature. She

was recalcitrant, as was shown in the dream. Another reason was that

there was need for her to do it: she had so far shown herself strong

enough  to  master  her  condition  without  outside  help.  There  still

remained a few features that I could not attach either to Irma or to her

friend: pale;  puffy;  false  teeth.  The  false  teeth  took  me  to  the

governess whom I have already mentioned; I now felt inclined to be

satisfied  with bad  teeth.  I  then  thought  of  someone  else  to  whom

these  features  might  be  alluding.  She  again  was  not  one  of  my

patients, nor should I have liked to have her as a patient, since I had

noticed that she was bashful in my presence and I could not think she

would make an amenable patient. She was usually pale, and once,

while  she  had  been  in  specially  good  health,  she  had  looked

puffy.¹Thus  I  had  been  comparing  my  patient  Irma  with  two  other

people  who  would  also  have  been  recalcitrant  to  treatment.  What

could  the  reason  have  been  for  my  having  exchanged  her  in  the

dream  for  her  friend?  Perhaps  it  was  that  I  should  have liked  to

exchange her: either I felt more sympathetic towards her friend or had

a higher opinion of her intelligence. For Irma seemed to me foolish

because she had not accepted my solution. Her friend would have

been wiser, that is to say she would have yielded sooner. She would

then have opened her mouth properly, and have told me more than

Irma.²

 

   ¹ The still unexplained complaint about pains in the abdomen could also be traced back to

this  third  figure.  The  person  in  question  was,  of  course,  my  own  wife;  the  pains  in  the
abdomen reminded me of one of the occasions on which I had noticed her bashfulness. I was
forced to admit to myself that I was not treating either Irma or my wife very kindly in thisdream; but it should be observed by way of excuse that I was measuring them both by the
standard of the good and amenable patient.

   ² I had a feeling that the interpretation of this part of the dream was not carried far enough

to  make  it  possible  to  follow  the  whole  of  its  concealed  meaning.  If  I  had  pursued  my
comparison between the three women, it would have taken me far afield. There is at least one
spot in every dream at which it is unplumbable - a navel, as it were, that is its point of contact
with the unknown.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        611

 

   What I saw in her throat: a white patch and turbinal bones with

scabs on them. The white patch reminded me of diphtheritis and so of

Irma’s  friend,  but  also  of  a  serious  illness  of  my  eldest  daughter’s

almost two years earlier and of the fright I had had in those anxious

days. The scabs on the turbinal bones recalled a worry about my own

state of health. I was making frequent use of cocaine at that time to

reduce some troublesome nasal swellings, and I had heard a few days

earlier that one of my women patients who had followed my example

had developed an extensive necrosis of the nasal mucous membrane.

I had been the first to recommend the use of cocaine, in 1885, and

this recommendation had brought serious reproaches down on me.

The misuse of that drug had hastened the death of a dear friend of

mine. This had been before 1895.

   I at once called in Dr. M., and he repeated the examination. This

simply corresponded to the position occupied by M. in our circle. But

the ‘at once’ was sufficiently striking to require a special explanation. It

reminded me of a tragic event in my practice. I had on one occasion

produced  a  severe  toxic  state  in  a  woman  patient  by  repeatedly

prescribing  what  was  at  that  time  regarded  as  a  harmless  remedy

(sulphonal), and had hurriedly turned for assistance and support to my

experienced  senior  colleague.  There  was  a  subsidiary  detail  which

confirmed the idea that I had this incident in mind. My patient - who

succumbed  to  the  poison  -  had  the  same  name  as  my  eldest

daughter. It had never occurred to me before, but it struck me now

almost like an act of retribution on the part of destiny. It was as though

the  replacement  of  one  person  by  another  was  to  be  continued  in

another sense: this Mathilde for that Mathilde, an eye for an eye and atooth for a tooth. It seemed as if I had been collecting all the occasions

which I could bring up against myself as evidence of lack of medical

conscientiousness.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

 612

 

   Dr. M. was pale, had a clean-shaven chin and walked with a limp.

This  was  true  to  the  extent  that  his  unhealthy  appearance  often

caused his friends anxiety. The two other features could only apply to

someone else. I thought of my elder brother, who lives abroad, who is

clean-shaven and whom, if I remembered right, the M. of the dream

closely resembled. We had had news a few days earlier that he was

walking with a limp owing to an arthritic affection of his hip. There

must, I reflected, have been some reason for my fusing into one the

two  figures  in  the  dream.  I  then  remembered  that  I  had  a  similar

reason for being in an ill-humour with each of them: they had both

rejected a certain suggestion I had recently laid before them.

   My friend Otto was now standing beside the patient and my friend

Leopold was examining her and indicated that there was a dull area

low down on the left. My friend Leopold was also a physician and a

relative of Otto’s. Since they both specialized in the same branch of

medicine, it was their fate to be in competition with each other, and

comparisons  were  constantly  being  drawn  between  them.  Both  of

them acted as my assistants for years while I was still in charge of the

neurological out-patients’ department of a children’s hospital. Scenes

such as the one represented in the dream used often to occur there.

While  I  was  discussing  the  diagnosis  of  a  case  with  Otto,  Leopold

would  be  examining  the  child  once  more  and  would  make  an

unexpected contribution to our decision. The difference between their

characters was like that between the bailiff Bräsig and his friend Karl:

one was distinguished for his quickness, while the other was slow but

sure. If in the dream I was contrasting Otto with the prudent Leopold, I

was evidently doing so to the advantage of the latter. The comparison

was similar to the one between my disobedient patient Irma and the,

friend  whom  I  regarded  as  wiser  than  she  was.  I  now  perceivedanother of the lines along which the chain of thought in the dream

branched off: from the sick child to the children’s hospital. - The dull

area low down on the left seemed to me to agree in every detail with

one  particular  case  in  which  Leopold  had  struck  me  by  his

thoroughness. I also had a vague notion of something in the nature of

a metastatic affection; but this may also have been a reference to the

patient whom I should have liked to have in the place of Irma. So far

as  I  had  been  able  to  judge,  she  had  produced  an  imitation  of  a

tuberculosis.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        613

 

   A portion of the skin on the left shoulder was infiltrated. I saw at

once  that  this  was  the  rheumatism  in  my  own  shoulder,  which  I

invariably notice if I sit up late into the night. Moreover the wording in

the dream was most ambiguous: ‘I noticed this, just as he did . . . .’ I

noticed it in my own body, that is. I was struck, too, by the unusual

phrasing: ‘a portion of the skin was infiltrated.’ We are in the habit of

speaking of ‘a left upper posterior infiltration’, and this would refer to

the lung and so once more to tuberculosis.

   In spite of her dress. This was in any case only an interpolation. We

naturally used to examine the children in the hospital undressed: and

this would be a contrast to the manner in which adult female patients

have to be examined. I remembered that it was said of a celebrated

clinician that he never made a physical examination of his patients

except through their clothes. Further than this I could not see. Frankly,

I had no desire to penetrate more deeply at this point.

   Dr. M. said: ‘Its an infection, but no matter. Dysentery will supervene

and the toxin will be eliminated.’ At first this struck me as ridiculous.

But  nevertheless,  like  all  the  rest,  it  had  to  be  carefully  analysed.

When I came to look at it more closely it seemed to have some sort of

meaning all the same. What I discovered in the patient was a local

diphtheritis. I remembered from the time of my daughter’s illness a

discussion on diphtheritis and diphtheria, the latter being the general

infection that arises from the local diphtheritis. Leopold indicated thepresence of a general infection of this kind from the existence of a dull

area, which might thus be regarded as a metastatic focus. I seemed to

think,  it  is  true,  that  metastases  like  this  do  not  in  fact  occur  with

diphtheria: it made me think rather of pyaemia.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        614

 

   No matter. This was intended as a consolation. It seemed to fit into

the context as follows. The content of the preceding part of the dream

had  been  that  my  patient’s  pains  were  due  to  a  severe  organic

affection. I had a feeling that I was only trying in that way to shift the

blame  from  myself.  Psychological  treatment  could  not  be  held

responsible  for  the  persistence  of  diphtheritic  pains.  Nevertheless  I

had a sense of awkwardness at having invented such a severe illness

for Irma simply in order to clear myself. It looked so cruel. Thus I was

in  need  of  an  assurance  that  all  would  be  well  in  the  end,  and  it

seemed  to  me  that  to  have  put  the  consolation  into  the  mouth

precisely of Dr. M. had not been a bad choice. But here I was taking

up  a  superior  attitude  towards  the  dream,  and  this  itself  required

explanation.

   And why was the consolation so nonsensical?

   Dysentery. There seemed to be some remote theoretical notion that

morbid matter can be eliminated through the bowels. Could it be that I

was  trying  to  make  fun  of  Dr.  M.’s  fertility  in  producing  far-fetched

explanations  and  making  unexpected  pathological  connections?

Something else now occurred to me in relation to dysentery. A few

months  earlier  I  had  taken  on  the  case  of  a  young  man  with

remarkable  difficulties  associated  with  defaecating,  who  had  been

treated by other physicians as a case of ‘anaemia accompanied by

malnutrition’. I had recognized it as a hysteria, but had been unwilling

to try him with my psychotherapeutic treatment and had sent him on a

sea voyage. Some days before, I had had a despairing letter from him

from Egypt, saying that he had had a fresh attack there which a doctor

had declared was dysentery. I suspected that the diagnosis was an

error on the part of an ignorant practitioner who had allowed himself tobe taken in by the hysteria. But I could not help reproaching myself for

having put my patient in a situation in which he might have contracted

some  organic  trouble  on  top  of  his  hysterical  intestinal  disorder.

Moreover,  ‘dysentery’  sounds  not  unlike  ‘diphtheria’  -  a  word  of  ill

omen which did not occur in the dream.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        615

 

   Yes, I thought to myself, I must have been making fun of Dr. M. with

the consoling prognosis ‘Dysentery will supervene’, etc.: for it came

back to me that, years before, he himself had told an amusing story of

a similar kind about another doctor. Dr. M. had been called in by him

for  consultation  over  a  patient  who  was  seriously  ill,  and  had  felt

obliged to point out, in view of the very optimistic view taken by his

colleague, that he had found albumen in the patient’s urine. The other,

however, was not in the least put out: ‘No matter’, he had said, ‘the

albumen will soon be eliminated!’ - I could no longer feel any doubt,

therefore,  that  this  part  of  the  dream  was  expressing  derision  at

physicians who are ignorant of hysteria. And, as though to confirm

this, a further idea crossed my mind: ‘Does Dr. M. realize that the

symptoms in his patient (Irma’s friend) which give grounds for fearing

tuberculosis  also  have  a  hysterical  basis?  Has  he  spotted  this

hysteria? or has he been taken in by it?’

      But  what  could  be  my  motive  for  treating  this  friend  of  mine  so

badly?  That  was  a  very  simple  matter.  Dr.  M.  was  just  as  little  in

agreement  with  my  ‘solution’  as  Irma  herself.  So  I  had  already

revenged myself in this dream on two people: on Irma with the words

‘If you still get pains, it’s your own fault’, and on Dr. M. by the wording

of the nonsensical consolation that I put into his mouth.

   We were directly aware of the origin of the infection. This direct

knowledge in the dream was remarkable. Only just before we had had

no knowledge of it, for the infection was only revealed by Leopold.

   When  she  was  feeling  unwell,  my  friend  Otto  had  given  her  an

injection. Otto had in fact told me that during his short stay with Irma’s

family  he  had  been  called  in  to  a  neighbouring  hotel  to  give  aninjection to someone who had suddenly felt unwell. These injections

reminded me once more of my unfortunate friend who had poisoned

himself with cocaine. I had advised him to use the drug internally only,

while morphia was being withdrawn; but he had at once given himself

cocaine injections.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        616

 

   A preparation of propyl . . . propyls . . . propionic acid. How could I

have  come  to  think  of  this?  During  the  previous  evening,  before  I

wrote out the case history and had the dream, my wife had opened a

bottle of liqueur, on which the word ‘Ananas’¹ appeared and which

was a gift from our friend Otto: for he has a habit of making presents

on every possible occasion. It was to be hoped, I thought to myself,

that  some  day  he  would  find  a  wife  to  cure  him  of  the  habit.  This

liqueur gave off such a strong smell of fusel oil that I refused to touch

it. My wife suggested our giving the bottle to the servants, but I - with

even  greater  prudence  -  vetoed  the  suggestion,  adding  in  a

philanthropic spirit that there was no need for them to be poisoned

either. The smell of fusel oil (amyl . . .) evidently stirred up in my mind

a recollection of the whole series - propyl, methyl, and so on - and this

accounted  for  the  propyl  preparation  in  the  dream.  It  is  true  that  I

carried  out  a  substitution  in  the  process:  I  dreamt  of  propyl  after

having smelt amyl. But substitutions of this kind are perhaps legitimate

in organic chemistry.

   Trimethylamin. I saw the chemical formula of this substance in my

dream,  which  bears  witness  to  a  great  effort  on  the  part  of  my

memory. Moreover, the formula was printed in heavy type, as though

there had been a desire to lay emphasis on some part of the context

as being of quite special importance. What was it, then, to which my

attention was to be directed in this way by trimethylamin? It was to a

conversation with another friend who had for many years been familiar

with all my writings during the period of their gestation, just as I had

been with his. He had at that time confided some ideas to me on the

subject of the chemistry of the sexual processes, and had mentionedamong other things that he believed that one of the products of sexual

metabolism  was  trimethylamin.  Thus  this  substance  led  me  to

sexuality, the factor to which I attributed the greatest importance in the

origin of the nervous disorders which it was my aim to cure. My patient

Irma was a young widow; if I wanted to find an excuse for the failure of

my treatment in her case, what I could best appeal to would no doubt

be this fact of her widowhood, which her friends would be so glad to

see changed. And how strangely, I thought to myself, a dream like this

is  put  together!  The  other  woman,  whom  I  had  as  a  patient  in  the

dream instead of Irma, was also a young widow.

 

   ¹ I must add that the sound of the word ‘Ananas’ bears a remarkable resemblance to that of

my patient Irma’s family name.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        617

 

   I began to guess why the formula for trimethylamin had been so

prominent in the dream. So many important subjects converged upon

that  one  word.  Trimethylamin  was  an  allusion  not  only  to  the

immensely powerful factor of sexuality, but also to a person whose

agreement I recalled with satisfaction whenever I felt isolated in my

opinions. Surely this friend who played so great a part in my life must

appear again elsewhere in these trains of thought. Yes. For he had a

special knowledge of the consequences of affections of the nose and

its accessory cavities; and he had drawn scientific attention to some

very  remarkable  connections  between  the  turbinal  bones  and  the

female organs of sex. (Cf. the three curly structures in Irma’s throat.) I

had had Irma examined by him to see whether her gastric pains might

be of nasal origin. But he suffered himself from suppurative rhinitis,

which caused me anxiety; and no doubt there was an allusion to this

in the pyaemia which vaguely came into my mind in connection with

the metastases in the dream.

   Injections of that sort ought not to be made so thoughtlessly. Here

an accusation of thoughtlessness was being made directly against my

friend Otto. I seemed to remember thinking something of the same

kind that afternoon when his words and looks had appeared to showthat he was siding against me. It had been some such notion as: ‘How

easily  his  thoughts  are  influenced!  How  thoughtlessly  he  jumps  to

conclusions!’ -Apart from this, this sentence in the dream reminded

me  once  more  of  my  dead  friend  who  had  so  hastily  resorted  to

cocaine injections. As I have said, I had never contemplated the drug

being  given  by  injection.  I  noticed  too  that  in  accusing  Otto  of

thoughtlessness  in  handling  chemical  substances  I  was  once  more

touching  upon  the  story  of  the  unfortunate  Mathilde,  which  gave

grounds for the same accusation against myself. Here I was evidently

collecting instances of my conscientiousness, but also of the reverse.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        618

 

   And probably the syringe had not been clean. This was yet another

accusation  against  Otto,  but  derived  from  a  different  source.  I  had

happened the day before to meet the son of an old lady of eighty-two,

to  whom  I  had  to  give  an  injection  of  morphia  twice  a  day.  At  the

moment she was in the country and he told me that she was suffering

from phlebitis. I had at once thought it must be an infiltration caused

by a dirty syringe. I was proud of the fact that in two years I had not

caused a single infiltration; I took constant pains to be sure that the

syringe was clean. In short, I was conscientious. The phlebitis brought

me back once more to my wife, who had suffered from thrombosis

during one of her pregnancies; and now three similar situations came

to my recollection involving my wife, Irma and the dead Mathilde. The

identity of these situations had evidently enabled me to substitute the

three figures for one another in the dream.

 

   I have now completed the interpretation of the dream.¹ While I was

carrying  it  out  I  had  some  difficulty  in  keeping  at  bay  all  the  ideas

which  were  bound  to  be  provoked  by  a  comparison  between  the

content of the dream and the concealed thoughts lying behind it. And

in the meantime the ‘meaning’ of the dream was borne in upon me. I

became  aware  of  an  intention  which  was  carried  into  effect  by  the

dream  and  which  must  have  been  my  motive  for  dreaming  it.  Thedream fulfilled certain wishes which were started in me by the events

of the previous evening (the news given me by Otto and my writing out

of the case history). The conclusion of the dream, that is to say, was

that I was not responsible for the persistence of Irma’s pains, but that

Otto was. Otto had in fact annoyed me by his remarks about Irma’s

incomplete cure, and the dream gave me my revenge by throwing the

reproach back on to him. The dream acquitted me of the responsibility

for Irma’s condition by showing that it was due to other factors - it

produced  a  whole  series  of  reasons.  The  dream  represented  a

particular state of affairs as I should have wished it to be. Thus its

content was the fulfilment of a wish and its motive was a wish.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909] Though it will be understood that I have not reported everything

that occurred to me during the process of interpretation.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        619

 

   Thus much leapt to the eyes. But many of the details of the dream

also became intelligible to me from the point of view of wish-fulfilment.

Not only did I revenge myself on Otto for being too hasty in taking

sides  against  me  by  representing  him  as  being  too  hasty  in  his

medical treatment (in giving the injection); but I also revenged myself

on him for giving me the bad liqueur which had an aroma of fusel oil.

And  in  the  dream  I  found  an  expression  which  united  the  two

reproaches: the injection was of a preparation of propyl. This did not

satisfy me and I pursued my revenge further by contrasting him with

his more trustworthy competitor. I seemed to be saying: ‘I like him

better than you.’ But Otto was not the only person to suffer from the

vials of my wrath. I took revenge as well on my disobedient patient by

exchanging her for one who was wiser and less recalcitrant. Nor did I

allow  Dr.  M.  to  escape  the  consequences  of  his  contradiction  but

showed him by means of a clear allusion that he was an ignoramus on

the subject. (‘Dysentery will supervene’, etc.) Indeed I seemed to be

appealing from him to someone else with greater knowledge (to my

friend who had told me of trimethylamin) just as I had turned from Irma

to her friend and from Otto to Leopold. ‘Take these people away! Giveme three others of my choice instead! Then I shall be free of these

undeserved reproaches!’ The groundlessness of the reproaches was

proved for me in the dream in the most elaborate fashion. I was not to

blame for Irma’s pains, since she herself was to blame for them by

refusing to accept my solution. I was not concerned with Irma’s pains,

since  they  were  of  an  organic  nature  and  quite  incurable  by

psychological treatment. Irma’s pains could be satisfactorily explained

by her widowhood (cf. the trimethylamin) which I had no means of

altering.  Irma’s  pains  had  been  caused  by  Otto  giving  her  an

incautious injection of an unsuitable drug - a thing I should never have

done. Irma’s pains were the result of an injection with a dirty needle,

like my old lady’s phlebitis - whereas I never did any harm with my

injections. I noticed, it is true, that these explanations of Irma’s pains

(which agreed in exculpating me) were not entirely consistent with one

another, and indeed that they were mutually exclusive. The whole plea

- for the dream was nothing else - reminded one vividly of the defence

put forward by the man who was charged by one of his neighbours

with having given him back a borrowed kettle in a damaged condition.

The defendant asserted first, that he had given it back undamaged;

secondly, that the kettle had a hole in it when he borrowed it; and

thirdly, that he had never borrowed a kettle from his neighbour at all.

So much the better: if only a single one of these three lines of defence

were to be accepted as valid, the man would have to be acquitted.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        620

 

   Certain other themes played a part in the dream, which were not so

obviously  connected  with  my  exculpation  from  Irma’s  illness:  my

daughter’s illness and that of my patient who bore the same name, the

injurious  effect  of  cocaine,  the  disorder  of  my  patient  who  was

travelling in Egypt, my concern about my wife’s health and about that

of my brother and of Dr. M., my own physical ailments, my anxiety

about  my  absent  friend  who  suffered  from  suppurative  rhinitis.  But

when I came to consider all of these, they could all be collected into a

single group of ideas and labelled, as it were, ‘concern about my ownand other people’s health - professional conscientiousness’. I called to

mind  the  obscure  disagreeable  impression  I  had  had  when  Otto

brought me the news of Irma’s condition. This group of thoughts that

played  a  part  in  the  dream  enabled  me  retrospectively  to  put  this

transient impression into words. It was as though he had said to me:

‘You  don’t  take  your  medical  duties  seriously  enough.  You’re  not

conscientious;  you  don’t  carry  out  what  you’ve  undertaken.’

Thereupon, this group of thoughts seemed to have put itself at my

disposal, so that I could produce evidence of how highly conscientious

I was, of how deeply I was concerned about the health of my relations,

my friends and my patients. It was a noteworthy fact that this material

also  included  some  disagreeable  memories,  which  supported  my

friend Otto’s accusation rather than my own vindication. The material

was,  as  one  might  say,  impartial;  but  nevertheless  there  was  an

unmistakable  connection  between  this  more  extensive  group  of

thoughts which underlay the dream and the narrower subject of the

dream which gave rise to the wish to be innocent of Irma’s illness.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        621

 

   I will not pretend that I have completely uncovered the meaning of

this dream or that its interpretation is without a gap. I could spend

much more time over it, derive further information from it and discuss

fresh  problems  raised  by  it.  I  myself  know  the  points  from  which

further trains of thought could be followed. But considerations which

arise in the case of every dream of my own restrain me from pursuing

my interpretative work. If anyone should feel tempted to express a

hasty condemnation of my reticence, I would advise him to make the

experiment of being franker than I am. For the moment I am satisfied

with the achievement of this one piece of fresh knowledge. If we adopt

the method of interpreting dreams which I have indicated here, we

shall find that dreams really have a meaning and are far from being

the expression of a fragmentary activity of the brain, as the authorities

have claimed. When the work of interpretation has been completed,

we perceive that a dream is the fulfilment of a wish. 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        622

 

                                    CHAPTER III

 

              A DREAM IS THE FULFILMENT OF A WISH

 

When,  after  passing  through  a  narrow  defile,  we  suddenly  emerge

upon a piece of high ground, where the path divides and the finest

prospects open up on every side, we may pause for a moment and

consider in which direction we shall first turn our steps. Such is the

case with us, now that we have surmounted the first interpretation of a

dream. We find ourselves in the full daylight of a sudden discovery.

Dreams are not to be likened to the unregulated sounds that rise from

a musical instrument struck by the blow of some external force instead

of by a player’s hand; they are not meaningless, they are not absurd;

they do not imply that one portion of our store of ideas is asleep while

another  portion  is  beginning  to  wake.  On  the  contrary,  they  are

psychical phenomena of complete validity - fulfilments of wishes; they

can be inserted into the chain of intelligible waking mental acts; they

are constructed by a highly complicated activity of the mind.

   But no sooner have we begun to rejoice at this discovery than we

are  assailed  by  a  flood  of  questions.  If,  as  we  are  told  by  dream-

interpretation, a dream represents a fulfilled wish, what is the origin of

the  remarkable  and  puzzling  form  in  which  the  wish-fulfilment  is

expressed?  What  alteration  have  the  dream  thoughts  undergone

before being changed into the manifest dream which we remember

when we wake up? How does that alteration take place? What is the

source of the material that has been modified into the dream? What is

the source of the many peculiarities that are to be observed in the

dream-thoughts  -  such,  for  instance,  as  the  fact  that  they  may  be

mutually  contradictory?  (Cf.  the  analogy  of  the  borrowed  kettle  on

p. 619.) Can a dream tell us anything new about our internal psychical

processes? Can its content correct opinions we have held during the

day? 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        623

 

 

   I propose that for the moment we should leave all these questions

on one side and pursue our way further along one particular path. We

have learnt that a dream can represent a wish as fulfilled. Our first

concern must be to enquire whether this is a universal characteristic of

dreams  or  whether  it  merely  happened  to  be  the  content  of  the

particular dream (the dream of Irma’s injection) which was the first that

we analysed. For even if we are prepared to find that every dream has

a meaning and a psychical value, the possibility must remain open of

this meaning not being the same in every dream. Our first dream was

the fulfilment of a wish; a second one might turn out to be a fulfilled

fear; the content of a third might be a reflection; while a fourth might

merely  reproduce  a  memory.  Shall  we  find  other  wishful  dreams

besides this one? or are there perhaps no dreams but wishful ones?

   It is easy to prove that dreams often reveal themselves without any

disguise as fulfilments of wishes; so that it may seem surprising that

the language of dreams was not understood long ago. For instance,

there  is  a  dream  that  I  can  produce  in  myself  as  often  as  I  like  -

experimentally, as it were. If I eat anchovies or olives or any other

highly  salted  food  in  the  evening,  I  develop  thirst  during  the  night

which wakes me up. But my waking is preceded by a dream; and this

always has the same content, namely, that I am drinking. I dream I am

swallowing down water in great gulps, and it has the delicious taste

that nothing can equal but a cool drink when one is parched with thirst.

Then I wake up and have to have a real drink. This simple dream is

occasioned by the thirst which I become aware of when I wake. The

thirst gives rise to a wish to drink, and the dream shows me that wish

fulfilled. In doing so it is performing a function - which it was easy to

divine. I am a good sleeper and not accustomed to be woken by any

physical need. If I can succeed in appeasing my thirst by dreaming

that I am drinking, then I need not wake up in order to quench it. This,

then, is a dream of convenience. Dreaming has taken the place ofaction, as it often does elsewhere in life. Unluckily my need for water

to quench my thirst cannot be satisfied by a dream in the same way as

my thirst for revenge against my friend Otto and Dr. M.; but the good

intention is there in both cases. Not long ago this same dream of mine

showed some modification. I had felt thirsty even before I fell asleep,

and I had emptied a glass of water that stood on the table beside my

bed. A few hours later during the night I had a fresh attack of thirst,

and this had inconvenient results. In order to provide myself with some

water I should have had to get up and fetch the glass standing on the

table by my wife’s bed. I therefore had an appropriate dream that my

wife was giving me a drink out of a vase; this vase was an Etruscan

cinerary urn which I had brought back from a journey to Italy and had

since given away. But the water in it tasted so salty (evidently because

of  the  ashes  in  the  urn)  that  I  woke  up.  It  will  be  noticed  how

conveniently  everything  was  arranged  in  this  dream.  Since  its  only

purpose was to fulfil a wish, it could be completely egoistical. A love of

comfort and convenience is not really compatible with consideration

for other people. The introduction of the cinerary urn was probably yet

another wish-fulfilment. I was sorry that the vase was no longer in my

possession - just as the glass of water on my wife’s table was out of

my reach. The urn with its ashes fitted in, too, with the salty taste in

my  mouth  which  had  now  grown  stronger  and  which  I  knew  was

bound to wake me.¹

 

   ¹ Weygandt (1893, 41) was aware of the occurrence of thirst dreams, for he writes: ‘The

sensation of thirst is perceived with greater precision than any other; it always gives rise to an
idea of its being quenched. The manner in which the thirst is represented as being quenched
in the dream varies, and derives its special form from some near-by memory. Another general
feature in these cases is that immediately after the idea of the thirst being quenched there
follows  a  disappointment  over  the  small  effect  produced  by  the  imaginary  refreshment.’
Weygandt, however, overlooks the fact that this reaction of a dream to a stimulus is one which
holds good universally. Other people who are attacked by thirst in the night may wake up
without having had a dream; but that is no objection to my experiment. It merely shows that
they are worse sleepers than I am. - Compare in this connection Isaiah xxix, 8: ‘It shall even
be as when an hungry man dreameth, and, behold, he eateth; but he awaketh, and his soul is
empty: or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and, behold, he drinketh; but he awaketh, and,
behold, he is faint, and his soul hath appetite.’
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        624 

   Dreams of convenience like these were very frequent in my youth.

Having made it a practice as far back as I can remember to work late

into the night, I always found it difficult to wake early. I used then to

have a dream of being out of bed and standing by the washing-stand;

after a while I was no longer able to disguise from myself the fact that I

was really still in bed, but in the meantime I had had a little more

sleep.  A  slothful  dream  of  this  kind,  which  was  expressed  in  a

particularly amusing and elegant form, has been reported to me by a

young medical colleague who seems to share my liking for sleep. The

landlady of his lodgings in the neighbourhood of the hospital had strict

instructions to wake him in time every morning but found it no easy job

to carry them out. One morning sleep seemed peculiarly sweet. The

landlady called through the door: ‘Wake up, Herr Pepi! It’s time to go

to the hospital!’ In response to this he had a dream that he was lying

in bed in a room in the hospital, and that there was a card over the

bed on which was written: ‘Pepi H., medical student, age 22.’ While he

was  dreaming,  he  said  to  himself  ‘As  I’m  already in  the  hospital,

there’s no need for me to go there ' - and turned over and went on

sleeping. In this way he openly confessed the motive for his dream.

   Here is another dream in which once again the stimulus produced its

effect during actual sleep. One of my women patients, who had been

obliged  to  undergo  an  operation  on  her  jaw  which  had  taken  an

unfavourable course, was ordered by her doctors to wear a cooling

apparatus on the side of her face day and night. But as soon as she

fell asleep she used to throw it off. One day, after she had once more

thrown  the  apparatus  on  the  floor,  I  was  asked  to  speak  to  her

seriously about it. ‘This time I really couldn’t help it’, she answered. ‘It

was because of a dream I had in the night. I dreamt I was in a box at

the  opera  and  very  much  enjoying  the  performance.  But  Herr  Karl

Meyer was in the nursing-home and complaining bitterly of pains in his

jaw.  So  I  told  myself  that  as  I  hadn’t  any  pain  I  didn’t  need  the

apparatus; and I threw it away.’ The dream of this poor sufferer seems

almost  like  a  concrete  representation  of  a  phrase  that  sometimes

forces its way on to people’s lips in unpleasant situations: ‘I must say I

could think of something more agreeable than this.’ The dream gives a

picture of this more agreeable thing. The Herr Karl Meyer on to whomthe dreamer transplanted her pains was the most indifferent young

man of her acquaintance that she could call to mind.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        625

 

   The wish-fulfilment can be detected equally easily in some other

dreams which I have collected from normal people. A friend of mine,

who knows my theory of dreams and has told his wife of it, said to me

one day: ‘My wife has asked me to tell you that she had a dream

yesterday that she was having her period. You can guess what that

means.’  I  could  indeed  guess  it.  The  fact  that  this  young  married

woman dreamt that she was having her period meant that she had

missed her period. I could well believe that she would have been glad

to go on enjoying her freedom a little longer before shouldering the

burden  of  motherhood.  It  was  a  neat  way  of  announcing  her  first

pregnancy. Another friend of mine wrote and told me that, not long

before, his wife had dreamt that she had noticed some milk stains on

the front of her vest. This too was an announcement of pregnancy, but

not of a first one. The young mother was wishing that she might have

more nourishment to give her second child than she had had for her

first.

   A young woman had been cut off from society for weeks on end

while  she  nursed  her  child  through  an  infectious  illness.  After  the

child’s recovery, she had a dream of being at a party at which, among

others, she met Alphonse Daudet, Paul Bourget, and Marcel Prévost;

they were all most affable to her and highly amusing. All of the authors

resembled their portraits, except Marcel Prévost, of whom she had

never seen a picture; and he looked like . . . the disinfection officer

who had fumigated the sick-room the day before and who had been

her first visitor for so long. Thus it seems possible to give a complete

translation of the dream: ‘It’s about time for something more amusing

than this perpetual sick-nursing.’

   These examples will perhaps be enough to show that dreams which

can only be understood as fulfilments of wishes and which bear their

meaning upon their faces without disguise are to be found under themost  frequent  and  various  conditions.  They  are  mostly  short  and

simple dreams, which afford a pleasant contrast to the confused and

exuberant compositions that have in the main attracted the attention of

the authorities. Nevertheless, it will repay us to pause for a moment

over these simple dreams. We may expect to find the very simplest

forms of dreams in children, since there can be no doubt that their

psychical productions are less complicated than those of adults. Child

psychology,  in  my  opinion,  is  destined  to  perform  the  same  useful

services for adult psychology that the investigation of the structure or

development of the lower animals has performed for research into the

structure of the higher classes of animals. Few deliberate efforts have

hitherto been made to make use of child psychology for this purpose.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        626

 

 

   The dreams of young children are frequently pure wish-fulfilments

and are in that case quite uninteresting compared with the dreams of

adults. They raise no problems for solution; but on the other hand they

are of inestimable importance in proving that, in their essential nature,

dreams represent fulfilments of wishes. I have been able to collect a

few  instances  of  such  dreams  from  material  provided  by  my  own

children.

   I have to thank an excursion which we made to the lovely village of

Hallstatt in the summer of 1896 for two dreams: one of these was

dreamt by my daughter, who was then eight and a half, and the other

by her brother of five and a quarter. I must explain by way of preamble

that we had been spending the summer on a hillside near Aussee,

from  which,  in  fine  weather,  we  enjoyed  a  splendid  view  of  the

Dachstein. The Simony Hütte could be clearly distinguished through a

telescope. The children made repeated attempts at seeing it through

the telescope - I cannot say with what success. Before our excursion I

had told the children that Hallstatt lay at the foot of the Dachstein.

They very much looked forward to the day. From Hallstatt we walked

up the Echerntal, which delighted the children with its succession ofchanging landscapes. One of them, however, the five year-old boy,

gradually became fretful. Each time a new mountain came into view

he asked if that was the Dachstein and I had to say ‘No, only one of

the foothills.’ After he had asked the question several times, he fell

completely silent; and he refused point-blank to come with us up the

steep path to the waterfall. I thought he was tired. But next morning he

came to me with a radiant face and said: ‘Last night I dreamt we were

at the Simony Hütte.’ I understood him then. When I had spoken about

the Dachstein, he had expected to climb the mountain in the course of

our excursion to Hallstatt and to find himself at close quarters with the

hut which there had been so much talk about in connection with the

telescope.  But  when  he  found  that  he  was  being  fobbed  off  with

foothills and a waterfall, he felt disappointed and out of spirits. The

dream  was  a  compensation.  I  tried  to  discover  its  details,  but  they

were scanty: ‘You have to climb up steps for six hours’ - which was

what he had been told.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        627

 

   The same excursion stirred up wishes in the eight-and-a-half year-

old girl as well - wishes which had to be satisfied in a dream. We had

taken our neighbour’s twelve-year-old son with us to Hallstatt. He was

already a full-blown gallant, and there were signs that he had engaged

the young lady’s affections. Next morning she told me the following

dream: ‘Just fancy! I had a dream that Emil was one of the family and

called you "Father" and "Mother" and slept with us in the big room like

the boys. Then Mother came in and threw a handful of big bars of

chocolate, wrapped up in blue and green paper, under our beds.’ Her

brothers, who have evidently not inherited a faculty for understanding

dreams,  followed  the  lead  of  the  authorities  and  declared  that  the

dream was nonsense. The girl herself defended one part of the dream

at  least;  and  it  throws  light  on  the  theory  of  the  neuroses  to  learn

which part. ‘Of course it’s nonsense Emil being one of the family; but

the part about the bars of chocolate isn’t.’ It had been precisely on that

point that I had been in the dark, but the girl’s mother now gave methe explanation. On their way home from the station the children had

stopped in front of a slot-machine from which they were accustomed

to obtain bars of chocolate of that very kind, wrapped in shiny metallic

paper. They had wanted to get some; but their mother rightly decided

that the day had already fulfilled enough wishes and left this one over

to be fulfilled by the dream. I myself had not observed the incident. But

the part of the dream which had been proscribed by my daughter was

immediately clear to me. I myself had heard our well-behaved guest

telling the children on the walk to wait till Father and Mother caught up

with  them.  The  little  girl’s  dream  turned  this  temporary  kinship  into

permanent  adoption.  Her  affection  was  not  yet  able  to  picture  any

other forms of companionship than those which were represented in

the dream and which were based on her relation to her brothers. It

was of course impossible to discover without questioning her why the

bars of chocolate were thrown under the beds.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        628

 

   A friend of mine has reported a dream to me which was very much

like my son’s. The dreamer was an eight-year-old girl. Her father had

started off with several children on a walk to Dornbach, with the idea

of visiting the Rohrer Hütte. As it was getting late, however, he had

turned back, promising the children to make up for the disappointment

another time. On their way home they had passed the sign-post that

marks the path up to the Hameau. The children had then asked to be

taken up to the Hameau; but once again for the same reason they had

to  be  consoled  with  the  promise  of  another  day.  Next  morning  the

eight-year-old  girl  came  to  her  father  and  said  in  satisfied  tones:

‘Daddy, I dreamt last night that you went with us to the Rohrer Hütte

and the Hameau.’ In her impatience she had anticipated the fulfilment

of her father’s promises.

   Here is an equally straightforward dream, provoked by the beauty of

the scenery at Aussee in another of my daughters, who was at that

time three and a quarter. She had crossed the lake for the first time,

and the crossing had been too short for her: when we reached thelanding-stage  she  had  not  wanted  to  leave  the  boat  and  had  wept

bitterly. Next morning she said: ‘Last night I went on the lake.’ Let us

hope that her dream-crossing had been of a more satisfying length.

      My  eldest  boy,  then  eight  years  old,  already  had  dreams  of  his

phantasies coming true: he dreamt that he was driving in a chariot

with  Achilles  and  that  Diomede  was  the  charioteer.  As  may  be

guessed,  he  had  been  excited  the  day  before  by  a  book  on  the

legends of Greece which had been given to his elder sister.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        629

 

   If I may include words spoken by children in their sleep under the

heading of dreams, I can at this point quote one of the most youthful

dreams in my whole collection. My youngest daughter, then nineteen

months  old,  had  had  an  attack  of  vomiting  one  morning  and  had

consequently been kept without food all day. During the night after this

day  of  starvation  she  was  heard  calling  out  excitedly  in  her  sleep:

‘Anna Fweud, stwawbewwies, wild stwawbewwies, omblet, pudden!’

At that time she was in the habit of using her own name to express the

idea of taking possession of something. The menu included pretty well

everything  that  must  have  seemed  to  her  to  make  up  a  desirable

meal. The fact that strawberries appeared in it in two varieties was a

demonstration against the domestic health regulations. It was based

upon the circumstance, which she had no doubt observed, that her

nurse had attributed her indisposition to a surfeit of strawberries. She

was thus retaliating in her dream against this unwelcome verdict.¹

   Though we think highly of the happiness of childhood because it is

still innocent of sexual desires, we should not forget what a fruitful

source of disappointment and renunciation, and consequently what a

stimulus to dreaming, may be provided by the other of the two great

vital instincts.² Here is another instance of this. My nephew, aged 22

months, had been entrusted with the duty of congratulating me on my

birthday and of presenting me with a basket of cherries, which are still

scarcely in season at that time of year. He seems to have found the

task a hard one, for he kept on repeating ‘Chewwies in it’ but could notbe induced to hand the present over. However, he found a means of

compensation. He had been in the habit every morning of telling his

mother that he had a dream of the ‘white soldier’ - a Guards officer in

his white cloak whom he had once gazed at admiringly in the street.

On the day after his birthday sacrifice he awoke with a cheerful piece

of news, which could only have originated from a dream: ‘Hermann

eaten all the chewwies!³

 

   ¹ The same feat was accomplished shortly afterwards by a dream produced by this little

girl’s grandmother - their combined ages came to some seventy years. She had been obliged
to go without food for a whole day on account of a disturbance due to a floating kidney. During
the following night, no doubt imagining herself back in the heyday of her girlhood, she dreamt
that she had been ‘asked out’ to both of the principal meals and been served at both with the
most appetizing delicacies.

   ² [Footnote added in 1911:] A closer study of the mental life of children has taught us, to be

sure, that sexual instinctual forces, in infantile form, play a large enough part, and one that
has been too long overlooked, in the psychical activity of children. Closer study, too, has given
us grounds for feeling some doubt in regard to the happiness of childhood as it has been
constructed by adults in retrospect. Cf. my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d).

   ³ [Footnote added 1911:] The fact should be mentioned that children soon begin to have

more complicated and less transparent dreams, and that, on the other hand, adults in certain
circumstances  often  have  dreams  of  a  similarly  simple,  infantile  character.  The  wealth  of
unexpected material that may occur in the dreams of children of four or five is shown by
examples in my ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy’ (1909b) and in Jung (1910a). -
[Added 1914:] For analytical interpretations of children’s dreams see also von Hug-Hellmuth
(1911  and  1913),  Putnam  (1912),  van  Raalte  (1912),  Spielrein  (1913)  and  Tausk  (1913).
Children’s dreams are also reported by Bianchieri (1912), Busemann (1909 and 1910), Doglia
and Bianchieri (1910-11) and, in particular, Wiggam (1909), who laid stress on their trend
towards wish-fulfilment. - [Added 1911:] On the other hand, dreams of an infantile type seem
to  occur  in  adults  with  special  frequency  when  they  find  themselves  in  unusual  external
circumstances. Thus Otto Nordenskjöld (1904, 1, 336 f.) writes as follows of the members of
his expedition while they were wintering in the Antarctic: ‘The direction taken by our innermost
thoughts was very clearly shown by our dreams, which were never more vivid or numerous
than at this time. Even those of us who otherwise dreamt but rarely had long stories to tell in
the morning when we exchanged our latest experiences in this world of the imagination. They
were all concerned with the outside world which was now so remote from us, though they
were often adapted to our actual circumstances. One of my companions had a particularly
characteristic dream of being back in his school class-room, where it was his task to skin
miniature  seals  which  had  been  specially  prepared  for  instructional  purposes.  Eating  and
drinking, however, were the pivot round which our dreams most often revolved. One of us,
who had a special gift for attending large luncheon parties during the night, was proud if he
was able to report in the morning that he had "got though a three-course dinner". Another of
us dreamt of tobacco, of whole mountains of tobacco; while a third dreamt of a ship in full sail
coming in across open water. Yet another dream is worth repeating. The postman brought
round the mail and gave a long explanation of why we had had to wait so long for it: he had
delivered it at the wrong address and had only succeeded in recovering it with great difficulty.We dreamt, of course, of still more impossible things. But there was a most striking lack of
imaginativeness shown by almost all the dreams that I dreamt myself or heard described. It
would certainly be of great psychological interest if all these dreams could be recorded. And it
will easily be understood how much we longed for sleep, since it could offer each one of us
everything that he most eagerly desired.’. - [Added 1914:] According to Du Prel (1885, 231),
’Mungo  Park,  when  he  was  almost  dying  of  thirst  on  one  of  his  African  journeys,  dreamt
unceasingly of the well-watered valleys and meadows of his home. Similarly, Baron Trenck
suffering torments of hunger while he was a prisoner in the fortress at Magdeburg, dreamt of
being surrounded by sumptuous meals; and George Back, who took part in Franklin’s first
expedition, when he was almost dying of starvation as a result of his fearful privations, dreamt
constantly and regularly of copious meals.’
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        630

 

 

   I do not myself know what animals dream of. But a proverb, to which

my attention was drawn by one of my students, does claim to know.

‘What’,  asks  the  proverb,  ‘do  geese  dream  of?’  And  it  replies:  ‘Of

maize.’¹  The  whole  theory  that  dreams  are  wish-fulfilments  is

contained in these two phrases.²

   It will be seen that we might have arrived at our theory of the hidden

meaning of dreams most rapidly merely by following linguistic usage.

It is true that common language sometimes speaks of dreams with

contempt.  (The  phrase  ‘Träume  sind  Schäume  [Dreams  are  froth]’

seems intended to support the scientific estimate of dreams.) But, on

the  whole,  ordinary  usage  treats  dreams  above  all  as  the  blessed

fulfillers of wishes. If ever we find our expectation surpassed by the

event, we exclaim in our delight: ‘I should never have imagined such a

thing even in my wildest dreams.

 

    ¹ [Footnote added  1911:]  A  Hungarian  proverb  quoted  by  Ferenczi  goes  further  and

declares that ‘pigs dream of acorns and geese dream of maize’. - [Added 1914:] A Jewish
proverb runs: ‘What do hens dream of? - of millet.’ (Bernstein and Segel, 1908, 116.)

   ² [Footnote added 1914:] I am far from seeking to maintain that I am the first writer to have

had the idea of deriving dreams from wishes. (Cf. the opening sentence of my next chapter.)
Those  who  attach  any  importance  to  anticipations  of  this  kind  may  go  back  to  classical
antiquity and quote Herophilus, a physician who lived under the first Ptolemy. According to
Büchsenschütz (1868, 33), he distinguished three sorts of dreams: those which are sent by
the gods, those which are natural and arise when the mind forms a picture of something that
is agreeable to it and will come about, and those which are of a mixed nature and which arise
of their own accord from the emergence of pictures in which we see what we wish for. J.Stärcke (1913, ) has drawn attention to a dream in Scherner’s collection which that writer
himself describes as the fulfilment of a wish. Scherner (1861, 239) writes: ‘The dreamer’s
imagination fulfilled her waking wish so promptly, simply because that wish was emotionally
active in her.’ Scherner classes this dream among ‘dreams of mood’; alongside it he places
‘dreams of erotic yearning’ in men and women, and ‘dreams of ill-temper’. There is clearly no
question of Scherner attributing any more importance to wishes in the instigation of dreams
than to any other waking mental state: still less is there any question of his having related
wishes to the essential nature of dreaming.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        631

 

                                    CHAPTER IV

 

                            DISTORTION IN DREAMS

 

If I proceed to put forward the assertion that the meaning of every

dream is the fulfilment of a wish, that is to say that there cannot be

any dreams but wishful dreams, I feel certain in advance that I shall

meet with the most categorical contradiction.

   ‘There is nothing new,’ I shall be told, ‘in the idea that some dreams

are to be regarded as wish-fulfilments; the authorities noticed that fact

long ago. Cf. Radestock (1879, 137 f.), Volkelt (1875, 110 f.), Purkinje

(1846,  456),  Tissié  (1898,  70),  Simon  (1888,  42,  on  the  hunger

dreams of Baron Trenck while he was a prisoner), and a passage in

Griesinger (1845, 89).¹ But to assert that there are no dreams other

than  wish-fulfilment  dreams  is  only  one  more  unjustifiable

generalization,  though  fortunately  one  which  it  is  easy  to  disprove.

After all, plenty of dreams occur which contain the most distressing

subject  matter  but  never  a  sign  of  any  wish-fulfilment.  Eduard  von

Hartmann, the philosopher of pessimism, is probably furthest removed

from the wish-fulfilment theory. In his Philosophie des Unbewussten

(1890, 2, 344) he writes: "When it comes to dreams, we find all the

annoyances of waking life carried over into the state of sleep; the only

thing we do not find is what can to some extent reconcile an educated

man  to  life  -  scientific  and  artistic  enjoyment.  .  .  ."  But  even  less

disgruntled  observers  have  insisted  that  pain  and  unpleasure  are

more common in dreams than pleasure: for instance, Scholz (1893,

57),  Volkelt  (1875,  80),  and  others.  Indeed  two  ladies,  FlorenceHallam and Sarah Weed (1896, 499), have actually given statistical

expression,  based  on  a  study  of  their  own  dreams,  to  the

preponderance  of  unpleasure  in  dreaming.  They  find  that  57.2  per

cent  of  dreams  are  "disagreeable"  and  only  28.6  percent  positively

"pleasant". And apart from these dreams, which carry over into sleep

the various distressing emotions of life, there are anxiety-dreams, in

which that most dreadful of all unpleasurable feelings holds us in its

grasp till we awaken. And the commonest victims of these anxiety-

dreams are precisely children,² whose dreams you have described as

undisguised wish-fulfilments.’

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] A writer as early as Plotinus, the Neoplatonist, is quoted by Du

Prel (1885, 276) as saying: ‘When our desires are aroused, imagination comes along and, as
it were, presents us with the objects of those desires.’

   ² Cf. Debacker (1881) on pavor nocturnus.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        632

 

   It does in fact look as though anxiety-dreams make it impossible to

assert as a general proposition (based on the examples quoted in my

last chapter) that dreams are wish-fulfilments; indeed they seem to

stamp any such proposition as an absurdity.

   Nevertheless, there is no great difficulty in meeting these apparently

conclusive objections. It is only necessary to take notice of the fact

that my theory is not based on a consideration of the manifest content

of dreams but refers to the thoughts which are shown by the work of

interpretation to lie behind dreams. We must make a contrast between

the manifest and the latent content of dreams. There is no question

that  there  are  dreams  whose  manifest  content  is  of  the  most

distressing kind. But has anyone tried to interpret such dreams? to

reveal the latent thoughts behind them? If not, then the two objections

raised against my theory will not hold water: it still remains possible

that  distressing  dreams  and  anxiety-dreams,  when  they  have  been

interpreted, may turn out to be fulfilments of wishes.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] It is hard to credit the obstinacy with which readers and critics ofthis  book  shut  their  eyes  to  this  consideration  and  overlook  the  fundamental  distinction
between  the  manifest  and  latent  content  of  dreams.  -  On  the  other  hand,  nothing  in  the
literature of the subject comes so near to my hypothesis as a passage in James Sully’s essay
‘The Dream as a Revelation’ (1893, 364). The fact that I am only now quoting it for the first
time is no sign of disparagement: ‘It would seem then, after all, that dreams are not the utter
nonsense  they  have  been  said  to  be  by  such  authorities  as  Chaucer,  Shakespeare  and
Milton. The chaotic aggregations of our night-fancy have a significance and communicate new
knowledge. Like some letter in cypher, the dream-inscription when scrutinized closely loses its
first look of balderdash and takes on the aspect of a serious, intelligible message. Or, to vary
the figure slightly, we may say that, like some palimpsest, the dream discloses beneath its
worthless surface-characters traces of an old and precious communication.’
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        633

 

 

   When in the course of a piece of scientific work we come upon a

problem which is difficult to solve, it is often a good plan to take up a

second problem along with the original one - just as it is easier to

crack two nuts together than each separately. Thus we are not only

faced  by  the  question  ‘How  can  distressing  dreams  and  anxiety-

dreams  be  wish-fulfilments?’;  our  reflections  enable  us  to  add  a

second question: ‘Why is it that dreams with an indifferent content,

which turn out to be wish-fulfilments, do not express their meaning

undisguised?’ Take, for instance, the dream which I treated at such

length of Irma’s injection. It was not by any means of a distressing

nature  and  interpretation  showed  it  as  a  striking  example  of  the

fulfilment of a wish. But why should it have needed any interpretation

at all? Why did it not say what it meant straight out? At first sight the

dream  of  Irma’s  injection  gave  no  impression  that  it  represented  a

wish of the dreamer’s as fulfilled. My readers will have had no such

impression; but neither did I myself before I carried out the analysis.

Let us describe this behaviour of dreams, which stands in so much

need  of  explanation,  as  ‘the  phenomenon  of  distortion  in  dreams’.

Thus our second problem is: what is the origin of dream-distortion?

   A number of possible solutions of the problem may at once occur to

us: as, for instance, that some incapacity exists during sleep for giving

direct expression to our dream-thoughts. But the analysis of certain

dreams forces us to adopt another explanation of distortion in dreams.I will exemplify this by another dream of my own. Once again this will

involve me in a variety of indiscretions; but a thorough elucidation of

the problem will compensate for my personal sacrifice.

 

   PREAMBLE. - In the spring of 1897 I learnt that two professors at our

university  had  recommended  me  for  appointment  as professor

extraordinarius.  The  news  surprised  and  greatly  delighted  me,  since  it

implied recognition by two eminent men, which could not be put down

to any considerations of a personal kind. But I at once warned myself

not to attach any expectations to the event. During the last few years

the  Ministry  had  disregarded  recommendations  of  that  sort;  and

several of my colleagues who were my seniors in age and at least my

equals  in  merit  had  been  waiting  vainly  for  appointment.  I  had  no

reason  to  believe  that  I  should  be  more  fortunate.  I  therefore

determined to meet the future with resignation. So far as I knew, I was

not an ambitious man; I was following my profession with gratifying

success  even  without  the  advantages  afforded  by  a  title.  Moreover

there was no question of my pronouncing the grapes sweet or sour:

they hung far too high over my head.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        634

 

   One evening I had a visit from a friend - one of the men whose

example I had taken as a warning to me. For a consider able time he

had been a candidate for promotion to a professorship, a rank which

in our society turns its holder into a demi-god to his patients. Less

resigned  than  I  was,  however,  he  was  in  the  habit  of  paying  his

respects from time to time in the offices of the Ministry with a view to

advancing his prospects. He had been paying one of these visits just

before calling on me. He told me that on this occasion he had driven

the exalted official into a corner and had asked straight out whether

the delay over his appointment was not in fact due to denominational

considerations. The reply had been that, in view of the present state of

feeling, it was no doubt true that, for the moment, His Excellency was

not in a position, etc. etc. ‘At least I know where I am now’, my friendhad  concluded.  It  was  not  news  to  me,  though  it  was  bound  to

strengthen  my  feeling  of  resignation;  for  the  same  denominational

considerations applied to my own case.

   On the morning after this visit I had the following dream, which was

remarkable  among  other  things  for  its  form.  It  consisted  of  two

thoughts  and  two  pictures  -  each  thought  being  succeeded  by  a

picture. I shall, however, report only the first half of the dream here,

since the other half has no connection with the purpose for which I am

describing the dream.

 

    I. . . . My friend R. was my uncle. - I had a great feeling of affection

for him.

    II. I saw before me his face, somewhat changed. It was a though it

had been drawn out lengthways. A yellow beard that surrounded it

stood out especially clearly.

 

   Then followed the two other pieces which I shall pass over - once

more a thought followed by a picture.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        635

 

 

   The interpretation of the dream took place as follows.

   When, during the course of the morning, the dream came into my

head,  I  laughed  aloud  and  said:  ‘The  dream’s  nonsense!’  But  it

refused to go away and followed me about all day, till at last in the

evening I began to reproach myself: ‘If one of your patients who was

interpreting a dream could find nothing better to say than that it was

nonsense, you would take him up about it and suspect that the dream

had  some  disagreeable  story  at  the  back  of  it  which  he  wanted  to

avoid  becoming  aware  of.  Treat  yourself  in  the  same  way.  Your

opinion  that  the  dream  is  nonsense  only  means  that  you  have  an

internal resistance against interpreting it. Don’t let yourself be put off

like this.’ So I set about the interpretation.

   ‘R. was my uncle.’ What could that mean?  I never had more thanone uncle - Uncle Josef.¹ There was an unhappy story attached to

him. Once - more than thirty years ago - in his eagerness to make

money, he allowed himself to be involved in a transaction of a kind

that is severely punished by the law, and he was in fact punished for

it. My father, whose hair turned grey from grief in a few days, used

always  to  say  that  Uncle  Josef  was  not  a  bad  man  but  only  a

simpleton; those were his words. So that if my friend R. was my Uncle

Josef, what I was meaning to say was that R. was a simpleton. Hardly

credible and most disagreeable! - But there was the face which I saw

in the dream with its elongated features and yellow beard. My uncle

did in fact have a face like that, elongated and framed in a handsome

fair beard. My friend R. had originally been extremely dark; but when

black-haired people begin to turn grey they pay for the splendour of

their youth. Hair by hair, their black beards go through an unpleasing

change of colour: first they turn to a reddish brown, then to a yellowish

brown, and only then to a definite grey. My friend R.’s beard was at

that time passing through this stage - and so, incidentally, was my

own, as I had noticed with dissatisfaction. The face that I saw in the

dream was at once my friend R.’s and my uncle’s. It was like one of

Galton’s  composite  photographs.  (In  order  to  bring  out  family

likenesses,  Galton  used  to  photograph  several  faces  on  the  same

plate.) So there could be no doubt that I really did mean that my friend

R. was a simpleton - like my Uncle Josef.

 

   ¹ It is astonishing to observe the way in which my memory - my waking memory - was

narrowed at this point, for the purposes of the analysis. Actually I have known five of my
uncles and loved and honoured one of them. But at the moment at which I overcame my
resistance to interpreting the dream I said to myself that I never had more than one uncle - the
one that was intended in the dream.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        636

 

      I  still  had  no  idea  at  all  what  could  be  the  purpose  of  this

comparison, against which I continued to struggle. It did not go very

deep, after all, since my uncle was a criminal, whereas my friend R.

bore an unblemished character . . . except for having been fined for

knocking a boy down with his bicycle. Could I have had that crime inmind? That would have been making fun of the comparison. At this

point I remembered another conversation which I had had a few days

earlier with another colleague, N., and, now I came to think of it, upon

the  same  subject.  I  had  met  N.  in  the  street.  He  too  had  been

recommended for a professorship. He had heard of the honour that

had been paid me and had offered me his congratulations on it; but I

had unhesitatingly refused to accept them. ‘You are the last person’, I

had  said,  ‘to  make  that  kind  of  joke;  you  know  what  such  a

recommendation is worth from your own experience.’ ‘Who can say?’

he had answered - jokingly, it seemed; ‘there was something definite

against me.  Don’t  you  know  that  a  woman  once  started  legal

proceedings  against  me?  I  needn’t  assure  you  that  the  case  was

dismissed.(It  was  a  disgraceful  attempt  at  blackmail;  and  I  had  the

greatest difficulty in saving the prosecutrix from being punished. But

perhaps they may be using this at the Ministry as an excuse for not

appointing me. But you have an unblemished character.’ This told me

who  the  criminal  was,  and  at  the  same  time  showed  me  how  the

dream  was  to  be  interpreted  and  what  its  purpose  was.  My  Uncle

Josef represented my two colleagues who had not been appointed to

professorships - the one as a simpleton and the other as a criminal. I

now  saw  too  why  they  were  represented  in  this  light.  If  the

appointment  of  my  friends  R.  and  N.  had  been  postponed  for

‘denominational’  reasons,  my  own  appointment  was  also  open  to

doubt; if, however, I could attribute the rejection of my two friends to

other reasons, which did not apply to me, my hopes would remain

untouched. This was the procedure adopted by my dream: it made

one of them, R., into a simpleton and the other, N., into a criminal,

whereas I was neither the one nor the other; thus we no longer had

anything  in  common;  I  could  rejoice  at  my  appointment  to  a

professorship, and I could avoid drawing the distressing conclusion

that R.’s report of what the high official had said to him must apply

equally to me.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        637

    But I felt obliged to proceed still further with my interpretation of the

dream; I felt I had not yet finished dealing with it satisfactorily. I was

still uneasy over the light-heartedness with which I had degraded two

of my respected colleagues in order to keep open my own path to a

professorship.  My  dissatisfaction  with  my  conduct,  however,  had

diminished  since  I  had  come  to  realize  the  worth  that  was  to  be

attached to expressions in dreams. I was prepared to deny through

thick and thin that I really considered that R. was a simpleton and that

I really disbelieved N.’s account of the blackmailing affair. Nor did I

believe  that  Irma  was  really  made  dangerously  ill  through  being

injected with Otto’s preparation of propyl. In both these cases what my

dreams  had  expressed  was  only my  wish  that  it  might  be  so. The

assertion in which my wish was realized sounded less absurd in the

later dream than in the earlier one; it made cleverer use of the actual

facts in its construction, like a well designed slander of the kind that

makes  people  feel  that  ‘there’s  something  in  it’.  For  one  of  the

professors in his own faculty had voted against my friend R., and my

friend N. had himself innocently provided me with the material for my

aspersions. Nevertheless, I must repeat, the dream seemed to me to

stand in need of further elucidation.

   I then recalled that there was still a piece of the dream which the

interpretation had not touched. After the idea had occurred to me that

R. was my uncle, I had had a warm feeling of affection for him in the

dream. Where did that feeling belong?  I had naturally never had any

feeling of affection for my Uncle Josef. I had been fond of my friend R.

and had esteemed him for many years; but if I had gone up to him and

expressed my sentiments in terms approaching the degree of affection

I had felt in the dream, there could be no doubt that he would have

been astonished. My affection for him struck me as ungenuine and

exaggerated - like the judgement of his intellectual qualities which I

had expressed by fusing his personality with my uncle’s, though there

the exaggeration had been in the opposite direction. But a new light

began to dawn on me. The affection in the dream did not belong to the

latent content, to the thoughts that lay behind the dream; it stood in

contradiction  to  them  and  was  calculated  to  conceal  the  true

interpretation of the dream. And probably that was precisely its raison

d’être.  I  recalled  my  resistance  against  embarking  on  theinterpretation, how long I had put it off and how I had declared that the

dream was sheer nonsense. My psycho-analytic treatments taught me

how a repudiation of that kind was to be interpreted: it had no value as

a  judgement  but  was  simply  an  expression  of  emotion.  If  my  little

daughter did not want an apple that was offered to her, she asserted

that the apple tasted sour without having tasted it. And if my patients

behaved like the child, I knew that they were concerned with an idea

which they wanted to repress. The same was true of my dream. I did

not  want  to  interpret  it,  because  the  interpretation  contained

something that I was struggling against. When I had completed the

interpretation I learnt what it was that I had been struggling against -

namely, the assertion that R. was a simpleton. The affection that I felt

for R. could not be derived from the latent dream-thoughts; but no

doubt  it  originated  from  this  struggle  of  mine.  If  my  dream  was

distorted in this respect from its latent content - and distorted into its

opposite - then the affection that was manifest in the dream served the

purpose of this distortion. In other words, distortion was shown in this

case to be deliberate and to be a means of dissimulation. My dream

thoughts had contained a slander against R.; and, in order that I might

not  notice  this,  what  appeared  in  the  dream  was  the  opposite,  a

feeling of affection for him.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        638

 

   It seemed as though this might be a discovery of general validity. It

is true that, as was shown by the instances quoted in Chapter III, there

are some dreams which are undisguised fulfilments of wishes. But in

cases where the wish-fulfilment is unrecognizable, where it has been

disguised,  there  must  have  existed  some  inclination  to  put  up  a

defence  against  the  wish;  and  owing  to  this  defence  the  wish  was

unable to express itself except in a distorted shape. I will try to seek a

social parallel to this internal event in the mind. Where can we find a

similar  distortion  of  a  psychical  act  in  social  life?  Only  where  two

persons are concerned, one of whom possesses a certain degree of

power which the second is obliged to take into account. In such a casethe second person will distort his psychical acts or, as we might put it,

will dissimulate. The politeness which I practise every day is to a large

extent dissimulation of this kind; and when I interpret my dreams for

my  readers  I  am  obliged  to  adopt  similar  distortions.  The  poet

complains of the need for these distortions in the words:

 

                                                Das Beste, was du wissen kannst,

                                                Darfst du den Buben doch nicht sagen.¹

 

   A similar difficulty confronts the political writer who has disagreeable

truths to tell to those in authority. If he presents them undisguised, the

authorities will suppress his words - after they have been spoken, if

his  pronouncement  was  an  oral  one,  but  beforehand,  if  he  had

intended to make it in print. A writer must beware of the censorship,

and on its account he must soften and distort the expression of his

opinion. According to the strength and sensitiveness of the censorship

he finds himself compelled either merely to refrain from certain forms

of attack, or to speak in allusions in place of direct references, or he

must  conceal  his  objectionable  pronouncement  beneath  some

apparently innocent disguise: for instance, he may describe a dispute

between two Mandarins in the Middle Kingdom, when the people he

really  has  in  mind  are  officials  in  his  own  country.  The  stricter  the

censorship, the more far-reaching will be the disguise and the more

ingenious too may be the means employed for putting the reader on

the scent of the true meaning.²

 

   ¹ [‘After all, the best of what you know may not be told to boys.’]

   ² [Footnote added 1919:] Frau Dr. H. von Hug-Hellmuth (1915) has recorded a dream which

is perhaps better fitted than any to justify my choice of nomenclature. In this example the
dream-distortion adopted the same methods as the postal censorship for expunging passages
which were objectionable to it. The postal censorship makes such passages unreadable by
blacking them out; the dream-censorship replaced them by an incomprehensible mumble.
   In order to make the dream intelligible, I must explain that the dreamer, a cultivated and
highly esteemed lady, was fifty years of age. She was the widow of an officer of high rank who
had died some twelve years previously and was the mother of grown sons, one of whom was
in the field at the time of the dream.
   Here then is the dream - which deals with ‘love services’ in war-time. ‘The patient went to
Garrison Hospital No. 1 and informed the sentry at the gate that she must speak to the Chief
Medical Officer (mentioning a name that was unknown to her) as she wanted to volunteer for
service at the hospital. She pronounced the word "service" in such a way that the N.C.O. at
once understood that she meant "love service". Since she was an elderly lady, after somehesitation he allowed her to pass. Instead of finding the Chief Medical Officer, however, she
reached a large and gloomy apartment in which a number of officers and army doctors were
standing and sitting round a long table. She approached a staff surgeon with her request, and
he understood her meaning after she had said only a few words. The actual wording of her
speech in the dream was: "I and many other women and girls in Vienna are ready to . . ." at
this point in the dream her words turned into a mumble " . . . for the troops - officers and other
ranks without distinction." She could tell from the expressions on the officers’ faces, partly
embarrassed and partly sly, that everyone had understood her meaning correctly. The lady
went on: "I’m aware that our decision must sound surprising, but we mean it in bitter earnest.
No one asks a soldier in the field whether he wishes to die or not." There followed an awkward
silence  of  some  minutes.  The  staff  surgeon  then  put  his  arm  round  her  waist  and  said:
"Suppose, madam, it actually came to . . . (mumble)." She drew away from him, thinking to
herself: "He’s like all the rest of them", and replied: "Good gracious, I’m an old woman and I
might never come to that. Besides, there’s one condition that must be observed: age must be
respected. It must never happen that an elderly woman . . . (mumble) . . . a mere boy. That
would be terrible." "I understand perfectly," replied the staff surgeon. Some of the officers, and
among them one who had been a suitor of hers in her youth, laughed out loud. The lady then
asked to be taken to the Chief Medical Officer, with whom she was acquainted, so that the
whole matter could be thrashed out; but she found, to her consternation, that she could not
recall his name. Nevertheless, the staff surgeon, most politely and respectfully, showed her
the way up to the second floor by a very narrow, iron, spiral staircase, which led directly from
the room to the upper storeys of the building. As she went up she heard an officer say: "That’s
a tremendous decision to make - no matter whether a woman’s young or old! Splendid of her!"
Feeling simply that she was doing her duty, she walked up an interminable staircase. The
dream was repeated twice in the course of a few weeks, with, as the lady remarked, some
quite unimportant and meaningless modifications.’
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        639

 

   The fact that the phenomena of censorship and of dream-distortion

correspond down to their smallest details justifies us in presuming that

they are similarly determined. We may therefore suppose that dreams

are given their shape in individual human beings by the operation of

two  psychical  forces  (or  we  may  describe  them  as  currents  or

systems); and that one of these forces constructs the wish which is

expressed by the dream, while the other exercises a censorship upon

this  dream-wish  and,  by  the  use  of  that  censorship,  forcibly  brings

about a distortion in the expression of the wish. It remains to enquire

as to the nature of the power enjoyed by this second agency which

enables it to exercise its censorship. When we bear in mind that the

latent dream-thoughts are not conscious before an analysis has been

carried out, whereas the manifest content of the dream is consciouslyremembered, it seems plausible to suppose that the privilege enjoyed

by  the  second  agency  is  that  of  permitting  thoughts  to  enter

consciousness.  Nothing,  it  would  seem,  can  reach  consciousness

from  the  first  system  without  passing  the  second  agency;  and  the

second agency allows nothing to pass without exercising its rights and

making  such  modifications  as  it  thinks  fit  in  the  thought  which  is

seeking admission to consciousness. Incidentally, this enables us to

form a quite definite view of the ‘essential nature’ of consciousness:

we  see  the  process  of  a  thing  becoming  conscious  as  a  specific

psychical  act,  distinct  from  and  independent  of  the  process  of  the

formation of a presentation or idea; and we regard consciousness as a

sense  organ  which  perceives  data  that  arise  elsewhere.  It  can  be

demonstrated  that  these  basic  assumptions  are  absolutely

indispensable to psychopathology. We must, however, postpone our

further consideration of them to a later stage.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        640

 

   If this picture of the two psychical agencies and their relation to

consciousness is accepted, there is a complete analogy in political life

to the extraordinary affection which I felt in my dream for my friend R.,

who  was  treated  with  such  contumely  during  the  dream’s

interpretation.  Let  us  imagine  a  society  in  which  a  struggle  is  in

process  between  a  ruler  who  is  jealous  of  his  power  and  an  alert

public opinion. The people are in revolt against an unpopular official

and demand his dismissal. But the autocrat, to show that he need take

no heed of the popular wish, chooses that moment for bestowing a

high distinction upon the official, though there is no other reason for

doing so. In just the same way my second agency, which commands

the  approaches  to  consciousness,  distinguished  my  friend  R.  by  a

display  of  excessive  affection  simply  because  the  wishful  impulses

belonging to the first system, for particular reasons of their own on

which they were intent at the moment, chose to condemn him as a

simpleton.¹

    ¹ [Footnote added 1911:] Hypocritical dreams of this description are not uncommon events

in my own case or in that of other people. While I was engaged in working out a certain
scientific  problem,  I  was  troubled  for  several  nights  in  close  succession  by  a  somewhat
confusing dream which had as its subject a reconciliation with a friend whom I had dropped
many years before. On the fourth or fifth occasion I at last succeeded in understanding the
meaning of the dream. It was an incitement to abandon my last remnants of consideration for
the person in question and to free myself from him completely, and it had been hypocritically
disguised as its opposite. I have reported elsewhere a ‘hypocritical Oedipus dream’, dreamt
by a man, in which the hostile impulses and death-wishes contained in the dream-thoughts
were replaced by manifest affection. Another kind of hypocritical dream will be mentioned
below in Chapter VI.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        641

 

 

  These considerations may lead us to feel that the interpretation of

dreams may enable us to draw conclusions as to the structure of our

mental apparatus which we have hoped for in vain from philosophy. I

do not propose, however, to follow this line of thought; but, having

cleared up the matter of distortion in dreams, I shall go back to the

problem from which we started. The question raised was how dreams

with a distressing content can be resolved into wish-fulfilments. We

now see that this is possible if dream-distortion has occurred and if the

distressing content serves only to disguise something that is wished

for. Bearing in mind our assumption of the existence of two psychical

agencies, we can further say that distressing dreams do in fact contain

something which is distressing to the second agency, but something

which at the same time fulfils a wish on the part of the first agency.

They are wishful dreams in so far as every dream arises from the first

agency;  the  relation  of  the  second  agency  towards  dreams  is  of  a

defensive and not of a creative kind.¹ If we were to restrict ourselves

to  considering  what  the  second  agency  contributes  to  dreams,  we

could never arrive at an understanding of them: all the conundrums

which  the  authorities  have  observed  in  dreams  would  remain

unsolved.

   The fact that dreams really have a secret meaning which represents

the fulfilment of a wish must be proved afresh in each particular case

by analysis. I shall therefore select a few dreams with a distressingcontent and attempt to analyse them. Some of them are the dreams of

hysterical patients which require lengthy preambles and an occasional

excursus into the psychical processes characteristic of hysteria. But I

cannot  escape  this  aggravation  of  the  difficulties  of  presenting  my

argument.

 

   As I have already explained, when I undertake the analytic treatment

of  a  psycho-neurotic  patient  his  dreams  are  invariably  discussed

between us. In the course of these discussions I am obliged to give

him all the psychological explanations which have enabled me myself

to reach an understanding of his symptoms. I am thereupon subjected

to  a  remorseless  criticism,  certainly  no  less  severe  than  I  have  to

expect  from  the  members  of  my  own  profession.  And  my  patients

invariably  contradict  my  assertion  that  all  dreams  are  fulfilments  of

wishes. Here, then, are some instances from the material of dreams

that have been brought up against me as evidence to the contrary.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added  1930:]  Later  we  shall  also  come  across  instance  in  which,  on  the

contrary, a dream expresses a wish on the part of the second agency.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        642

 

 

   ‘You’re always saying to me’, began a clever woman patient of mine,

‘that  a  dream  is  a  fulfilled  wish.  Well,  I’ll  tell  you  a  dream  whose

subject was the exact opposite - a dream in which one of my wishes

was not fulfilled. How do you fit that in with your theory? This was the

dream:

   ‘I wanted to give a supper-party, but I had nothing in the house but a

little smoked salmon. I thought I would go out and buy something, but

remembered  then  that  it  was  Sunday  afternoon  and  all  the  shops

would be shut. Next I tried to ring up some caterers, but the telephone

was out of order. So I had to abandon my wish to give a supper-party.’

   I answered, of course, that analysis was the only way of deciding on

the  meaning  of  the  dream;  though  I  admitted  that  at  first  sight  it

seemed sensible and coherent and looked like the reverse of a wish-fulfilment. ‘But what material did the dream arise from? As you know,

the instigation to a dream is always to be found in the events of the

previous day.’

   ANALYSIS. - My patient’s husband, an honest and capable wholesale

butcher, had remarked to her the day before that he was getting too

stout and therefore intended to start on a course of weight-reduction.

He proposed to rise early, do physical exercises, keep to a strict diet,

and above all accept no more invitations to supper. -She laughingly

added that her husband, at the place where he regularly lunched, had

made  the  acquaintance  of  a  painter,  who  had  pressed  him  to  be

allowed to paint his portrait, as he had never seen such expressive

features. Her husband however had replied in his blunt manner that

he  was  much  obliged,  but  he  was  sure  the  painter  would  prefer  a

piece of a pretty young girl’s behind to the whole of his face.¹ She was

very much in love with her husband now and teased him a lot. She

had begged him, too, not to give her any caviare.

   I asked her what that meant; and she explained that she had wished

for a long time that she could have a caviare sandwich every morning

but had grudged the expense. Of course her husband would have let

her have it at once if she had asked him. But, on the contrary, she had

asked him not to give her any caviare, so that she could go on teasing

him about it.

 

   ¹ Cf. the phrase ‘sitting for one’s portrait’ and Goethe’s lines:

                                                Und wenn er keinen Hintern hat,
                                                Wie mag der Edle sitzen?
 
                                                [And if he hasn’t a behind,
                                                How can his Lordship sit?]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        643

 

   This explanation struck me as unconvincing. Inadequate reasons

like  this  usually  conceal  unconfessed  motives.  They  remind  one  of

Bernheim’s hypnotized patients. When one of these carries out a post-

hypnotic suggestion and is asked why he is acting in this way, instead

of  saying  that  he  has  no  idea  he  feels  compelled  to  invent  someobviously unsatisfactory reason. The same was no doubt true of my

patient  and  the  caviare.  I  saw  that  she  was  obliged  to  create  an

unfulfilled wish for herself in her actual life; and the dream represented

this renunciation as having been put into effect. But why was it that

she stood in need of an unfulfilled wish?

      The  associations  which  she  had  so  far  produced  had  not  been

sufficient to interpret the dream. I pressed her for some more. After a

short  pause,  such  as  would  correspond  to  the  over  coming  of  a

resistance, she went on to tell me that the day before she had visited

a woman friend of whom she confessed she felt jealous because her

(my patient’s) husband was constantly singing her praises. Fortunately

this friend of hers is very skinny and thin and her husband admires a

plumper figure. I asked her what she had talked about to her thing

friend. Naturally, she replied, of that lady’s wish to grow a little stouter.

Her  friend  had  enquired,  too:  ‘When  are  you  going  to  ask  us  to

another meal? You always feed one so well.’

   The meaning of the dream was now clear, and I was able to say to

my patient: ‘It is just as though when she made this suggestion you

said to yourself: "A likely thing! I’m to ask you to come and eat in my

house so that you may get stout and attract my husband still more! I’d

rather never give another supper-party." What the dream was saying

to you was that you were unable to give any supper-parties, and it was

thus fulfilling your wish not to help your friend to grow plumper. The

fact  that  what  people  eat  at  parties  makes  them  stout  had  been

brought home to you by your husband’s decision not to accept any

more invitations to supper in the interests of his plan to reduce his

weight.’ All that was now lacking was some coincidence to confirm the

solution.  The  smoked  salmon  in  the  dream  had  not  yet  been

accounted for. ‘How’, I asked, ‘did you arrive at the salmon that came

into  your  dream?’  ‘Oh’,  she  replied,  ‘smoked  salmon  is  my  friend’s

favourite dish.’ I happen to be acquainted with the lady in question

myself, and I can confirm the fact that she grudges herself salmon no

less than my patient grudges herself caviare.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        644 

   The same dream admits of another and subtler interpretation, which

in  fact  becomes  unavoidable  if  we  take  a  subsidiary  detail  into

account. (The two interpretations are not mutually contradictory, but

both cover the same ground; they are a good instance of the fact that

dreams,  like  all  other  psychopathological  structures,  regularly  have

more than one meaning.) My patient, it will be remembered, at the

same time as she was occupied with her dream of the renunciation of

a  wish,  was  also  trying  to  bring  about  a  renounced  wish  (for  the

caviare sandwich) in real life. Her friend had also given expression to

a wish - to become stouter - and it would not have been surprising if

my patient had dreamt that her friend’s wish was unfulfilled; for my

patient’s own wish was that her friend’s wish (to put on weight) should

not be fulfilled. But instead of this she dreamt that one of her own

wishes  was  not  fulfilled.  Thus  the  dream  will  acquire  a  new

interpretation if we suppose that the person indicated in the dream

was not herself but her friend, that she had put herself in her friend’s

place, or, as we might say, that she had ‘identified’ herself with her

friend. I believe she had in fact done this; and the circumstance of her

having brought about a renounced wish in real life was evidence of

this identification.

      What  is  the  meaning  of  hysterical  identification?  It  requires  a

somewhat  lengthy  explanation.  Identification  is  a  highly  important

factor in the mechanism of hysterical symptoms. It enables patients to

express in their symptoms not only their own experiences but those of

a large number of other people; it enables them, as it were, to suffer

on behalf of a whole crowd of people and to act all the parts in a play

single-handed. I shall be told that this is not more than the familiar

hysterical imitation, the capacity of hysterics to imitate any symptoms

in other people that may have struck their attention - sympathy, as it

were, intensified to the point of reproduction. This, however, does no

more  than  show  us  the  path  along  which  the  psychical  process  in

hysterical imitation proceeds. The path is something different from the

mental  act  which  proceeds  along  it.  The  latter  is  a  little  more

complicated than the common picture of hysterical imitation; it consists

in the unconscious drawing of an inference, as an example will make

clear.  Supposing  a  physician  is  treating  a  woman  patient,  who  issubject  to  a  particular  kind  of  spasm,  in  a  hospital  ward  among  a

number  of  other  patients.  He  will  show  no  surprise  if  he  finds  one

morning  that  this  particular  kind  of  hysterical  attack  has  found

imitators.  He  will  merely  say:  ‘The  other  patients  have  seen  it  and

copied  it;  it’s  a  case  of  psychical  infection.’  That  is  true;  but  the

psychical infection has occurred along some such lines as these. As a

rule,  patients  know  more  about  one  another  than  the  doctor  does

about any of them; and after the doctor’s visit is over they turn their

attention  to  one  another.  Let  us  imagine  that  this  patient  had  her

attack on a particular day; then the others will quickly discover that it

was caused by a letter from home, the revival of some unhappy love-

affair, or some such thing. Their sympathy is aroused and they draw

the following inference, though it fails to penetrate into consciousness:

‘If a cause like this can produce an attack like this, I may have the

same kind of attack since I have the same grounds for having it.’ If this

inference were capable of entering consciousness, it might possibly

give rise to a fear of having the same kind of attack. But in fact the

inference is made in a different psychical region, and consequently

results  in  the  actual  realization  of  the  dreaded  symptom.  Thus

identification is not simple imitation but assimilation on the basis of a

similar  aetiological  pretension;  it  expresses  a  resemblance  and  is

derived from a common element which remains in the unconscious.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        645

 

      Identification  is  most  frequently  used  in  hysteria  to  express  a

common sexual element. A hysterical woman identifies herself in her

symptoms  most  readily  -  though  not  exclusively  -  with  people  with

whom  she  has  had  sexual  relations  or  with  people  who  have  had

sexual  relations  with  the  same  people  as  herself.  Linguistic  usage

takes this into account, for two lovers are spoken of as being ‘one’. In

hysterical phantasies, just as in dreams, it is enough for purposes of

identification that the subject should have thoughts of sexual relations

without their having necessarily taken place in reality. Thus the patient

whose dream I have been discussing was merely following the rules ofhysterical  processes  of  thought  in  expressing  her  jealousy  of  her

friend (which incidentally she herself knew was unjustified) by taking

her place in the dream and identifying herself with her by creating a

symptom  -  the  renounced  wish.  The  process  might  be  expressed

verbally thus: my patient put herself in her friend’s place in the dream

because her friend was taking my patient’s place with her husband

and because she (my patient) wanted to take her friend’s place in her

husband’s high opinion.¹

 

   ¹ I myself regret the insertion into my argument of excerpts from the psychopathology of

hysteria.  Their  fragmentary  presentation  and  detachment  from  their  context  cannot  fail  to
detract  from  their  enlightening  effect.  If,  however,  they  serve  to  indicate  the  intimate
connection  between  the  topic  of  dreams  and  that  of  the  psychoneuroses,  they  will  have
fulfilled the purpose for which they are inserted.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        646

 

 

   A contradiction to my theory of dreams produced by another of my

women patients (the cleverest of all my dreamers) was resolved more

simply, but upon the same pattern: namely that the non-fulfilment of

one  wish  meant  the  fulfilment  of  another.  One  day  I  had  been

explaining to her that dreams are fulfilments of wishes. Next day she

brought  me  a  dream  in  which  she  was  travelling  down  with  her

mother-in-law to the place in the country where they were to spend

their  holidays  together.  Now  I  knew  that  she  had  violently  rebelled

against the idea of spending the summer near her mother-in-law and

that a few days earlier she had successfully avoided the propinquity

she dreaded by engaging rooms in a far distant resort. And now her

dream had undone the solution she had wished for: was not this the

sharpest possible contradiction of my theory that in dreams wishes are

fulfilled? No doubt; and it was only necessary to follow the dream’s

logical consequence in order to arrive at its interpretation. The dream

showed that I was wrong. Thus it was her wish that I might be wrong,

and her dream showed that wish fulfilled. But her wish that I might be

wrong,  which  was  fulfilled  in  connection  with  her  summer  holidays,

related in fact to another and more serious matter. For at about thesame time I had inferred from the material produced in her analysis

that at a particular period of her life something must have occurred

that was of importance in determining her illness. She had disputed

this, since she had no recollection of it; but soon afterwards it had

turned out that I was right. Thus her wish that I might be wrong, which

was  transformed  into  her  dream  of  spending  her  holidays  with  her

mother-in-law, corresponded to a well-justified wish that the events of

which she was then becoming aware for the first time might never

have occurred.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        647

 

 

   I have ventured to interpret - without any analysis, but only by a

guess - a small episode which occurred to a friend of mine who was in

the same class as I was all through our career at a secondary school.

One day he listened to a lecture which I gave before a small audience

on the novel idea that dreams were wish-fulfilments. He went home

and dreamt that he had lost all his cases (he was a barrister) and

afterwards arraigned me on the subject. I evaded the issue by telling

him that after all one can’t win all one’s cases. But to myself I thought:

‘Considering that for eight whole years I sat on the front bench as top

of the class while he drifted about somewhere in the middle, he can

hardly fail to nourish a wish, left over from his school-days, that some

day or other I may come a complete cropper.’

 

   A dream of a gloomier kind was also brought up against me by a

patient as an objection to the theory of wishful dreams.

      The  patient,  who  was  a  young  girl,  began  thus:  ‘As  you  will

remember, my sister has only one boy left now - Karl; she lost his

elder  brother,  Otto,  while  I  was  still  living  with  her.  Otto  was  my

favourite; I more or less brought him up. I’m fond of the little one too,

but of course not nearly so fond as I was of the one who died. Last

night, then, I dreamt that I saw Karl lying before me dead. He was

lying  in  his  little  coffin  with  his  hands  folded  and  with  candles  allaround - in fact just like little Otto, whose death was such a blow to

me. Now tell me, what can that mean? You know me. Am I such a

wicked person that I can wish my sister to lose the one child she still

has? Or does the dream mean that I would rather Karl were dead than

Otto whom I was so much fonder of?

   I assured her that this last interpretation was out of question. And

after reflecting a little I was able to give her the correct interpretation of

the  dream,  which  she  afterwards  confirmed.  I  was  able  to  do  so

because  I  was  familiar  with  the  whole  of  the  dreamer’s  previous

history.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        648

 

   The girl had early been left an orphan and had been brought up in

the house of a much older sister. Among the friends who visited at the

house was a man who made a lasting impression on her heart. For a

time it had seemed as though her scarcely acknowledged relations

with him would lead to marriage; but this happy outcome was brought

to nothing by her sister, whose motives were never fully explained.

After the breach the man ceased to visit the house; and shortly after

the death of little Otto, on to whom she had meanwhile turned her

affection, my patient herself set up on her own. She did not succeed,

however, in freeing herself from her attachment to her sister’s friend.

Her pride bade her avoid him; but she was unable to transfer her love

to  any  of  the  other  admirers  who  presented  themselves  later.

Whenever it was announced that the object of her affections, who was

by profession a literary man, was to give a lecture anywhere, she was

invariably in the audience; and she took every possible opportunity of

seeing him from a distance on neutral ground. I remembered that she

had told me the day before that the Professor was going to a particular

concert and that she intended to go to it as well so as to enjoy a

glimpse  of  him  once  more.  That  had  been  on  the  day  before  the

dream, and the concert was to take place on the day on which she

told  me  the  dream.  It  was  therefore  easy  for  me  to  construct  the

correct  interpretation,  and  I  asked  her  whether  she  could  think  ofanything  that  happened  after  little  Otto’s  death.  She  answered  at

once: ‘Of course! the Professor came to see us again after a long

absence, and I saw him once more beside little Otto’s coffin.’ This was

exactly what I had expected, and I interpreted the dream in this way:

‘If now the other boy were to die, the same thing would happen. You

would  spend  the  day  with  your  sister  and  the  Professor  would  be

certain to come to offer his condolences, so that you would see him

again under the same conditions as the other time. The dream means

no more than your wish to see him once more, a wish which you are

inwardly  struggling  against.  I  know  you  have  a  ticket  for  to-day’s

concert  in  your  pocket.  Your  dream  was  a  dream  of  impatience:  it

anticipated the glimpse you are to have of him to-day by a few hours.’

   In order to conceal her wish, she had evidently chosen a situation in

which such wishes are usually suppressed, a situation in which one is

so much filled with grief that one has no thought of love. Yet it is quite

possible that even in the real situation of which the dream was an

exact replica, beside the coffin of the elder boy whom she had loved

still more, she may have been unable to suppress her tender feelings

for the visitor who had been absent so long.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        649

 

 

      A  similar  dream  of  another  woman  patient  had  a  different

explanation. When she was young the had been remarkable for her

ready wit and cheerful disposition; and these characteristics were still

to be seen, at all events in the ideas that occurred to her during the

treatment. In the course of a longish dream, this lady imagined that

she saw her only, fifteen-year-old daughter lying dead ‘in a case.’ She

had half a mind to use the scene as an objection to the wish-fulfilment

theory, though she herself suspected that the detail of the ‘case’ must

point  the  way  to  another  view  of  the  dream.¹  In  the  course  of  the

analysis  she  recalled  that  at  a  party  the  evening  before  there  had

been some talk about the English word ‘box’ and the various ways in

which it could be translated into German - such as ‘Schachtel’, ‘Loge’,‘Kasten’, ‘Ohrfeige’,  and  so  on.  Other  portions  of  the  same  dream

enabled us to discover further that she had guessed that the English

‘box’ was related to the German ‘Büchse’, and that she had then been

plagued by a recollection that ‘Büchse’ is used as a vulgar term for the

female  genitals.  If  some  allowance  was  made  for  the  limits  of  her

knowledge of topographical anatomy, it might be presumed, therefore,

that the child lying in the case meant an embryo in the womb. After

being  enlightened  up  to  this  point,  she  no  longer  denied  that  the

dream-picture corresponded to a wish of hers. Like so many young

married women, she had been far from pleased when she became

pregnant; and more than once she had allowed herself to wish that the

child in her womb might die. Indeed, in a fit of rage after a violent

scene with her husband, she had beaten with her fists on her body so

as  to  hit  the  child  inside  it.  Thus  the  dead  child  was  in  fact  the

fulfilment of a wish, but of a wish that had been put aside fifteen years

earlier. It is scarcely to be wondered at if a wish that was fulfilled after

such a long delay was not recognized. Too much had changed in the

interval.

 

   ¹ Like the smoked salmon in the dream of the abandoned supper party.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        650

 

 

   I shall have to return to the group of dreams to which the last two

examples belong (dreams dealing with the death of relatives of whom

the dreamer is fond) when I come to consider ‘typical’ dreams. I shall

then  be  able  to  show  from  further  instances  that,  in  spite  of  their

unwished for contents, all such dreams must be interpreted as wish-

fulfilments.

   I owe the following dream, not to a patient, but to an intelligent jurist

of my acquaintance. He told it to me, once again, in order to restrain

me from rash generalizing on the theory of wishful dreams. ‘I dreamt’,

said my informant, ‘that I came up to my house with a lady on my arm.

A closed carriage was standing in front of it and a man came up to

me, showed me his credentials as a police officer and requested meto follow him. I asked him to allow me a little time to put my affairs in

order. Can you suppose that I have a wish to be arrested?’ - Of course

not, I could only agree. Do you happen to know the charge on which

you were arrested?  - ‘Yes, for infanticide, I believe.’ - Infanticide? But

surely you’re aware that that’s a crime that can only be committed by

a mother on a new-born child? - ‘Quite true.’¹ - And what were the

circumstances in which you had the dream? What happened on the

previous  evening?  -  ‘I  would  prefer  not  to  tell  you.  It’s  a  delicate

matter.’ - Nevertheless I shall have to hear it; otherwise we shall have

to give up the idea of interpreting the dream. - ‘Very well then, listen. I

didn’t spend last night at home but with a lady who means a great deal

to me. When we woke up in the morning there was a further passage

between us, after which I went to sleep again and had the dream I

described to you.’ - Is she a married woman? - ‘Yes.’ - And you don’t

want to have a child by her? - ‘Oh, no; that might give us away.’ - So

you  don’t  practice  normal  intercourse?  -  ‘I  take  the  precaution  of

withdrawing before ejaculation.’ - I think I may assume that you had

used  this  device  several  times  during  the  night,  and  that  after

repeating it in the morning you felt a little uncertain whether you had

carried it out success fully. - ‘That’s possible, no doubt.’ - In that case

your dream was the fulfilment of a wish. It gave you a reassurance

that you had not procreated a child, or, what amounts to the same

thing,  that  you  had  killed  a  child.  The  intermediate  links  are  easily

indicated. You remember that a few days ago we were talking about

marriage difficulties and how inconsistent it is that there should be no

objection to carrying out intercourse in such a way that no fertilization

takes  place,  whereas  any  interference  when  once  the  ovum  and

semen have come together and a foetus has been formed is punished

as a crime. We went on to recall the mediaeval controversy over the

exact point of time at which the soul enters the foetus, since it is not

until  after  that  that  the  concept  of  murder  becomes  applicable.  No

doubt, too, you know Lenau’s gruesome poem in which child murder

and child prevention are equated. - ‘Oddly enough I happened to think

of Lenau this morning, quite by chance, as it seemed.’ - An after-echo

of  your  dream.  And  now  I  can  show  you  another  incidental  wish-

fulfilment contained in your dream. You came up to your house with

the lady on your arm. Thus you were bringing her home, instead ofspending the night in her house as you did in reality. There may be

more than one reason why the wish-fulfilment which constitutes the

core  of  the  dream  was  disguised  in  such  a  disagreeable  form.

Perhaps you have learned from my paper on the aetiology of anxiety

neurosis  that  I  regard coitus  interruptus  as  one  of  the  aetiological

factors in the development of neurotic anxiety? It would tally with this

if, after carrying out sexual intercourse in this way several times, you

were left in an uneasy mood which afterwards became an element in

the  construction  of  your  dream.  Moreover,  you  made  use  of  this

moodiness  to  help  disguise  the  wish-fulfilment.  Incidentally,  your

reference to infanticide has not been explained. How did you come to

light  on  this  specifically  feminine  crime?  -  ‘I  must  admit  that  some

years  ago  I  became  involved  in  an  occurrence  of  that  kind.  I  was

responsible for a girl’s trying to avoid the consequence of a love-affair

with me by means of an abortion. I had nothing to do with her carrying

out her intention, but for a long time I naturally felt very nervous in

case  the  business  came  out.’  -  I  quite  understand  that.  This

recollection  provides  a  second  reason  why  you  must  have  been

worried by your suspicion that your device might have gone wrong.

 

   ¹ It often happens that the account first given of a dream is incomplete and that the memory

of the omitted portions only emerges in the course of analysis. These subsequently added
portions regularly turn out to provide the key to the dream’s interpretation. Cf. the discussion
below on the forgetting of dreams.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        651

 

      A  young  physician  who  heard  me  describe  this  dream  during  a

course of lectures must have been greatly struck by it, for he promptly

re-dreamt it, applying the same pattern of thought to another theme.

The day before, he had sent in his income tax return, which he had

filled in perfectly honestly, since he had very little to declare. He then

had a dream that an acquaintance of his had come to him from a

meeting  of  the  tax  commissioners  and  informed  him  that,  while  no

objection  had  been  raised  to  any  of  the  other  tax  returns,  general

suspicion  had  been  aroused  by  his  and  a  heavy  fine  had  beenimposed on him. The dream was a poorly disguised fulfilment of his

wish to be known as a doctor with a large income. It recalls the well-

known  story  of  the  girl  who  was  advised  not  to  accept  a  suitor

because he had a violent temper and would be sure to beat her if they

were married. ‘If only he’d begun beating me already!’ the girl replied.

Her wish to be married was so intense that she was ready to take the

threatened unpleasantness into the bargain, and even went so far as

to turn it into a wish.

 

   The very frequent dreams, which appear to stand in contradiction to

my theory because their subject-matter is the frustration of a wish or

the  occurrence  of  something  clearly  unwished-for,  may  be  brought

together under the heading of ‘counter-wish dreams’. If these dreams

are considered as a whole, it seems to me possible to trace them back

to two principles; I have not yet mentioned one of these, although it

plays a large part not only in people’s dreams but in their lives as well.

One of the two motive forces leading to such dreams is the wish that I

may be wrong. These dreams appear regularly in the course of my

treatments when a patient is in a state of resistance to me; and I can

count almost certainly on provoking one of them after I have explained

to a patient for the first time my theory that dreams are fulfilments of

wishes.¹ Indeed, it is to be expected that the same thing will happen to

some of the readers of the present book: they will be quite ready to

have one of their wishes frustrated in a dream if only their wish that I

may be wrong can be fulfilled.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1911:] During the last few years similar ‘counter-wish dreams’ have

repeatedly been reported to me by people who have heard me lecturing, as a reaction to first
making the acquaintance of my ‘wishful’ theory of dreams.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        652

 

   The same point is illustrated by one last dream of the kind which I

will quote from a patient under treatment. This was the dream of a girl

who had succeeded in her struggle to continue her treatment with me

against the will of her relatives and of the authorities whose opinionshad been consulted. She dreamt that her people forbade her to go on

coming to me. She then reminded me of a promise I had given her

that if necessary I would continue the treatment without a fee. To this I

replied: ‘I cannot make any allowances in money matters.’ It must be

admitted  that  it  was  not  easy  to  point  to  the  wish-fulfilment  in  this

instance.  But  in  all  such  cases  one  discovers  a  second  riddle,  the

solution of which helps one to solve the original one. What was the

origin  of  the  words  she  put  into  my  mouth?  Of  course  I  had  said

nothing of the kind to her; but one of her brothers, and the one by

whom she was most influenced, had been good enough to attribute

this  sentiment  to  me.  The  dream  was  thus  intended  to  prove  her

brother right. And it was not only in her dreams that she insisted on his

being right; the same idea dominated her whole life and it was the

motive of her illness.

   A dream which seems at first sight to put special difficulties in the

way  of  the  wish-fulfilment  theory  was  dreamt  and  interpreted  by  a

physician, and reported by August Stärcke (1911): ‘I saw upon my left

index-finger the first indication of syphilis on the terminal phalange.’

The  reflection  that,  apart  from  the  dream’s  unwished-for  content,  it

appears to be clear and coherent, might dissuade us from analysing it.

If, however, we are prepared to face the trouble involved, we shall find

that ‘Primäraffekt’ was equivalent to a ‘prima affectio’ (a first love), and

that the repellent ulcer turned out, to quote Stärcke’s words, to ‘stand

for wish-fulfilments that were highly charged with emotion’.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        653

 

   The second motive for counter-wish dreams is so obvious that it is

easy to overlook it, as I did myself for some considerable time. There

is a masochistic component in the sexual constitution of many people,

which arises from the reversal of an aggressive, sadistic component

into its opposite. Those who find their pleasure, not in having physical

pain inflicted on them, but in humiliation and mental torture, may be

described as ‘mental masochists’. It will at once be seen that people of

this kind can have counter-wish dreams and unpleasurable dreams,which  are  none  the  less  wish-fulfilments  since  they  satisfy  their

masochistic inclinations. I will quote one such dream, produced by a

young man who in his earlier years had greatly tormented his elder

brother,  to  whom  he  had  a  homosexual  attachment.  His  character

having undergone a fundamental change, he had the following dream,

which was in three pieces: I. His elder brother was chaffing him. II.

Two  grown  men  were  caressing  each  other  with  a  homosexual

purpose. III. His brother had sold the business of which he himself had

looked  forward  to  becoming  the  director.  He  awoke  from  the  last

dream  with  the  most  distressing  feelings.  Nevertheless  it  was  a

masochistic  wishful  dream,  and  might  be  translated  thus:  ‘It  would

serve me right if my brother were to confront me with this sale as a

punishment for all the torments he had to put up with from me.

 

      I  hope  that  the  foregoing  examples  will  be  enough  (till  the  next

objection is raised) to make it seem plausible that even dreams with a

distressing content are to be construed as wish-fulfilments. Nor will

anyone regard it as a chance coincidence that the interpretation of

these dreams has brought us up each time against topics about which

people are loth to speak or to think. The distressing feeling aroused by

these dreams is no doubt identical with the repugnance which tends

(usually  with  success)  to  restrain  us  from  discussing  or  mentioning

such topics, and which each of us has to overcome if we nevertheless

find ourselves compelled to embark on them. But the unpleasurable

feeling which thus recurs in dreams does not disprove the existence of

a wish. Everyone has wishes that he would prefer not to disclose to

other people, and wishes that he will not admit even to himself. On the

other hand, we are justified in linking the unpleasurable character of

all these dreams with the fact of dream-distortion. And we are justified

in concluding that these dreams are distorted and the wish-fulfilment

contained  in  them  disguised  to  the  point  of  being  unrecognizable

precisely owing to the repugnance felt for the topic of the dream or for

the  wish  derived  from  it  and  to  an  intention  to  repress  them.  The

distortion  in  the  dream  is  thus  shown  in  fact  to  be  an  act  of  the

censorship. We shall be taking into account everything that has been

brought to light by our analysis of unpleasurable dreams if we make

the following modification in the formula in which we have sought toexpress the nature of dreams: a dream is a (disguised) fulfilment of a

(suppressed or repressed) wish.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] A great living writer, who, as I have been told, refuses to hear

anything of psycho-analysis or the interpretation of dreams, has independently arrived at an
almost identical formula for the nature of dreams. He speaks of a dream as ‘the unauthorized
emergence of suppressed desires and wishes, under false features and name’. (Spitteler,
1914, 1.)
   [Added 1911:] I shall anticipate questions which will be discussed later by quoting at this
point Otto Rank’s enlargement and modification of the above basic formula: ‘On the basis and
with the help of repressed, infantile sexual material, dreams regularly represent present-day,
and also as a rule erotic, wishes as fulfilled, in a veiled and symbolically disguised shape.’
(Rank, 1910.)
   [Added 1925:] I have nowhere stated that I adopted Rank’s formula as my own. The shorter
version, as stated in the text above, seems to me adequate. But the mere fact of my having
mentioned Rank’s modification has been enough to unleash countless accusations against
psycho-analysis of having asserted that ‘all dreams have a sexual content’.
      If  this  sentence  is  taken  in  the  sense  in  which  it  was  intended,  it  merely  shows  the
unconscientious manner in which critics are accustomed to perform their functions, and the
readiness with which opponents overlook the clearest statements if they do not give scope to
their aggressive inclinations. For only a few pages earlier I had mentioned the variety of the
wishes  whose  fulfilments  are  to  be  found  in  children’s  dreams  (wishes  to  take  part  in  an
excursion or a sail on a lake, or to make up for a missed meal, and so on ); and in other
passages I had discussed dreams of hunger, dreams stimulated by thirst or by excretory
needs, and dreams of mere convenience. Even Rank himself made no absolute assertion.
The  words  he  used  were  ‘also as a rule  erotic  wishes’,  and  what  he  said  can  be  amply
confirmed in the dreams of most adults.
   The situation would be different if ‘sexual’ was being used by my critics in the sense in
which  it  is  now  commonly  employed  in  psycho-analysis  -  in  the  sense  of  ‘Eros’.  But  my
opponents  are  scarcely  likely  to  have  had  in  mind  the  interesting  problem  of  whether  all
dreams are created by ‘libidinal’ instinctual forces as contrasted with ‘destructive’ ones.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        654

 

 

   There remain to be discussed anxiety-dreams as a special sub-

species of dreams with a distressing content. The notion of regarding

these as wishful dreams will meet with very little sympathy from the

unenlightened.  Nevertheless  I  can  deal  with  anxiety-dreams  very

briefly at this point. They do not present us with a new aspect of the

dream-problem;  what  they  face  us  with  is  the  whole  question  of

neurotic anxiety. The anxiety that we feel in a dream is only apparently

explained  by  the  dream’s  content.  If  we  submit  the  content  of  thedream to analysis, we find that the anxiety in the dream is no better

justified  by  the  dream’s  content  than,  let  us  say,  the  anxiety  in  a

phobia is justified by the idea to which the phobia relates. No doubt it

is true, for instance, that it is possible to fall out of a window and that

there is therefore reason for exercising a certain degree of caution in

the neighbourhood of a window; but we cannot see why the anxiety

felt in a phobia on this subject is so great and pursues the patient far

beyond its occasion. We find then that the same thing may be validly

asserted both of phobias and of anxiety-dreams: in both cases the

anxiety is only superficially attached to the idea that accompanies it; it

originates from another source.

   Since this intimate connection exists between anxiety in dreams and

in neuroses, in discussing the former I must refer to the latter. In a

short paper on anxiety-neurosis (Freud, 1895b), I argued some time

ago that neurotic anxiety is derived from sexual life and corresponds

to libido which has been diverted from its purpose and has found no

employment. Since then this formula has met the test of time; and it

enables us now to infer from it that anxiety-dreams are dreams with a

sexual content, the libido belonging to which has been transformed

into anxiety. There will be an opportunity later to support this assertion

by the analysis of some neurotic patients’ dreams. In the course, too,

of  a  further  attempt  to  arrive  at  a  theory  of  dreams,  I  shall  have

occasion to discuss once more the determinants of anxiety-dreams

and their compatibility with the theory of wish-fulfilment.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        655

 

                                      CHAPTER V

 

              THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS

 

When the analysis of the dream of Irma’s injection showed us that a

dream could be the fulfilment of a wish, our interest was at first wholly

absorbed by the question of whether we had come upon a universal

characteristic of dreams, and for the time being we stifled our curiosityabout any other scientific problems that may have arisen during the

work of the interpretation. Having followed one path to its end, we may

now  retrace  our  steps  and  choose  another  starting-point  for  our

rambles through the problems of dream-life: for the time being, we

may leave the topic of wish-fulfilment on one side, though we are still

far from having exhausted it.

   Now that the application of our procedure for interpreting dreams

enables us to disclose a latent content in them which is of far greater

significance than their manifest one, the pressing task at once arises

of re-examining one by one the various problems raised by dreams, to

see  whether  we  may  not  now  be  in  a  position  to  find  satisfactory

solutions  for  the  conundrums  and  contradictions  which  seemed

intractable  so  long  as  we  were  only  acquainted  with  the  manifest

content.

   In the first chapter I have given a detailed account of the views of

the authorities on the relation of dreams with waking life and on the

origin of the material of dreams. No doubt, too, my readers will recall

the three characteristics of memory in dreams, which have been so

often remarked on but which have never been explained:

      (1)  Dreams  show  a  clear  preference  for  the  impressions  of  the

immediately preceding days. Cf. Robert, Strümpell, Hildebrandt and

Hallam and Weed.

      (2)  They  make  their  selection  upon  different  principles  from  our

waking  memory,  since  they  do  not  recall  what  is  essential  and

important but what is subsidiary and unnoticed.

      (3)  They  have  at  their  disposal  the  earliest  impressions  of  our

childhood and even bring up details from that period of our life which,

once  again,  strike  us  as  trivial  and  which  in  our  waking  state  we

believe to have been long since forgotten.¹

   All these peculiarities shown by dreams in their choice of material

have, of course, only been studied by earlier writers in connection with

their manifest content.

 

   ¹ The view adopted by Robert that the purpose of dreams is to unburden our memory of the

useless impressions of daytime is plainly no longer tenable if indifferent memory images from
our  childhood  appear  at  all  frequently  in  dreams.  Otherwise  we  could  only  conclude  that
dreams perform their function most inadequately.

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        656

 

                                          (A)

 

                  RECENT AND INDIFFERENT MATERIAL IN DREAMS

 

   If I examine my own experience on the subject of the origin of the

elements  included  in  the  content  of  dreams,  I  must  begin  with  an

assertion that in every dream it is possible to find a point of contact

with the experiences of the previous day. This view is confirmed by

every  dream  that  I  look  into,  whether  my  own  or  anyone  else’s.

Bearing this fact in mind, I am able, on occasion, to begin a dream’s

interpretation by looking for the event of the previous day which set it

in motion; in many instances, indeed, this is the easiest method. In the

two dreams which I have analysed in detail in my last chapters (the

dream of Irma’s injection and the dream of my uncle with a yellow

beard)  the  connection  with  the  previous  day  is  so  obvious  as  to

require no further comment. But in order to show the regularity with

which such a connection can be traced, I will go through the records of

my own dreams and give some instances. I shall only quote enough of

the dream to indicate the source we are looking for:

 

        (1) I  was  visiting  a  house  into  which  I  had  difficulty  in  gaining

admittance . . .; in the meantime I kept a lady WAITING.

    Source: I had had a conversation with a female relative the evening

before  in  which  I  had  told  her  that  she  would  have  to wait  for  a

purchase she wanted to make till . . . etc.

    (2) I had written a MONOGRAPH on certain (indistinct) species of plant.

       Source:  That  morning  I  had  seen  a monograph  on  the  genus

Cyclamen in the window of a book-shop.

    (3) I saw two women in the street, A MOTHER AND DAUGHTER, the latter

of whom was a patient of mine.

       Source:  One  of  my  patients  had  explained  to  me  the  previous

evening  the  difficulties  her mother  was  putting  in  the  way  of  her

continuing her treatment.

    (4) I took out a subscription in S. and R.’s bookshop for a periodicalcosting TWENTY FLORINS a year.

    Source: My wife had reminded me the day before that I still owed

her twenty florins for the weekly household expenses.

        (5) I  received  a COMMUNICATION from  the  Social  Democratic

COMMITTEE, treating me as though I were a MEMBER.

    Source: I had received communications simultaneously from the

Liberal Election Committee and from the Council of the Humanitarian

League, of which latter body I was in fact a member.

    (6) A man standing on A CLIFF IN THE MIDDLE OF THE SEA, IN THE STYLE OF

BÖCKLIN.

    Source: Dreyfus on the Ile di Diable; I had had news at the same

time from my relatives in England, etc.

 

   The question may be raised whether the point of contact with the

dream is invariably the events of the immediately preceding day or

whether it may go back to impressions derived from a rather more

extensive  period  of  the  most  recent  past.  It  is  unlikely  that  this

question involves any matter of theoretical importance; nevertheless I

am inclined to decide in favour of the exclusiveness of the claims of

the day immediately preceding the dream - which I shall speak of as

the ‘dream-day’. Whenever it has seemed at first that the source of a

dream was an impression two or three days earlier, closer enquiry has

convinced me that the impression had been recalled on the previous

day and thus that it was possible to show that a reproduction of the

impression, occurring on the previous day, could be inserted between

the day of the original event and the time of the dream; moreover it

has been possible to indicate the contingency on the previous day

which may have led to the recalling of the older impression.

 

   On the other hand I do not feel convinced that there is any regular

interval  of  biological  significance  between  the  instigating  daytime

impression  and  its  recurrence  in  the  dream.  (Swoboda,  1904,  has

mentioned an initial period of eighteen hours in this connection.)¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1911:] As I have mentioned in a postscript to my first chapter (p. 599 f.),

Hermann Swoboda has made a far-reaching application to the mental field of the biological
periodic  intervals  of  23  and  28  days  discovered  by  Wilhelm  Fliess.  He  has  asserted  in
particular  that  these  periods  determine  the  emergence  of  the  elements  which  appear  indreams. No essential modification in dream-interpretation would be involved if this fact were to
be established; it would merely provide a fresh source of origin of dream-material. I have,
however, recently made some investigations upon my own dreams, to test now far the ‘theory
of  periodicity’  is  applicable  to  them.  For  this  purpose  I  chose  some  specially  outstanding
dream-elements the time of whose appearance in real life could be determined with certainty.

 

                        I. DREAM OF OCTOBER 1ST-2ND, 1910
 
   (Fragment) . . . Somewhere in Italy. Three daughters were showing me some small curios,
as though we were in an antique shop, and were sitting on my lap. I commented on one of the
objects: ‘Why, you got that from me’, and saw plainly before me a small profile relief with the
clear-cut features of Savonarola.
   When had I last seen a portrait of Savonarola? My travel-diary proved that I had been in
Florence on September 4th and 5th. While I was there I thought I would show my travelling
companion the medallion bearing the fanatical monk’s features, let into the pavement of the
Piazza della Signoria, which marks the place where he was burned. I pointed it out to him, I
believe,  on  the  morning  of  the  3rd.  Between  this  impression  and  its  reappearance  in  the
dream 27 + 1 days elapsed - Fliess’s ‘female period’. Unluckily for the conclusiveness of this
example, however, I must add that on the actual ‘dream-day’ I had a visit (for the first time
since my return) from a capable but gloomy-looking medical colleague of mine whom I had
many years before nick-named ‘Rabbi Savonarola’. He introduced a patient to me who was
suffering  from  the  effects  of  an  accident  to  the  Pontebba  express,  in  which  I  myself  had
travelled a week earlier, and my thoughts were thus led back to my recent visit to Italy. The
appearance  in  the  content  of  the  dream  of  the  outstanding  element  ‘Savonarola’  is  thus
accounted  for  by  my  colleague’s  visit  on  the  dream-day;  and  the  interval  of  28  days  is
deprived of its significance.
 
                      II. DREAM OF OCTOBER 10TH-11TH, 1910
 
   I was once more working at chemistry in the University laboratory. Hofrat L. invited me to
come somewhere and walked in front of me in the corridor, holding a lamp or some other
instrument before him in his uplifted hand and with his head stretched forward in a peculiar
attitude,  with  a  clear-sighted  (?  far-sighted)  look  about  him.  Then  we  crossed  an  open
space. . . . (The remainder was forgotten.)
   The most outstanding point in the content of this dream was the way in which Hofrat L. held
the lamp (or magnifying glass ) before him, with his eyes peering into the distance. It was
many years since I had last seen him; but I knew at once that he was only a substitute figure
in the place of someone else, someone greater than he - Archimedes, whose statue stands
near the Fountain of Arethusa at Syracuse in that very attitude, holding up his burning-glass
and peering out towards the besieging army of the Romans. When did I see that statue for the
first (and last) time? According to my diary it was on the evening of September 17th; and
between then and the time of the dream 13 + 10 = 23 days had elapsed - Fliess’s ‘male
period’.
   Unfortunately, when we go into the interpretation of this dream in greater detail, we once
again find that the coincidence loses some of its conclusiveness. The exciting cause of the
dream was the news I received on the dream-day that the clinic, in whose lecture room I was
able by courtesy to deliver my lectures, was shortly to be removed to another locality. I took it
for granted that its new situation would be very out of the way and told myself that in that case
I might just as well not have a lecture room at my disposal at all. From that point my thoughts
must have gone back to the beginning of my career as University Lecturer when I in fact hadno lecture room and when my efforts to get hold of one met with little response from the
powerfully placed Hofrats and Professors. In those circumstances I had gone to L., who at
that time held the office of Dean of the Faculty and who I believed was friendlily disposed to
me, to complain of my troubles. He promised to help me, but I beard nothing more from him.

In the dream he was Archimedes, giving me a pousuv [footing] and himself leading me to the

new locality. Anyone who is an adept at interpretation will guess that the dream-thoughts were
not exactly free from ideas of vengeance and self-importance. It seems clear, in any case,
that without this exciting cause Archimedes would scarcely have found his way into my dream
that night; nor am I convinced that the powerful and still recent impression made on me by the
statue in Syracuse might not have produced its effect after some different interval of time.
 
                        III. DREAM OF OCTOBER 2ND-3rd, 1910
 
   (Fragment) . . . Something about Professor Oser, who had drawn up the menu for me
himself, which had a very soothing effect. . . . (Some more that was forgotten.)
   This dream was a reaction to a digestive disturbance that day, which made me consider
whether I should go to one of my colleagues to have a dietary prescribed for me. My reason
for choosing Oser for that purpose, who had died in the course of the summer, went back to
the death of another University teacher whom I greatly admired, which had occurred shortly
before (on October 1st). When had Oser died? and when had I heard of his death? According
to a paragraph in the papers he had died on August 22nd. I had been in Holland at that time
and had my Vienna newspaper sent on to me regularly; so that I must have read of his death
on  August  24th  or  25th.  But  here  the  interval  no  longer  corresponds  to  either  period.  It
amounts to 7 + 30 + 2 = 39 days or possibly 40 days. I could not recall having spoken or
thought of Oser in the meantime.
   Intervals such as this one, which cannot be fitted into the theory of periodicity without further
manipulation, occur far more frequently in my dreams than intervals which can be so fitted.
The only relation which I find occurs with regularity is the relation which I have insisted upon in
the text and which connects the dream with some impression of the dream-day.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        657

 

   Havelock Ellis, who has also given some attention to this point,

declares that he was unable to find any such periodicity in his dreams

in spite of looking for it. He records a dream of being in Spain and of

wanting to go to a place called Daraus, Varaus or Zaraus. On waking

he could not recall any such place-name, and put the dream on one

side. A few months later he discovered that Zaraus was in fact the

name  of  a  station  on  the  line  between  San  Sebastian  and  Bilbao,

through  which  his  train  had  passed  250  days  before  he  had  the

dream.

 

   I believe, then, that the instigating agent of every dream is to befound among the experiences which one has not yet ‘slept on’. Thus

the relations of a dream’s content to impressions of the most recent

past (with the single exception of the day immediately preceding the

night  of  the  dream)  differ  in  no  respect  from  its  relations  to

impressions dating from any remoter period. Dreams can select their

material from any part of the dreamer’s life, provided only that there is

a train of thought linking the experience of the dream-day (the ‘recent’

impressions) with the earlier ones.

   But why this preference for recent impressions? We shall form some

notion on this point, if we submit one of the dreams in the series I

have just quoted to a fuller analysis. For this purpose I shall choose

the

 

                      DREAM OF THE BOTANICAL MONOGRAPH

 

   I had written a monograph on a certain plant. The book lay before

me and I was at the moment turning over a folded coloured plate.

Bound up in each copy there was a dried specimen of the plant, as

though it had been taken from a herbarium.

 

                                        ANALYSIS

 

   That morning I had seen a new book in the window of a book-shop,

bearing the title The Genus Cyclamen - evidently a monograph on that

plant.

      Cyclamens,  I  reflected,  were  my  wife’s favourite  flowers  and  I

reproached  myself  for  so  rarely  remembering  to bring  her flowers,

which was what she liked. - The subject of ‘bringing flowers’ recalled

an anecdote which I had recently repeated to a circle of friends and

which I had used as evidence in favour of my theory that forgetting is

very often determined by an unconscious purpose and that it always

enables one to deduce the secret intentions of the person who forgets.

A young woman was accustomed to receiving a bouquet of flowers

from her husband on her birthday. One year this token of his affection

failed to appear, and she burst into tears. Her husband came in and

had no idea why she was crying till she told him that to-day was her

birthday.  He  clasped  his  hand  to  his  head  and  exclaimed:  ‘I’m  so

sorry, but I’d quite forgotten. I’ll go out at once and fetch your flowers.’But she was not to be consoled; for she recognized that her husband’s

forgetfulness was a proof that she no longer had the same place in his

thoughts as she had formerly. - This lady, Frau L., had met my wife

two days before I had the dream, had told her that she was feeling

quite well and enquired after me. Some years ago she had come to

me for treatment.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        658

 

      I  now  made  a  fresh  start.  Once,  I  recalled,  I  really had written

something  in  the  nature  of  a monograph  on  a  plant,  namely  a

dissertation on the coca-plant, which had drawn Karl Koller’s attention

to the anaesthetic properties of cocaine. I had myself indicated this

application of the alkaloid in my published paper, but I had not been

thorough enough to pursue the matter further. This reminded me that

on the morning of the day after the dream - I had not found time to

interpret it till the evening - I had thought about cocaine in a kind of

day-dream. If ever I got glaucoma, I had thought, I should travel to

Berlin and get myself operated on, incognito, in my friend’s house, by

a surgeon recommended by him. The operating surgeon, who would

have no idea of my identity, would boast once again of how easily

such operations could be per formed since the introduction of cocaine;

and I should not give the slightest hint that I myself had had a share in

the discovery. This phantasy had led on to reflections of how awkward

it is, when all is said and done, for a physician to ask for medical

treatment for himself from his professional colleagues. The Berlin eye-

surgeon would not know me, and I should be able to pay his fees like

anyone  else.  It  was  not  until  I  had  recalled  this  day-dream  that  I

realized that the recollection of a specific event lay behind it. Shortly

after  Koller’s  discovery,  my  father  had  in  fact  been  attacked  by

glaucoma;  my  friend  Dr.  Königstein,  the  ophthalmic  surgeon,  had

operated on him; while Dr. Koller had been in charge of the cocaine

anaesthesia  and  had  commented  on  the  fact  that  this  case  had

brought  together  all  of  the  three  men  who  had  had  a  share  in  the

introduction of cocaine. 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        659

 

   My thoughts then went on to the occasion when I had last been

reminded  of  this  business  of  the  cocaine.  It  had  been  a  few  days

earlier, when I had been looking at a copy of a Festschrift in which

grateful  pupils  had  celebrated  the  jubilee  of  their  teacher  and

laboratory director. Among the laboratory’s claims to distinction which

were enumerated in this book I had seen a mention of the fact that

Koller had made his discovery there of the anaesthetic properties of

cocaine. I then suddenly perceived that my dream was connected with

an event of the previous evening. I had walked home precisely with

Dr. Königstein and had got into conversation with him about a matter

which never fails to excite my feelings whenever it is raised. While I

was talking to him in the entrance-hall, Professor Gärtner and his wife

had joined us; and I could not help congratulating them both on their

blooming looks. But Professor Gärtner was one of the authors of the

Festschrift I have just mentioned, and may well have reminded me of

it.  Moreover,  the  Frau  L.,  whose  disappointment  on  her  birthday  I

described earlier, was mentioned - though only, it is true, in another

connection - in my conversation with Dr. Königstein.

   I will make an attempt at interpreting the other determinants of the

content of the dream as well. There was a dried specimen of the plant

included in the monograph, as though it had been a herbarium. This

led me to a memory from my secondary school. Our headmaster once

called together the boys from the higher forms and handed over the

school’s herbarium to them to be looked through and cleaned. Some

small worms - book worms - had found their way into it. He does not

seem to have had much confidence in my helpfulness, for he handed

me only a few sheets. These, as I could still recall, included some

Crucifers. I never had a specially intimate contact with botany. In my

preliminary  examination  in  botany  I  was  also  given  a  Crucifer  to

identify - and failed to do so. My prospects would not have been too

bright, if I had not been helped out by my theoretical knowledge. I

went on from the Cruciferae to the Compositae. It occurred to me thatartichokes  were  Compositae,  and  indeed  I  might  fairly  have  called

them my favourite flowers. Being more generous than I am, my wife

often  brought  me  back  these  favourite  flowers  of  mine  from  the

market.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        660

 

   I saw the monograph which I had written lying before me. This again

led me back to something. I had had a letter from my friend in Berlin

the day before in which he had shown his power of visualization: ‘I am

very  much  occupied  with  your  dream-book. I  see  it  lying  finished

before me and I see myself turning over its pages. How much I envied

him his gift as a seer! If only I could have seen it lying finished before

me!

   The folded coloured plate. While I was a medical student I was the

constant victim of an impulse only to learn things out of monographs.

In spite of my limited means, I succeeded in getting hold of a number

of volumes of the proceedings of medical societies and was enthralled

by  their coloured  plates.  I  was  proud  of  my  hankering  for

thoroughness. When I myself had begun to publish papers, I had been

obliged to make my own drawings to illustrate them and I remembered

that one of them had been so wretched that a friendly colleague had

jeered at me over it. There followed, I could not quite make out how, a

recollection from very early youth. It had once amused my father to

hand  over  a  book  with coloured  plates  (an  account  of  a  journey

through Persia) for me and my eldest sister to destroy. Not easy to

justify from the educational point of view!  I had been five years old at

the time and my sister not yet three; and the picture of the two of us

blissfully pulling the book to pieces (leaf by leaf, like an artichoke, I

found  myself  saying)  was  almost  the  only  plastic  memory  that  I

retained from that period of my life. Then, when I became a student, I

had developed a passion for collecting and owning books, which was

analogous  to  my  liking  for  learning  out  of  monographs:  a favourite

hobby. (The idea of ‘favourite’  had  already  appeared  in  connection

with cyclamens and artichokes.) I had become a book-worm. I hadalways, from the time I first began to think about myself, referred this

first passion of mine back to the childhood memory I have mentioned.

Or rather, I had recognized that the childhood scene was a ‘screen

memory’  for  my  later  bibliophile  propensities.¹  And  I  had  early

discovered, of course, that passions often lead to sorrow. When I was

seventeen I had run up a largish account at the bookseller’s and had

nothing  to  meet  it  with;  and  my  father  had  scarcely  taken  it  as  an

excuse that my inclinations might have chosen a worse outlet. The

recollection of this experience from the later years of my youth at once

brought  back  to  my  mind  the  conversation  with  my  friend  Dr.

Königstein.  For  in  the  course  of  it  we  had  discussed  the  same

question  of  my  being  blamed  for  being  too  much  absorbed  in  my

favourite hobbies.

 

   ¹ Cf. my paper on screen memories.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        661

 

   For reasons with which we are not concerned, I shall not pursue the

interpretation of this dream any further, but will merely indicate the

direction in which it lay. In the course of the work of analysis I was

reminded of my conversation with Dr. Königstein, and I was brought to

it from more than one direction. When I take into account the topics

touched  upon  in  that  conversation,  the  meaning  of  the  dream

becomes intelligible to me. All the trains of thought starting from the

dream - the thoughts about my wife’s and my own favourite flowers,

about cocaine, about the awkwardness of medical treatment among

colleagues, about my preference for studying monographs and about

my neglect of certain branches of science such as botany - all of these

trains of thought, when they were further pursued, led ultimately to

one or other of the many ramifications of my conversation with Dr.

Königstein. Once again the dream, like the one we first analysed - the

dream of Irma’s injection - turns out to have been in the nature of a

self-justification, a plea on behalf of my own rights. Indeed, it carried

the subject that was raised in the earlier dream a stage further and

discussed  it  with  reference  to  fresh  material  that  had  arisen  in  theinterval between the two dreams. Even the apparently indifferent form

in which the dream was couched turns out to have had significance.

What it meant was: ‘After all, I’m the man who wrote the valuable and

memorable paper (on cocaine)', just as in the earlier dream I had said

on my behalf: ‘I’m a conscientious and hard-working student.’ In both

cases what I was insisting was: ‘I may allow myself to do this.’ There

is, however, no need for me to carry the interpretation of the dream

any further, since my only purpose in reporting it was to illustrate by

an  example  the  relation  between  the  content  of  a  dream  and  the

experience of the previous day which provoked it. So long as I was

aware only of the dream’s manifest content, it appeared to be related

only to a single event of the dream-day. But when the analysis was

carried  out,  a second  source  of  the  dream  emerged  in  another

experience of the same day. The first of these two impressions with

which the dream was connected was an indifferent one, a subsidiary

circumstance:  I  had  seen  a  book  in  a  shop-window  whose  title

attracted my attention for a moment but whose subject-matter could

scarcely  be  of  interest  to  me.  The  second  experience  had  a  high

degree  of  psychical  importance:  I  had  had  a  good  hour’s  lively

conversation with my friend the eye-surgeon; in the course of it I had

given  him  some  information  which  was  bound  to  affect  both  of  us

closely, and I had had memories stirred up in me which had drawn my

attention  to  a  great  variety  of  internal  stresses  in  my  own  mind.

Moreover, the conversation had been interrupted before its conclusion

because we had been joined by acquaintances.

   We must now ask what was the relation of the two impressions of

the  dream-day  to  each  other  and  to  the  dream  of  the  subsequent

night.  In  the  manifest  content  of  the  dream  only  the indifferent

impression  was  alluded  to,  which  seems  to  confirm  the  notion  that

dreams have a preference for taking up unimportant details of waking

life. All the strands of the interpretation, on the other hand, led to the

important  impression,  to  the  one  which  had  justifiably  stirred  my

feelings. If the sense of the dream is judged, as it can only rightly be,

by its latent content as revealed by the analysis, a new and significant

fact is unexpectedly brought to light. The conundrum of why dreams

are concerned only with worthless fragments of waking life seems to

have lost all its meaning; nor can it any longer be maintained thatwaking life is not pursued further in dreams and that dreams are thus

psychical activity wasted upon foolish material. The contrary is true:

our  dream-thoughts  are  dominated  by  the  same  material  that  has

occupied us during the day and we only bother to dream of things

which have given us cause for reflection in the daytime.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        662

 

   Why is it, then, that, though the occasion of my dreaming was a

daytime  impression  by  which  I  had  been  justifiably  stirred,  I

nevertheless  actually  dreamt  of  something  indifferent?  The  most

obvious explanation, no doubt, is that we are once more faced by one

of  the  phenomena  of  dream-distortion,  which  in  my  last  chapter  I

traced to a psychical force acting as a censorship. My recollection of

the monograph on the genus Cyclamen would thus serve the purpose

of being an allusion to the conversation with my friend, just as the

‘smoked salmon’ in the dream of the abandoned supper-party served

as an allusion to the dreamer’s thought of her woman friend. The only

question is as to the intermediate links which enabled the impression

of the monograph to serve as an allusion to the conversation with the

eye-surgeon,  since  at  first  sight  there  is  no  obvious  connection

between  them.  In  the  example  of  the  abandoned  supper-party  the

connection  was  given  at  once:  ‘smoked  salmon’,  being  the  friend’s

favourite  dish,  was  an  immediate  constituent  of  the  group  of  ideas

which  were  likely  to  be  aroused  in  the  dreamer’s  mind  by  the

personality of her friend. In this later example there were two detached

impressions which at a first glance only had in common the fact of

their  having  occurred  on  the  same  day:  I  had  caught  sight  of  the

monograph in the morning and had had the conversation the same

evening.  The  analysis  enabled  us  to  solve  the  problem  as  follows:

connections  of  this  kind,  when  they  are  not  present  in  the  first

instance, are woven retrospectively between the ideational content of

one impression and that of the other. I have already drawn attention to

the  intermediate  links  in  the  present  case  by  the  words  I  have

italicized in my record of the analysis. If there had been no influencesfrom  another  quarter,  the  idea  of  the  monograph  on  the  Cyclamen

would only, I imagine, have led to the idea of its being my wife’ s

favourite  flower,  and  possibly  also  to  Frau  L.’s  absent  bouquet.  I

scarcely think that these background thoughts would have sufficed to

evoke a dream. As we are told in Hamlet:

 

                                                There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
                                                To tell us this.

 

But, lo and behold, I was reminded in the analysis that the man who

interrupted our conversation was called Gärtner and that I had thought

his wife looked blooming. And even as I write these words I recall that

one of my patients, who bore the charming name of Flora, was for a

time  the  pivot  of  our  discussion.  These  must  have  been  the

intermediate  links,  arising  from  the  botanical  group  of  ideas,  which

formed  the  bridge  between  the  two  experiences  of  that  day,  the

indifferent and the stirring one. A further set of connections was then

established - those surrounding the idea of cocaine, which had every

right to serve as a link between the figure of Dr. Königstein and a

botanical  monograph  which  I  had  written;  and  these  connections

strengthened the fusion between the two groups of ideas so that it

became possible for a portion of the one experience to serve as an

allusion to the other one.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        663

 

   I am prepared to find this explanation attacked on the ground of its

being  arbitrary  or  artificial.  What,  it  may  be  asked,  would  have

happened if Professor Gärtner and his wife with her blooming looks

had not come up to us or if the patient we were talking about had been

called Anna instead of Flora? The answer is simple. If these chains of

thought had been absent others would no doubt have been selected.

It is easy enough to construct such chains, as is shown by the puns

and riddles that people make every day for their entertainment. The

realm of jokes knows no boundaries. Or, to go a stage further, if there

had been no possibility of forging enough intermediate links betweenthe  two  impressions,  the  dream  would  simply  have  been  different.

Another indifferent impression of the same day - for crowds of such

impressions  enter  our  minds  and  are  then  forgotten  -  would  have

taken the place of the ‘monograph’ in the dream, would have linked up

with the subject of the conversation and would have represented it in

the content of the dream. Since it was in fact the monograph and not

any  other  idea  that  was  chosen  to  serve  this  function,  we  must

suppose that it was the best adapted for the connection. There is no

need  for  us  to  emulate  Lessing’s  Hänschen  Schlau  and  feel

astonished that ‘only the rich people own the most money’.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        664

 

 

      A  psychological  process  by  which,  according  to  our  account,

indifferent experiences take the place of psychically significant ones,

cannot fail to arouse suspicion and bewilderment. It will be our task in

a later chapter to make the peculiarities of this apparently irrational

operation more intelligible. At this point we are only concerned with

the effects of a process whose reality I have been driven to assume by

innumerable and regularly recurrent observations made in analysing

dreams. What takes place would seem to be something in the nature

of a ‘displacement’ - of psychical emphasis, shall we say? - by means

of intermediate links; in this way, ideas which originally had only a

weak charge of intensity take over the charge from ideas which were

originally intensely  cathected  and  at  last  attain  enough  strength  to

enable them to force an entry into consciousness. Displacements of

this kind are no surprise to us where it is a question of dealing with

quantities of affect or with motor activities in general. When a lonely

old maid transfers her affection to animals, or a bachelor becomes an

enthusiastic  collector,  when  a  soldier  defends  a  scrap  of  coloured

cloth - a flag - with his life’s blood, when a few seconds’ extra pressure

in a hand-shake means bliss to a lover, or when, in Othello, a lost

handkerchief  precipitates  an  outburst  of  rage  -  all  of  these  are

instances of psychical displacements to which we raise no objection.But  when  we  hear  that  a  decision  as  to  what  shall  reach  our

consciousness and what shall be kept out of it - what we shall think, in

short  -  has  been  arrived  at  in  the  same  manner  and  on  the  same

principles, we have an impression of a pathological event and, if such

things happen in waking life, we describe them as errors in thought. I

will  anticipate  the  conclusions  to  which  we  shall  later  be  led,  and

suggest that the psychical process which we have found at work in

dream-displacement, though it cannot be described as a pathological

disturbance,  nevertheless  differs  from  the  normal  and  is  to  be

regarded as a process of a more primary nature.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        665

 

   Thus the fact that the content of dreams includes remnants of trivial

experiences is to be explained as a manifestation of dream-distortion

(by  displacement);  and  it  will  be  recalled  that  we  came  to  the

conclusion  that  dream-distortion  was  the  product  of  a  censorship

operating in the passage-way between two psychical agencies. It is to

be expected that the analysis of a dream will regularly reveal its true,

psychically significant source in waking life, though the emphasis has

been displaced from the recollection of that source on to that of an

indifferent one. This explanation brings us into complete conflict with

Robert’s theory, which ceases to be of any service to us. For the fact

which Robert sets out to explain is a non-existent one. His acceptance

of  it  rests  on  a  misunderstanding,  on  his  failure  to  replace  the

apparent  content  of  dreams  by  their real  meaning.  And  there  is

another objection that can be raised to Robert’s theory. If it were really

the business of dreams to relieve our memory of the ‘dregs’ of daytime

recollections by a special psychical activity, our sleep would be more

tormented and harder worked than our mental life while we are awake.

For  the  number  of  indifferent  impressions  from  which  our  memory

would need to be protected is clearly immensely large: the night would

not be long enough to cope with such a mass. It is far more likely that

the process of forgetting indifferent impressions goes forward without

the active intervention of our psychical forces.   Nevertheless we must not be in a hurry to take leave of Robert’s

ideas  without  further  consideration.  We  have  still  not  explained  the

fact  that  one  of  the  indifferent  impressions  of  waking  life,  one,

moreover,  dating  from  the  day  preceding  the  dream,  invariably

contributes  towards  the  dream’s  content.  The  connections  between

this impression and the true source of the dream in the unconscious

are not always there ready-made; as we have seen, they may only be

established retrospectively, in the course of the dream-work, with a

view, as it were, to making the intended displacement feasible. There

must  therefore  be  some  compelling  force  in  the  direction  of

establishing  connections  precisely  with  a  recent,  though  indifferent,

impression; and the latter must possess some attribute which makes it

especially suitable for this purpose. For if that were not so, it would be

just as easy for the dream-thoughts to displace their emphasis on to

an unimportant component in their own circle of ideas.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        666

 

   The following observations may help us towards clearing up this

point.  If  in  the  course  of  a  single  day  we  have  two  or  more

experiences suitable for provoking a dream, the dream will make a

combined reference to them as a single whole; it is under a necessity

to  combine  them  into  a  unity.  Here  is  an  instance.  One  afternoon

during the summer I entered a railway compartment in which I found

two acquaintances who were strangers to each other. One of them

was an eminent medical colleague and the other was a member of a

distinguished  family  with  which  I  had  professional  relations.  I

introduced the two gentlemen to each other, but all through the long

journey they conducted their conversation with me as a go-between,

so that I presently found myself discussing various topics alternately,

first with the one and then with the other. I asked my doctor friend to

use his influence on behalf of a common acquaintance of ours who

was just starting a medical practice. The doctor replied that he was

convinced  of  the  young  man’s  capacity,  but  that  his  homely

appearance would make it hard for him to make his way in families ofthe better class; to which I replied that that was the very reason why

he needed influential assistance. Turning to my other fellow-traveller, I

enquired after the health of his aunt - the mother of one of my patients

- who was lying seriously ill at the time. During the night following the

journey I had a dream that the young friend on whose behalf I had

pleaded  was  sitting  in  a  fashionable  drawing-room  in  a  select

company composed of all the distinguished and wealthy people of my

acquaintance and, with the easy bearing of a man of the world, was

delivering a funeral oration on the old lady (who was already dead so

far  as  my  dream  was  concerned),  the  aunt  of  my  second  fellow-

traveller. (I must confess that I had not been on good terms with that

lady.)  Thus  my  dream  had,  once  again,  worked  out  connections

between  the  two  sets  of  impressions  of  the  previous  day  and  had

combined them into a single situation.

   Many experiences such as this lead me to assert that the dream-

work is under some kind of necessity to combine all the sources which

have acted as stimuli for the dream into a single unity in the dream

itself.¹

 

   ¹ The tendency of the dream-work to fuse into a single action all events of interest which

occur simultaneously has already been remarked on by several writers; e.g. Delage (1891,
41) and Delboeuf (1885, 237), who speaks of ‘rapprochement forcé' [‘enforced convergence’].

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        667

 

   I will now proceed to the question of whether the instigating source

of a dream, revealed by analysis, must invariably be a recent (and

significant)  event  or  whether  an  internal  experience,  that  is,  the

recollection of a psychically important event - a train of thought - can

assume  the  role  of  a  dream-instigator.  The  answer,  based  upon  a

large  number  of  analyses,  is  most  definitely  in  favour  of  the  latter

alternative. A dream can be instigated by an internal process which

has,  as  it  were,  become  a  recent  event,  owing  to  thought-activity

during the previous day. This seems to be the appropriate moment for

tabulating the different conditions to which we find that the sources of

dreams are subject. The source of a dream may be either -      (a)  a  recent  and  psychically  significant  experience  which  is

represented in the dream directly,¹ or

   (b) several recent and significant experiences which are combined

into a single unity by the dream,² or

      (c)  one  or  more  recent  and  significant  experiences  which  are

represented  in  the  content  of  the  dream  by  a  mention  of  a

contemporary but indifferent experience,³ or

   (d) an internal significant experience (e.g. a memory or a train of

thought), which is in that case invariably represented in the dream by

                                                            4
a mention of a recent but indifferent impression.

   It will be seen that in interpreting dreams we find one condition

always  fulfilled:  one  component  of  the  content  of  the  dream  is  a

repetition of a recent impression of the previous day. This impression

that is to be represented in the dream may either itself belong to the

circle of ideas surrounding the actual instigator of the dream - whether

as an essential or as a trivial portion of it - or it may be derived from

the  field  of  an  indifferent  impression  which  has  been  brought  into

connection with the ideas surrounding the dream-instigator by more or

less numerous links. The apparent multiplicity of governing conditions

is in fact merely dependent upon the two alternatives of whether a

displacement has or has not taken place; and it is worth pointing out

that  we  are  enabled  by  these  alternatives  to  explain  the  range  of

contrast between different dreams just as easily as the medical theory

is enabled to do by its hypothesis of brain-cells ranging from partial to

total wakefulness. (See above, p. 583 ff.)

 

   ¹ As in the dream of Irma’s injection and in the dream of my uncle with the yellow beard.

   ² As in the young doctor’s funeral oration.

   ³ As in the dream of the botanical monograph.

4
    Most of my patient’s dreams during analysis are of this kind.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        668

 

   It will further be observed, if we consider these four possible cases,

that a psychical element which is significant but not recent (e.g. a trainof thought or a memory)  can be replaced, for the purpose of forming a

dream, by an element which is recent but indifferent, provided only

that two conditions are fulfilled: (1) the content of the dream must be

connected  with  a  recent  experience,  and  (2)  the  instigator  of  the

dream must remain a psychically significant process. Only in one case

- case (a) - are both of these conditions fulfilled by one and the same

impression. It is to be noticed, moreover, that indifferent impressions

which are capable of being used for constructing a dream so long as

they are recent lose that capacity as soon as they are a day (or at the

most  a  few  days)  older.  From  this  we  must  conclude  that  the

freshness of an impression gives it some kind of psychical value for

purposes of dream-construction equivalent in some way to the value

of emotionally coloured memories or trains of thought. The basis of

the value which thus attaches to recent impressions in connection with

the construction of dreams will only become evident in the course of

our subsequent psychological discussions.¹

   In this connection it will be noticed, incidentally, that modifications in

our mnemic and ideational material may take place during the night

unobserved by our consciousness. We are often advised that before

coming to a final decision on some subject we should ‘sleep on it’, and

this advice is evidently justified. But here we have passed from the

psychology of dreams to that of sleep, and this is not the last occasion

on which we shall be tempted to do so.²

 

    ¹ See the passage on ‘transference’ in Chapter VII.

   ² [Footnote added 1919:] An important contribution to the part played by recent material in

the construction of dreams has been made by Pötzl (1917) in a paper which carries a wealth
of implications. In a series of experiments Pötzl required the subjects to make a drawing of
what they had consciously noted of a picture exposed to their view in a tachistoscope. He
then turned his attention to the dreams dreamt by the subjects during the following night and
required them once more to make drawings of appropriate portions of these dreams. It was
shown unmistakably that those details of the exposed picture which had not been noted by
the subject provided material for the construction of the dream, whereas those details which
had been consciously perceived and recorded in the drawing made after the exposure did not
recur in the manifest content of the dream manifest content of the dream. The material that
was taken over by the dream-work was modified by it for the purposes of dream-construction
in  its  familiar  ‘arbitrary’  (or,  more  properly,  ‘autocratic’)  manner.  The  questions  raised  by
Pötzl’s  experiment  go  far  beyond  the  sphere  of  dream-interpretation  as  dealt  with  in  the
present volume. In passing, it is worth remarking on the contrast between this new method of
studying  the  formation  of  dreams  experimentally  and  the  earlier,  crude  technique  for
introducing into the dream stimuli which interrupted the subject’s sleep. 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        669

 

      An  objection,  however,  may  be  raised  which  threatens  to  upset

these  last  conclusions.  If  indifferent  impressions  can  only  find  their

way into a dream provided they are recent, how does it happen that

the content of dreams also includes elements from an earlier period of

life  which  at  the  time  when  they  were  recent  possessed,  to  use

Strümpell’s  words,  no  psychical  value,  and  should  therefore  have

been long since forgotten - elements, that is to say, which are neither

fresh nor psychically significant?

   This objection can be completely dealt with by a reference to the

findings of the psycho-analysis of neurotics. The explanation is that

the displacement which replaces psychically important by indifferent

material (alike in dreaming and in thinking) has in these cases already

taken  place  at  the  early  period  of  life  in  question  and  since  then

become fixed in the memory. These particular elements which were

originally  indifferent  are  indifferent  no  longer,  since  taking  over  (by

means of displacement) the value of psychically significant material.

Nothing that has really remained indifferent can be reproduced in a

dream.

 

   The reader will rightly conclude from the foregoing arguments that I

am  asserting  that  there  are  no  indifferent  dream-instigators  -  and

consequently  no  ‘innocent’  dreams.  Those  are,  in  the  strictest  and

most absolute sense, my opinions - if I leave on one side the dreams

of children and perhaps brief reactions in dreams to sensations felt

during the night. Apart from this, what we dream is either manifestly

recognizable as psychically significant, or it is distorted and cannot be

judged  till  the  dream  has  been  interpreted,  after  which  it  will  once

more be found to be significant. Dreams are never concerned with

trivialities; we do not allow our sleep to be disturbed by trifles.¹ The

apparently innocent dreams turn out to be quite the reverse when we

take the trouble to analyse them. They are, if I may say so, wolves in

sheep’s clothing. Since this is another point upon which I may expect

to be contradicted, and since I am glad of an opportunity of showingdream-distortion at work, I will select a number of ‘innocent’ dreams

from my records and submit them to analysis.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] Havelock Ellis, a friendly critic of this book, writes (1911, 166):

‘This is the point at which many of us are no longer able to follow Freud.’ Havelock Ellis has
not, however, carried out any analyses of dreams and refuses to believe how impossible it is
to base one’s judgement on their manifest content.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        670

 

                                            I

 

      An  intelligent  and  cultivated  young  woman,  reserved  and

undemonstrative in her behaviour, reported as follows: I dreamt that I

arrived too late at the market and could get nothing either from the

butcher or from the woman who sells vegetables. An innocent dream,

no doubt; but dreams are not as simple as that, so I asked to be told it

in greater detail. She thereupon gave me the following account. She

dreamt she was going to the market with her cook, who was carrying

the basket. After she had asked for something, the butcher said to her:

‘That’s  not  obtainable  any  longer’,  and  offered  her  something  else,

adding ‘This is good too.’ She rejected it and went on to the woman

who sells vegetables, who tried to get her to buy a peculiar vegetable

that was tied up in bundles but was of a black colour. She said: ‘I don’t

recognize that; I won’t take it.’

      The  dream’s  connection  with  the  previous  day  was  quite

straightforward. She had actually gone to the market too late and had

got nothing. The situation seemed to shape itself into the phrase ‘Die

Flieschbank  war  schon  gescholossen’.  I  pulled  myself  up:  was  not

that, or rather its opposite, a vulgar description of a certain sort of

slovenliness in a man’s dress? However, the dreamer herself did not

use  the  phrase;  she  may  perhaps  have  avoided  using  it.  Let  us

endeavour,  then,  to  arrive  at  an  interpretation  of  the  details  of  the

dream.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams                                                                                        671

 

   When anything in a dream has the character of direct speech, that is

to say, when it is said or heard and not merely thought (and it is easy

as a rule to make the distinction with certainty), then it is derived from

something  actually  spoken  in  waking  life-though,  to  be  sure,  this

something is merely treated as raw material and may be cut up and

slightly  altered  and,  more  especially,  divorced  from  its  context.¹  In

carrying  out  an  interpretation,  one  method  is  to  start  from  spoken

phrases  of  this  kind.  What,  then,  was  the  origin  of  the  butcher’s

remark ‘That’s  not  obtainable  any  longer’?  The  answer  was  that  it

came from me myself. A few days earlier I had explained to the patient

that  the  earliest  experiences  of  childhood  were  ‘not obtainable any

longer as such’, but were replaced in analysis by ‘transferences’ and

dreams.  So I  was  the  butcher  and  she  was  rejecting  these

transferences into the present of old habits of thinking and feeling. -

What, again, was the origin of her own remark in the dream ‘I don’t

recognize that; I won’t take it’? For the purposes of the analysis this

had to be divided up. ‘I don’t recognize that’ was something she had

said the day before to her cook, with whom she had had a dispute; but

at the time she had gone on: ‘Behave yourself properly!’ At this point

there had clearly been a displacement. Of the two phrases that she

had  used  in  the  dispute  with  her  cook,  she  had  chosen  the

insignificant  one  for  inclusion  in  the  dream.  But  it  was  only  the

suppressed one, ‘Behave yourself properly!’ that fitted in with the rest

of the content of the dream: those would have been the appropriate

words to use if someone had ventured to make improper suggestions

and had forgotten ‘to close his meat-shop’. The allusions underlying

the incident with the vegetable-seller were a further confirmation that

our interpretation was on the right track. A vegetable that is sold tied

up in bundles (lengthways, as the patient added afterwards) and is

also black, could only be a dream-combination of asparagus and black

(Spanish) radishes. No knowledgeable person of either sex will ask for

an interpretation of asparagus. But the other vegetable - ’Schwarzer

Retting’ - can be taken as an exclamation - ‘Schwarzer rett’ dich!’ -,

and accordingly it too seems to hint at the same sexual topic which we

suspected at the very beginning, when we felt inclined to introduce thephrase about the meat-shop being closed into the original account of

the  dream.  We  need  not  enquire  now  into  the  full  meaning  of  the

dream. So much is quite clear: it had a meaning and that meaning

was far from innocent.²

 

   ¹ See my discussion of speeches in dreams in my chapter on the dream-work. Only one

writer on the subject seems to have recognized the source of spoken phrases occurring in
dreams, namely Delboeuf (1885, 226), who compares them to clichés.

   ² If anyone is curious to know, I may add that the dream concealed a phantasy of my

behaving in an improper and sexually provocative manner, and of the patient putting up a
defence against my conduct. If this interpretation seems incredible, I need only point to the
numerous instances in which doctors have charges of the same kind brought against them by
hysterical women. But in such cases the phantasy emerges into consciousness undisguised
and in the form of a delusion, instead of being distorted and appearing only as a dream. -
[Added  1909:]  This  dream  occurred  at  the  beginning  of  the  patient’s  psycho-analytic
treatment. It was not until later that I learnt that she had been repeating in it the initial trauma
from which her neurosis had arisen. I have since then come across the same behaviour in
other patients; having been exposed to a sexual assault in their childhood, they seek, as it
were, to bring about a repetition of it in their dreams.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        672

 

                                            II

 

   Here is another innocent dream, dreamt by the same patient, and in

a sense a counterpart to the last one. Her husband asked her: ‘Don’t

you think we ought to have the piano tuned?’ And she replied: ‘It’s not

worth while; the hammers need reconditioning in any case.’

   Once again this was a repetition of a real event of the previous day.

Her husband had asked this question and she had made some such

reply. But what was the explanation of her dreaming it?  She told me

that the piano was a disgusting old box, that it made an ugly noise,

that it had been in her husband’s possession before their marriage,¹

and so on. But the key to the solution was only given by her words:

‘It’s not worth while.’ These were derived from a visit she had paid the

day before to a woman friend. She had been invited to take off her

jacket, but had refused with the words: ‘Thank you, but its not worth

while;  I  can  only  stop  a  minute.’  As  she  was  telling  me  this,  I

recollected that during the previous day’s analysis she had suddenlycaught hold of her jacket, one of the buttons having come undone.

Thus it was as though she were saying: ‘Please don’t look; its not

worth while.’ In the same way the ‘box’ [‘Kasten’] was a substitute for a

‘chest’ [‘Bruskasten’]; and the interpretation of the dream led us back

at once to the time of her physical development at puberty, when she

had begun to be dissatisfied by her figure. We can hardly doubt that it

led  back  to  still  earlier  times,  if  we  take  the  word  ‘disgusting’  into

account and the ‘ugly noise’, and if we remember how often - both in

double  entendres  and  in  dreams  -  the  lesser  hemispheres  of  a

woman’s body are used, whether as contrasts or as substitutes, for

the larger ones.

 

   ¹ This last was a substitute for the opposite idea, as the course of the analysis will make

clear.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        673

 

                                            III

 

   I will interrupt this series for a moment and insert a short innocent

dream produced by a young man. He dreamt that he was putting on

his  winter  overcoat  once  more,  which  was  a  dreadful  thing.  The

ostensible reason for this dream was a sudden return of cold weather.

If we look more closely, however, we shall notice that the two short

pieces that make up the dream are not in complete harmony. For what

could there be ‘dreadful’ about putting on a heavy or thick overcoat in

cold weather?  Moreover, the innocence of the dream was decidedly

upset  by  the  first  association  that  occurred  to  the  dreamer  in  the

analysis. He recalled that a lady confided to him the day before that

her youngest child owed its existence to a torn condom. On that basis

he  was  able  to  reconstruct  his  thoughts.  A  thin  condom  was

dangerous,  but  a  thick  one  was  bad.  The  condom  was  suitably

represented as an overcoat, since one slips into both of them. But an

occurrence  such  as  the  lady  described  to  him  would  certainly  be

‘dreadful’ for an unmarried man.

   And now let us return to our innocent lady dreamer. 

                                            IV

 

   She was putting a candle into a candlestick; but the candle broke so

that it wouldn’t stand up properly. The girls at her school said she was

clumsy; but the mistress said it was not her fault.

   Yet again the occasion for the dream was a real event. The day

before she had actually put a candle into a candlestick, though it did

not break. Some transparent symbolism was being used in this dream.

A candle is an object which can excite the female genitals; and, if it is

broken, so that it cannot stand up properly, it means that the man is

impotent.  (‘It  was  not  her  fault.’)  But  could  a  carefully  brought-up

young woman, who had been screened from the impact of anything

ugly, have known that a candle might be put to such a use? As it

happened, she was able to indicate how it was that she obtained this

piece of knowledge. Once when they were in a rowing boat on the

Rhine, another boat had passed them with some students in it. They

were in high spirits and were singing, or rather shouting, a song:

 

                                                                Wenn die Königin von Schweden,
                                                                Bei geschlossenen Fensterläden

                                                                Mit Apollokerzen . . .¹

 

She either failed to hear or did not understand the last word and had

to get her husband to give her the necessary explanation. The verse

was replaced in the content of the dream by an innocent recollection

of some job she had done clumsily when she was at school, and the

replacement  was  made  possible  owing  to  the  common  element  of

closed shutters. The connection between the topics of masturbation

and impotence is obvious enough. The ‘Apollo’ in the latent content of

this  dream  linked  it  with  an  earlier  one  in  which  the  virgin  Pallas

figured. Altogether far from innocent.

 

   ¹ [‘When the Queen of Sweden, behind closed shutters, . . . with Apollo candles.’ The

missing word is ‘onaniert’ (‘masturbates’).]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        674 

 

                                            V

 

   In order that we may not be tempted to draw conclusions too easily

from dreams as to the dreamer’s actual life, I will add one more dream

of the same patient’s, which once more has an innocent appearance.

‘I dreamt,’ she said, ‘of what I really did yesterday: I filled a small trunk

so full of books that I really had difficulty in shutting it and I dreamt

what really happened.’  In  this  instance  the  narrator  herself  laid  the

chief emphasis on the agreement between the dream and reality. All

such  judgements  on  a  dream  and  comments  upon  it,  though  they

have made themselves a place in waking thought, invariably form in

fact part of the latent content of the dream, as we shall find confirmed

by other examples later on. What we were being told, then, was that

what  the  dream  described  had  really  happened  the  day  before.  It

would take up too much space to explain how it was that the idea

occurred  to  me  of  making  use  of  the  English  language  in  the

interpretation. It is enough to say that once again what was in question

was a little ‘box’ (cf. the dream of the dead child in the ‘case’, p. 649 f.)

which was so full that nothing more could get into it. Anyhow, nothing

bad this time.

 

   In all of these ‘innocent’ dreams the motive for the censorship is

obviously  the  sexual  factor.  This,  however,  is  a  subject  of  prime

importance which I must leave on one side.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        675

 

                                          (B)

 

                  INFANTILE MATERIAL AS A SOURCE OF DREAMS

 

   Like every other writer on the subject, with the exception of Robert, I

have pointed out as a third peculiarity of the content of dreams that it

may include impressions which date back to earliest childhood, andwhich  seem  not  to  be  accessible  to  waking  memory.  It  is  naturally

hard to determine how rarely or how frequently this occurs, since the

origin  of  the  dream  elements  in  question  is  not  recognized  after

waking.  Proof  that  what  we  are  dealing  with  are  impressions  from

childhood  must  therefore  be  established  by  external  evidence  and

there is seldom an opportunity for doing this. A particularly convincing

example is that given by Maury of the man who determined one day to

revisit  his  old  home  after  an  absence  of  more  than  twenty  years.

During  the  night  before  his  departure  he  dreamt  that  he  was  in  a

totally unknown place and there met an unknown man in the street

and  had  a  conversation  with  him.  When  he  reached  his  home,  he

found  that  the  unknown  place  was  a  real  one  in  the  immediate

neighbourhood of his native town, and the unknown man in the dream

turned out to be a friend of his dead father’s who was still living there.

This was conclusive evidence that he had seen both the man and the

place in his childhood. This dream is also to be interpreted as a dream

of impatience like that of the girl with the concert-ticket in her pocket

(p. 647 f.), that of the child whose father had promised to take her on

an  excursion  to  the  Hameau  (cf. p.  628  f.),  and  similar  ones.  The

motives  which  led  the  dreamers  to  reproduce  one  particular

impression  from  their  childhood  rather  than  any  other  cannot,  of

course, be discovered without an analysis.

   Someone who attended a course of lectures of mine and boasted

that his dreams very seldom underwent distortion reported to me that

not long before he had dreamt of seeing his former tutor in bed with

the nurse who had been with his family till his eleventh year. In the

dream he had identified the locality where the scene occurred. His

interest had been aroused and he had reported the dream to his elder

brother,  who  had  laughingly  confirmed  the  truth  of  what  he  had

dreamt. His brother remembered it very well, as he had been six years

old at the time. The lovers had been in the habit of making the elder

boy  drunk  with  beer,  whenever  circumstances  were  favourable  for

intercourse during the night. The younger boy - the dreamer - who

was then three years old and slept in the room with the nurse, was not

regarded as an impediment.

   There is another way in which it can be established with certainty

without  the  assistance  of  interpretation  that  a  dream  containselements from childhood. This is where the dream is of what has been

called  the  ‘recurrent’  type:  that  is  to  say,  where  a  dream  was  first

dreamt in childhood and then constantly reappears from time to time

during adult sleep. I am able to add to the familiar examples of such

dreams  a  few  from  my  own  records,  though  I  have  never  myself

experienced  one.  A  physician  in  his  thirties  told  me  that  from  the

earliest  days  of  his  childhood  to  the  present  time  a  yellow  lion

frequently  appeared  in  his  dreams;  he  was  able  to  give  a  minute

description of it. This lion out of his dreams made its appearance one

day in bodily form, as a china ornament that had long disappeared.

The young man then learnt from his mother that this object had been

his  favourite  toy  during  his  early  childhood,  though  he  himself  had

forgotten the fact.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        676

 

 

   If we turn now from the manifest content of dreams to the dream-

thoughts which only analysis uncovers, we find to our astonishment

that  experiences  from  childhood  also  play  a  part  in  dreams  whose

content would never have led one to suppose it. I owe a particularly

agreeable  and  instructive  example  of  a  dream  of  this  kind  to  my

respected  colleague  of  the  yellow  lion.  After  reading  Nansen’s

narrative of his polar expedition, he had a dream of being in a field of

ice and of giving the gallant explorer galvanic treatment for an attack

of sciatica from which he was suffering. In the course of analysing the

dream, he thought of a story dating from his childhood, which alone,

incidentally,  made  the  dream  intelligible.  One  day,  when  he  was  a

child of three or four, he had heard the grown-ups talking of voyages

of  discovery  and  had  asked  his  father  whether  that  was  a  serious

illness. He had evidently confused ‘Reisen’ [‘voyages’] with ‘Reissen’

[‘gripes’], and his brothers and sisters saw to it that he never forgot

this embarrassing mistake.

      There  was  a  similar  instance  of  this  when,  in  the  course  of  my

analysis of the dream of the monograph on the genus Cyclamen, Istumbled upon the childhood memory of my father, when I was a boy

of five, giving me a book illustrated with coloured plates to destroy. It

may perhaps be doubted whether this memory really had any share in

determining the form taken by the content of the dream or whether it

was not rather that the process of analysis built up the connection

subsequently.  But  the  copious  and  intertwined  associative  links

warrant  our  accepting  the  former  alternative:  cyclamen  -  favourite

flower - favourite food - artichokes; pulling to pieces like an artichoke,

leaf by leaf (a phrase constantly ringing in our ears in relation to the

piecemeal  dismemberment  of  the  Chinese  Empire)  -  herbarium  -

book-worms, whose favourite food is books. Moreover I can assure

my readers that the ultimate meaning of the dream, which I have not

disclosed, is intimately related to the subject of the childhood scene.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        677

 

 

   In the case of another group of dreams, analysis shows us that the

actual wish which instigated the dream, and the fulfilment of which is

represented by the dream, is derived from childhood; so that, to our

surprise, we find the child and the child’s impulses still living on in the

dream.

   At this point I shall once more take up the interpretation of a dream

which we have already found instructive - the dream of my friend R.

being  my  uncle.  We  have  followed  its  interpretation  to  the  point  of

recognizing clearly as one of its motives my wish to be appointed to a

professorship; and we explained the affection I felt in the dream for my

friend R. as a product of opposition and revolt against the slanders

upon my two colleagues which were contained in the dream-thoughts.

The dream was one of my own; I may therefore continue its analysis

by saying that my feelings were not yet satisfied by the solution that

had so far been reached. I knew that my waking judgement upon the

colleagues who were so ill-used in the dream-thoughts would have

been a very different one; and the force of my wish not to share their

fate  in  the  matter  of  the  appointment  struck  me  as  insufficient  toexplain the contradiction between my waking and dreaming estimates

of them. If it was indeed true that my craving to be addressed with a

different  title  was  as  strong  as  all  that,  it  showed  a  pathological

ambition which I did not recognize in myself and which I believed was

alien to me. I could not tell how other people who believed they knew

me  would  judge  me  in  this  respect.  It  might  be  that  I  was  really

ambitious; but, if so, my ambition had long ago been transferred to

objects quite other than the title and rank of professor extraordinarius.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        678

 

   What, then, could have been the origin of the ambitiousness which

produced the dream in me? At that point I recalled an anecdote I had

often heard repeated in my childhood. At the time of my birth an old

peasant-woman had prophesied to my proud mother that with her first-

born child she had brought a great man into the world. Prophecies of

this kind must be very common: there are so many mothers filled with

happy expectations and so many old peasant-women and others of

the kind who make up for the loss of their power to control things in

the  present  world  by  concentrating  it  on  the  future.  Nor  can  the

prophetess have lost anything by her words. Could this have been the

source of my thirst for grandeur? But that reminded me of another

experience,  dating  from  my  later  childhood,  which  provided  a  still

better explanation. My parents had been n the habit, when I was a boy

of eleven or twelve, of taking me with them to the Prater. One evening,

while  we  were  sitting  in  a  restaurant  there,  our  attention  had  been

attracted by a man who was moving from one table to another and, for

a small consideration, improvising a verse upon any topic presented to

him. I was despatched to bring the poet to our table and he showed

his  gratitude  to  the  messenger.  Before  enquiring  what  the  chosen

topic was to be, he had dedicated a few lines to myself; and he had

been  inspired  to  declare  that  I  should  probably  grow  up  to  be  a

Cabinet Minister. I still remembered quite well what an impression this

second  prophecy  had  made  on  me.  Those  were  the  days  of  the

‘Bürger’ Ministry. Shortly before, my father had brought home portraitsof  these  middle-class  professional  men  -  Herbst,  Giskra,  Unger,

Berger  and  the  rest  -  and  we  had  illuminated  the  house  in  their

honour. There had even been some Jews among them. So henceforth

every  industrious  Jewish  schoolboy  carried  a  Cabinet  Minister’s

portfolio in his satchel. The events of that period no doubt had some

bearing  on  the  fact  that  up  to  a  time  shortly  before  I  entered  the

University it had been my intention to study Law; it was only at the last

moment  that  I  changed  my  mind.  A  ministerial  career  is  definitely

barred to a medical man. But now to return to my dream. It began to

dawn  on  me  that  my  dream  had  carried  me  back  from  the  dreary

present to the cheerful hopes of the days of the ‘Bürger’ Ministry, and

that the wish that it had done its best to fulfil was one dating back to

those times. In mishandling my two learned and eminent colleagues

because they were Jews, and in treating the one as a simpleton and

the other as a criminal, I was behaving as though I were the Minister, I

had  put  myself  in  the  Minister’s  place.  Turning  the  tables  on  His

Excellency with a vengeance! He had refused to appoint me professor

extraordinarius and I had retaliated in the dream by stepping into his

shoes.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        679

 

 

   In another instance it became apparent that, though the wish which

instigated  the  dream  was  a  present-day  one,  it  had  received  a

powerful  reinforcement  from  memories  that  stretched  far  back  into

childhood. What I have in mind is a series of dreams which are based

upon a longing to visit Rome. For a long time to come, no doubt, I

shall have to continue to satisfy that longing in my dreams: for at the

season of the year when it is possible for me to travel, residence in

Rome must be avoided for reasons of health.¹ For instance, I dreamt

once that I was looking out of a railway-carriage window at the Tiber

and  the  Ponte  Sant’  Angelo.  The  train  began  to  move  off,  and  it

occurred to me that I had not so much as set foot in the city. The view

that I had seen in my dream was taken from a well-known engravingwhich I had caught sight of for a moment the day before in the sitting-

room of one of my patients. Another time someone led me to the top

of a hill and showed me Rome half-shrouded in mist; it was so far

away that I was surprised at my view of it being so clear. There was

more in the content of this dream than I feel prepared to detail; but the

theme of ‘the promised land seen from afar’ was obvious in it. The

town which I saw in this way for the first time, shrouded in mist, was -

Lübeck, and the prototype of the hill was - at Gleichenberg. In a third

dream I had at last got to Rome, as the dream itself informed me; but I

was disappointed to find that the scenery was far from being of an

urban character. There was a narrow stream of dark water; on one

side of it were black cliffs and on the other meadows with big white

flowers.  I  noticed  a  Herr  Zucker  (whom  I  knew  slightly) and

determined to ask him the way to the city. I was clearly making a vain

attempt  to  see  in  my  dream  a  city  which  I  had  never  seen  in  my

waking life. Breaking up the landscape in the dream into its elements,

I found that the white flowers took me to Ravenna, which I have visited

and which, for a time at least, superseded Rome as capital of Italy. In

the  marshes  round  Ravenna  we  found  the  loveliest  water-lilies

growing in black water. Because we had had such difficulty in picking

them out of the water, the dream made them grow in meadows like

the narcissi at our own Aussee. The dark cliff, so close to the water,

reminded me vividly of the valley of the Tepl near Karlsbad. ‘Karlsbad’

enabled  me  to  explain  the  curious  detail  of  my  having  asked  Herr

Zucker  the  way.  The  material  out  of  which  the  dream  was  woven

included at this point two of those facetious Jewish anecdotes which

contain so much profound and often bitter worldly wisdom and which

we so greatly enjoy quoting in our talk and letters. Here is the first one:

the ‘constitution’ story. An impecunious Jew had stowed himself away

without a ticket in the fast train to Karlsbad. He was caught, and each

time tickets were inspected he was taken out of the train and treated

more and more severely. At one of the stations on his via dolorosa he

met an acquaintance, who asked him where he was travelling to. ‘To

Karlsbad’, was his reply, ‘if my constitution can stand it.’ My memory

then passed on to another story: of a Jew who could not speak French

and had been recommended when he was in Paris to ask the way to

the rue Richelieu. Paris itself had for many long years been anothergoal of my longings; and the blissful feelings with which I first set foot

on its pavement seemed to me a guarantee that others of my wishes

would be fulfilled as well. ‘Asking the way’, moreover, was a direct

allusion  to  Rome,  since  it  is  well  known  that  all  roads  lead  there.

Again, the name Zucker was once more an allusion to Karlsbad; for

we are in the habit of prescribing treatment there for anyone suffering

from the constitutional complaint of diabetes. The instigation to this

dream  had  been  a  proposal  made  by  my  friend  in  Berlin  that  we

should meet in Prague at Easter. What we were going to discuss there

would have included something with a further connection with ‘sugar’

and ‘diabetes’.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] I discovered long since that it only needs a little courage to fulfil

wishes  which  till  then  have  been  regarded  as  unattainable;  [added  1925:]  and  thereafter
became a constant pilgrim to Rome.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        680

 

   A fourth dream, which occurred soon after the last one, took me to

Rome once more. I saw a street-corner before me and was surprised

to find so many posters in German stuck up there. I had written to my

friend  with  prophetic  foresight  the  day  before  to  say  that  I  thought

Prague might not be an agreeable place for a German to walk about

in. Thus the dream expressed at the same time a wish to meet him in

Rome instead of in a Bohemian town, and a desire, probably dating

back to my student days, that the German language might be better

tolerated in Prague. Incidentally, I must have understood Czech in my

earliest childhood, for I was born in a small town in Moravia which has

a  Slav  population.  A  Czech  nursery  rhyme,  which  I  heard  in  my

seventeenth year, printed itself on my memory so easily that I can

repeat it to this day, though I have no notion what it means. Thus

there  was  no  lack  of  connections  with  my  early  childhood  in  these

dreams either.

   It was on my last journey to Italy, which, among other places, took

me past Lake Trasimene, that finally - after having seen the Tiber and

sadly turned back when I was only fifty miles from Rome - I discoveredthe way in which my longing for the eternal city had been reinforced by

impressions from my youth. I was in the act of making a plan to by-

pass Rome next year and travel to Naples, when a sentence occurred

to me which I must have read in one of our classical authors:¹ ‘Which

of the two, it may be debated, walked up and down his study with the

greater impatience after he had formed his plan of going to Rome -

Winckelmann,  the  Vice-Principal,  or  Hannibal,  the  Commander-in-

Chief’ I had actually been following in Hannibal’s footsteps. Like him, I

had  been  fated  not  to  see  Rome;  and  he  too  had  moved  into  the

Campagna when everyone had expected him in Rome. But Hannibal,

whom  I  had  come  to  resemble  in  these  respects,  had  been  the

favourite hero of my later school days. Like so many boys of that age,

I had sympathized in the Punic Wars not with the Romans but with the

Carthaginians. And when in the higher classes I began to understand

for the first time what it meant to belong to an alien race, and anti-

semitic feelings among the other boys warned me that I must take up

a definite position, the figure of the semitic general rose still higher in

my esteem. To my youthful mind Hannibal and Rome symbolized the

conflict  between  the  tenacity  of  Jewry  and  the  organization  of  the

Catholic church. And the increasing importance of the effects of the

anti-semitic  movement  upon  our  emotional  life  helped  to  fix  the

thoughts  and  feelings  of  those  early  days.  Thus  the  wish  to  go  to

Rome had become in my dream-life a cloak and symbol for a number

of other passionate wishes. Their realization was to be pursued with

all  the  perseverance  and  single-mindedness  of  the  Carthaginian,

though their fulfilment seemed at the moment just as little favoured by

destiny as was Hannibal’s lifelong wish to enter Rome.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1925:] The author in question must no doubt have been Jean Paul.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        681

 

   At that point I was brought up against the event in my youth whose

power was still being shown in all these emotions and dreams. I may

have been ten or twelve years old, when my father began to take me

with him on his walks and reveal to me in his talk his views uponthings in the world we live in. Thus it was, on one such occasion, that

he told me a story to show me how much better things were now than

they had been in his days. ‘When I was a young man’, he said, ‘I went

for a walk one Saturday in the streets of your birthplace; I was well

dressed, and had a new fur cap on my head. A Christian came up to

me  and  with  a  single  blow  knocked  off  my  cap  into  the  mud  and

shouted: "Jew! get off the pavement!"' ‘And what did you do?’ I asked.

‘I went into the roadway and picked up my cap’, was his quiet reply.

This struck me as unheroic conduct on the part of the big, strong man

who was holding the little boy by the hand. I contrasted this situation

with  another  which  fitted  my  feelings  better:  the  scene  in  which

Hannibal’s father, Hamilcar Barca,¹ made his boy swear before the

household altar to take vengeance on the Romans. Ever since that

time Hannibal had had a place in my phantasies.

   I believe I can trace my enthusiasm for the Carthaginian general a

step further back into my childhood; so that once more it would only

have  been  a  question  of  a  transference  of  an  already  formed

emotional relation on to a new object. One of the first books that I got

hold of when I had learnt to read was Thiers’ history of the Consulate

and Empire. I can still remember sticking labels on the flat backs of my

wooden soldiers with the names of Napoleon’s marshals written on

them. And at that time my declared favourite was already Massena (or

to  give  the  name  its  Jewish  form,  Manasseh).²  (No  doubt  this

preference was also partly to be explained by the fact that my birthday

fell on the same day as his, exactly a hundred years later.) Napoleon

himself lines up with Hannibal owing to their both having crossed the

Alps.  It  may  even  be  that  the  development  of  this  martial  ideal  is

traceable still further back into my childhood: to the times when, at the

age of three, I was in a close relation, sometimes friendly but some

times warlike, with a boy a year older than myself, and to the wishes

which that relation must have stirred up in the weaker of us.

   The deeper one carries the analysis of a dream, the more often one

comes upon the track of experiences in childhood which have played

a part among the sources of that dream’s latent content.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] In the first edition the name of Hasdrubal appeared instead: a

puzzling mistake, which I have explained in my Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901b),
Chapter X (2).   ² [Footnote added 1930:] Incidentally, doubts have been thrown on the Marshal’s Jewish

origin.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        682

 

 

      We  have  already  seen  (on p.  534)  that  a  dream  very  seldom

reproduces recollections in such a way that they constitute, without

abbreviation  or  modification,  the whole  of  its  manifest  content.

Nevertheless there are some undoubted instances of this happening:

and I can add a few more, relating, once more, to childhood scenes.

One  of  my  patients  was  presented  in  a  dream  with  an  almost

undistorted  reproduction  of  a  sexual  episode,  which  was  at  once

recognizable as a true recollection. His memory of the event had, in

fact, never been completely lost in waking life, though it had become

greatly  obscured,  and  its  revival  was  a  consequence  of  work

previously done in analysis. At the age of twelve, the dreamer had

gone to visit a school friend who was laid up in bed, when the latter,

by what was probably an accidental movement, uncovered his body.

At the sight of his friend’s genitals, my patient had been overcome by

some sort of compulsion and had uncovered himself too and caught

hold of the other’s penis. His friend looked at him with indignation and

astonishment; where upon, overcome by embarrassment, he let go.

This  scene  was  repeated  in  a  dream  twenty-three  years  later,

including all the details of his feelings at the time. It was modified,

however, to this extent, that the dreamer assumed the passive instead

of the active role, while the figure of his school-friend was replaced by

someone belonging to his contemporary life.

   It is true that as a rule the childhood scene is only represented in the

dream’s manifest content by an allusion, and has to be arrived at by

an  interpretation  of  the  dream.  Such  instances  when  they  are

recorded, cannot carry much conviction, since as a rule there is no

other  evidence  of  these  childhood  experiences  having  occurred:  if

they date back to a very early age they are no longer recognized as

memories.  The  general  justification  for  inferring  the  occurrence  of

these  childhood  experiences  from  dreams  is  provided  by  a  wholenumber  of  factors  in  psycho-analytic  work,  which  are  mutually

consistent and thus seem sufficiently trustworthy. If I record some of

these inferred childhood experiences torn from their context for the

purposes  of  dream-interpretation,  they  may  perhaps  create  little

impression,  especially  as  I  shall  not  even  be  able  to  quote  all  the

material on which the interpretations were based. Nevertheless I shall

not allow this to deter me from relating them.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        683

 

                                            I

 

   All the dreams of one of my women patients were characterized by

her being ‘rushed’: she would be in a violent rush to get somewhere in

time not to miss a train, and so on. In one dream she was going to call

on a woman friend; her mother told her to take a cab and not to walk;

but  she  ran  instead  and  kept  on  falling  down.  -The  material  which

came up in analysis led to memories of rushing about and romping as

a child. One particular dream recalled the favourite children’s game of

saying a sentence ‘Die Kuh rannte, bies sie fiel’ [‘The cow ran till it

fell’] so quickly that it sounds as though it were a single word - another

rush in fact. All these innocent rushings-about with little girl friends

were remembered because they took the place of other, less innocent

ones.

                                            II

 

   Here is another woman patient’s dream: She was in a big room in

which all sorts of machines were standing, like what she imagined an

orthopaedic institute to be. She was told I had no time and that she

must have her treatment at the same time as five others. She refused,

however, and would not lie down in the bed - or whatever it was - that

was meant for her. She stood in the corner and waited for me to say it

wasn’t true. Meanwhile the others were laughing at her and saying it

was just her way of ‘carrying on.’ - Simultaneously, it was as though

she was making a lot of small squares.

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        684

 

   The first part of the content of this dream related to the treatment

and  was  a  transference  on  to  me.  The  second  part  contained  an

allusion to a scene in childhood. The two parts were linked together by

the mention of the bed.

   The orthopaedic institute referred back to a remark I had made in

which  I  had  compared  the  treatment,  alike  in  its  length  and  in  its

nature,  to  an orthopaedic  one.  When  I  started  her  treatment  I  had

been obliged to tell her that for the time being I had not much time for

her, though later I should be able to give her a whole hour daily. This

had stirred up her old sensitiveness, which is a principal trait in the

character of children inclined to hysteria: they are insatiable for love.

My patient had been the youngest of a family of six children (hence: at

the  same  time  as  five  others)  and  had  therefore  been  her  father’s

favourite; but even so she seems to have felt that her adored father

devoted too little of his time and attention to her. -Her waiting for me to

say it wasn’t true had the following origin. A young tailor’s apprentice

had  brought  her  a  dress  and  she  had  given  him  the  money  for  it.

Afterwards she had asked her husband whether if the boy lost the

money she would have to pay it over again. Her husband, to tease

her, had said that was so. (The teasing in the dream.) She kept on

asking over and over again and waited for him to say after all it wasn’t

true.  It  was  then  possible  to  infer  that  in  the  latent  content  of  the

dream she had had a thought of whether she would have to pay me

twice as much if I gave her twice as much time - a thought which she

felt  was  avaricious  or filthy.  (Uncleanliness  in  childhood  is  often

replaced in dreams by avariciousness for money; the link between the

two is the word ‘filthy’.) If the whole passage about waiting for me to

say, etc., was intended in the dream as a circumlocution for the word

‘filthy’, then her ‘standing in the corner’ and ‘not lying down in the bed’

would fit in with it as constituents of a scene from her childhood: a

scene in which she had dirtied her bed and been punished by being

made to stand in the corner, with a threat that her father would not

love her any more and her brothers and sisters would laugh at her,

and  so  on.  -The small squares  related  to  her  little  niece,  who  hadshown her the arithmetical trick of arranging the digits in nine squares

(I believe this is correct) so that they add up in all directions to fifteen.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        685

 

                                            III

 

      A  man  dreamt  as  follows: He  saw  two  boys  struggling  -  barrel-

maker’s boys, to judge by the implements lying around. One of the

boys threw the other down; the boy on the ground had earrings with

blue stones. He hurried towards the offender with his stick raised, to

chastise  him.  The  latter  fled  for  protection  to  a  woman,  who  was

standing by a wooden fence, as though she was his mother. She was

a  woman  of  the  working  classes  and  her  back  was  turned  to  the

dreamer. At last she turned around and gave him a terrible look so

that he ran off in terror. The red flesh of the lower lids of her eyes

could be seen standing out.

   The dream had made copious use of trivial events of the previous

day. He had in fact seen two boys in the street, one of whom threw the

other down. When he hurried up to stop the fight they had both taken

to  their  heels.  -Barrel-maker’s boys.  This  was  only  explained  by  a

subsequent dream in which he used the phrase ‘knocking the bottom

out of a barrel’. -From his experience he believed that earrings with

blue stones were mostly worn by prostitutes. A line from a well-known

piece of doggerel about two boys then occurred to him: ‘The other boy

was called Marie’ (i.e. was a girl). -The woman standing.  After  the

scene with the two boys he had gone for a walk along the bank of the

Danube and had profited by the loneliness of the spot to micturate

against a wooden fence.  Further  on,  a  respectably  dressed  elderly

lady had smiled at him in a very friendly manner and had wanted to

give  him  her  visiting-card.  Since  the  woman  in  the  dream  was

standing  in  the  same  position  as  he  had  been  in  when  he  was

micturating,  it  must  have  been  a  question  of  a  micturating  woman.

This tallies with her terrible look and the red flesh standing out, which

could only relate to the gaping of the genitals caused by stooping.

This,  seen  in  his  childhood,  reappeared  in  later  memory  as  ‘proudflesh’ - as a wound.

   The dream combined two opportunities he had had as a little boy of

seeing little girls’ genitals: when they were thrown down and when

they  were micturating.  And  from  the  other  part  of  the  context  it

emerged that he had a recollection of being chastised or threatened

by  his  father  for  the  sexual  curiosity  he  had  evinced  on  these

occasions.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        686

 

                                            IV

 

   Behind the following dream (dreamt by an elderly lady) there lay a

whole quantity of childhood memories, combined, as best they might

be, into a single phantasy.

   She went out in a violent rush to do some commissions. In the

Graben  she  sank  down  on  her  knees,  as  though  she  was  quite

broken-down.  A  large  number  of  people  collected  round  her,

especially cab-drivers; but no one helped her up. She made several

vain attempts, and she must at last have succeeded, for she was put

into a cab which was to take her home. Someone threw a big, heavily-

laden basket (like a shopping-basket) in through the window after her.

   This was the same lady who always felt ‘rushed’ in her dreams, just

as she had rushed and romped about when she was a child. The first

scene in the dream was evidently derived from the sight of a horse

fallen  down;  in  the  same  way  the  word  ‘broken-down’  referred  to

horse-racing. In her youth she had ridden horses, and no doubt when

she was still younger she had actually been a horse. The falling down

was related to a memory from very early childhood of the seventeen

year-old son of the house-porter who had fallen down in the street in

an  epileptic  fit  and  been  brought  home  in  a  carriage.  She  had  of

course only heard about this, but the idea of epileptic fits (of the ‘falling

sickness’)  had  obtained  a  hold  on  her  imagination  and  had  later

influenced the form taken by her own hysterical attacks. - If a woman

dreams  of  falling,  it  almost  invariably  has  a  sexual  sense:  she  is

imagining herself as a ‘fallen woman’. The present dream in particularscarcely left any room for doubt, since the place where my patient fell

was  the  Graben,  a  part  of  Vienna  notorious  as  a  promenade  for

prostitutes.  The shopping-basket  [Korb]  led  to  more  than  one

interpretation. It reminded her of the numerous rebuffs [Körbe] which

she  had  dealt  out  to  her  suitors,  as  well  as  of  those  which  she

complained of having later received herself. This also connected with

the fact that no one helped her up, which she herself explained as a

rebuff. The shopping-basket further reminded her of phantasies which

had already come up in her analysis, in which she was married far

beneath her and had to go marketing herself. And lastly it might serve

as the mark of a servant. At this point further childhood recollections

emerged. First, of a cook who had been dismissed for stealing, and

who had fallen on her knees and begged to be forgiven. She herself

had been twelve at the time. Then, of a housemaid who had been

dismissed on account of a love-affair with the family coachman (who

incidentally  married  her  subsequently).  Thus  this  memory  was  also

one of the sources of the coachmen (drivers) in the dream (who, in

contradistinction  to  the  actual  coachman,  failed  to  raise  the  fallen

woman). There remained to be explained the fact of the basket being

thrown  in  after  her  and through  the  window.  This  reminded  her  of

handing in luggage to be sent off by rail, of the country custom of

lovers climbing in through their sweethearts’ window and of other little

episodes from her life in the country: how a gentleman had thrown

some blue plums to a lady through the window of her room, and how

her own younger sister had been scared by the village idiot looking in

through her window. An obscure memory from her tenth year then

began to emerge, of a nurse in the country who had had love-scenes

(which the girl might have seen something of) with one of the servants

in the house and who, along with her lover, had been sent off, thrown

out (the opposite of the dream-image ‘thrown in) - a story that we had

already approached from several other directions. A servant’s luggage

or  trunk  is  referred  to  contemptuously  in  Vienna  as  ‘seven plums:

‘pack up your seven plums and out you go!’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        687 

 

   My records naturally include a large collection of patients’ dreams

the analysis of which led to obscure or entirely forgotten impressions

of childhood, often going back to the first three years of life. But it

would be unsafe to apply any conclusions drawn from them to dreams

in general. The persons concerned were in every instance neurotics

and in particular hysterics; and it is possible that the part played by

childhood scenes in their dreams might be determined by the nature

of their neurosis and not by the nature of dreams. Nevertheless, in

analysing  my  own  dreams  -  and,  after  all,  I  am  not  doing  so  on

account  of  any  gross  pathological  symptoms  -  it  happens  no  less

frequently that in the latent content of a dream I come unexpectedly

upon a scene from childhood, and that all at once a whole series of

my  dreams  link  up  with  the  associations  branching  out  from  some

experience of my childhood. I have already given some instances of

this,  and  I  shall  have  others  to  give  in  a  variety  of  connections.  I

cannot, perhaps, bring this section to a better close than by reporting

one  or  two  dreams  of  mine  in  which  recent  occasions  and  long-

forgotten experiences of childhood came together as sources of the

dream.

 

                                            I

 

   Tired and hungry after a journey, I went to bed, and the major vital

needs began to announce their presence in my sleep; I dreamt as

follows:

   I went into a kitchen in search of some pudding. Three women were

standing in it; one of them was the hostess of the inn and was twisting

something about in her hands, as though she were making Knödel.

She answered that I must wait until she was ready. (These were not

definite spoken words.) I felt impatient and went off with a sense of

injury. I put on an overcoat. But the first I tried on was too long for me.

I took it off, rather surprised to find it was trimmed with fur. A second

one that I put on had had a long strip with a Turkish design let into it. A

stranger with a long face and a short pointed beard came up and tried

to prevent my putting it on, saying it was his. I showed him then that itwas  embroidered  all  over  with  a  Turkish  pattern.  He  asked:  ‘What

have the Turkish (designs, stripes . . .) to do with you?’ But then we

became quite friendly with each other.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        688

 

   When I began analysing this dream, I thought quite unexpectedly of

the first novel I ever read (when I was thirteen, perhaps); as a matter

of fact I began at the end of the first volume. I have never known the

name of the novel or of its author; but I have a vivid memory of its

ending. The hero went mad and kept calling out the names of the

three women who had brought the greatest happiness and sorrow into

his life. One of these names was Pélagie. I still had no notion what this

recollection was going to lead to in the analysis. In connection with the

three women I thought of the three Fates who spin the destiny of man,

and I knew that one of the three women - the inn-hostess in the dream

- was the mother who gives life, and furthermore (as in my own case)

gives  the  living  creature  its  first  nourishment.  Love  and  hunger,  I

reflected, meet at a woman’s breast. A young man who was a great

admirer of feminine beauty was talking once - so the story went - of

the  good-looking  wet-nurse  who  had  suckled  him  when  he  was  a

baby: ‘I’m sorry’, he remarked, ‘that I didn’t make a better use of my

opportunity.’ I was in the habit of quoting this anecdote to explain the

factor of ‘deferred action’ in the mechanism of the psychoneuroses. -

One of the Fates, then, was rubbing the palms of her hands together

as though she was making dumplings: a queer occupation for a Fate,

and  one  that  cried  out  for  an  explanation.  This  was  provided  by

another and earlier memory of my childhood. When I was six years old

and  was  given  my  first  lessons  by  my  mother,  I  was  expected  to

believe that we were all made of earth and must therefore return to

earth. This did not suit me and I expressed doubts of the doctrine. My

mother thereupon rubbed the palms of her hands together - just as

she did in making dumplings, except that there was no dough between

them - and showed me the blackish scales of epidermis produced by

the friction as a proof that we were made of earth. My astonishment atthis ocular demonstration knew no bounds and I acquiesced in the

belief which I was later to hear expressed in the words: ‘Du bist der

Natur einen Tod schuldig.’ [‘Thou owest Nature a death.’]¹ So they

really were Fates that I found in the kitchen when I went into it - as I

had  so  often  done  in  my  childhood  when  I  was  hungry,  while  my

mother, standing by the fire, had admonished me that I must wait till

dinner was ready. - And now for the dumplings - the Knödel! One at

least of my teachers at the University - and precisely the one to whom

I  owe  my  histological  knowledge  (for  instance  of  the epidermis)  -

would infallibly be reminded by the name Knödl of a person against

whom  he  had  been  obliged  to  take  legal  action  for plagiarizing his

writings. The idea of plagiarizing - of appropriating whatever one can,

even though it belongs to someone else - clearly led on to the second

part of the dream, in which I was treated as though I were the thief

who had for some time carried on his business of stealing overcoats in

the lecture-rooms. I had written down the word ‘plagiarizing’, without

thinking about it, because it occurred to me; but now I noticed that it

could form a bridge [Brücke] between different pieces of the dream’s

manifest  content.  A  chain  of  associations  (Pélagie  -  plagiarizing  -

plagiostomes²  or  sharks  [Haifische]  - a  fish’s  swimming-bladder

[Fischblase]) connected the old novel with the case of Knödl and with

the  overcoats,  which  clearly  referred  to  implements  used  in  sexual

technique. (Cf. Maury’s alliterative dreams.) No doubt it was a very

far-fetched and senseless chain of thought; but I could never have

constructed it in waking life unless it had already been constructed by

the dream-work. And, as though the need to set up forced connections

regarded nothing as sacred, the honoured name of Brücke (cf. the

verbal bridge above) reminded me of the Institute in which I spent the

happiest hours of my student life, free from all other desires -

 

                                                So wird’s Euch an der Weisheit Brüsten

                                                Mit jedem Tage mehr gelüsten³

 

- in complete contrast to the desires which were now plaguing me in

my  dreams.  Finally  there  came  to  mind  another  much  respected

teacher - his name, Fleischl [‘Fleisch’ = ‘meat’], like Knödl, sounded

like  something  to  eat  -  and  a  distressing  scene  in  which scales ofepidermis played a part (my mother and the inn-hostess) as well as

madness (the novel) and a drug from the dispensary which removes

hunger: cocaine.

 

   ¹ Both of the emotions that were attached to these childhood scenes - astonishment and

submission to the inevitable - had occurred in a dream which I had had shortly before this one
and which had first reminded me of this event in my childhood.

   ² I have deliberately avoided enlarging upon the plagiostomes; they reminded me of an

unpleasant occasion on which I had disgraced myself in connection with this same University
teacher.

   ³ [‘Thus, at the breasts of Wisdom clinging,

     Thou’lt find each day a greater rapture bringing.’]

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        689

 

   I might pursue the intricate trains of thought further along these lines

and explain fully the part of the dream which I have not analysed; but I

must  desist  at  this  point  because  the  personal  sacrifice  demanded

would be too great. I will only pick out one thread, which is qualified to

lead  us  straight  to  one  of  the  dream-thoughts  underlying  the

confusion.  The  stranger  with  the  long  face  and  pointed  beard  who

tried  to  prevent  my  putting  on  the  overcoat  bore  the  features  of  a

shop-keeper at Spalato from whom my wife had bought a quantity of

Turkish stuffs. He was called Popovic, an equivocal name, on which a

humorous  writer,  Stettenheim,  has  already  made  a  suggestive

comment: ‘He told me his name and blushingly pressed my hand.’

Once again I found myself misusing a name, as I already had done

with Pélagie, Knödl, Brücke and Fleischl. It could scarcely be denied

that  playing  about  with  names  like  this  was  a  kind  of  childish

naughtiness. But if I indulged in it, it was as an act of retribution; for

my own name had been the victim of feeble witticisms like these on

countless  occasions.  Goethe,  I  recalled,  had  remarked  somewhere

upon people’s sensitiveness about their names: how we seem to have

grown into them like our skin. He had said this á propos  of  a  line

written on his name by Herder:

 

                                ‘Der du von Göttern abstammst, von Gothen oder vom Kote.’ -¹ 

                                ‘So seid ihr Götterbilder auch zu Staub.’ ²

 

I noticed that my digression on the subject of the misuse of names

was only leading up to this complaint. But I must break off here. - My

wife’s purchase made at Spalato reminded me of another purchase,

made at Cattaro, which I had been too cautious over, so that I had lost

an opportunity of making some nice acquisitions. (Cf. the neglected

opportunity  with  the  wet-nurse.)  For  one  of  the  thoughts  which  my

hunger introduced into the dream was this: ‘One should never neglect

an opportunity, but always take what one can even when it involves

doing a small wrong. One should never neglect an opportunity, since

life is short and death inevitable.’ Because this lesson of ‘carpe diem’

had among other meanings a sexual one, and because the desire it

expressed did not stop short of doing wrong, it had reason to dread

the censorship and was obliged to conceal itself behind a dream. All

kinds of thoughts having a contrary sense then found voice: memories

of a time when the dreamer was content with spiritual food, restraining

thoughts of every kind and even threats of the most revolting sexual

punishments.

 

   ¹ [`Thou who art the offspring of gods or of Goths or of dung’]

   ² [`So you too, divine figures, have turned to dust!’]

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        690

 

                                            II

 

   The next dream calls for a rather long preamble:

   I had driven to the Western Station to take the train for my summer

holiday at Aussee, but had arrived on the platform while an earlier

train, going to Ischl, was still standing in the station. There I had seen

Count Thun who was once again travelling to Ischl for an audience

with the Emperor. Though it was raining, he had arrived in an open

carriage. He had walked straight in through the entrance for the Local

Trains. The ticket inspector at the gate had not recognized him andhad tried to take his ticket, but he had waved the man aside with a curt

motion of his hand and without giving any explanation. After the train

for Ischl had gone out, I ought by rights to have left the platform again

and returned to the waiting room; and it had cost me some trouble to

arrange matters so that I was allowed to stop on the platform. I had

passed the time in keeping a look-out to see if anyone came along

and tried to get a reserved compartment by exercising some sort of

‘pull’. I had intended in that case to make a loud protest: that is to say

to claim equal rights. Meantime I had been humming a tune to myself

which I recognized as Figaro’s aria from Le Nozze di Figaro:

 

                                                                Se vuol ballare, signor contino,
                                                                Se vuol ballare, signor contino,

                                                                Il chitarino le suonerò¹

 

(It is a little doubtful whether anyone else would have recognized the

tune.)

 

   ¹ [‘If my Lord Count is inclined to go dancing,

       If my Lord Count is inclined to go dancing,
       I’II be quite ready to play him a tune . . .’]

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        691

 

   The whole evening I had been in high spirits and in a combative

mood. I had chaffed my waiter and my cab-driver - without, I hope,

hurting their feelings. And now all kinds of insolent and revolutionary

ideas were going through my head, in keeping with Figaro’s words

and with my recollections of Beaumarchais’ comedy which I had seen

acted by the Comédie français. I thought of the phrase about the great

gentlemen who had taken the trouble to be born, and of the droit du

Seigneur  which  Count  Almaviva  tried  to  exercise  over  Susanna.  I

thought, too, of how our malicious opposition journalists made jokes

over Count Thun’s name, calling him instead ‘Count Nichtsthun’. Not

that I envied him. He was on his way to a difficult audience with the

Emperor,  while I  was  the  real  Count  Do-nothing  -(just  off  on  myholidays. There followed all sorts of enjoyable plans for the holidays.

At this point a gentleman came on to the platform whom I recognized

as a Government invigilator at medical examinations, and who by his

activities  in  that  capacity  had  won  the  flattering  nickname  of

‘Government  bedfellow’.  He  asked  to  be  given  a  first-class  half-

compartment to himself in virtue of his official position, and I heard

one  railwayman  saying  to  another:  ‘Where  are  we  to  put  the

gentleman with the half first-class ticket?’ This, I thought to myself,

was a fine example of privilege; after all I had paid the full first-class

fare.  And  I  did  in  fact  get  a  compartment  to  myself,  but  not  in  a

corridor coach, so that there would be no lavatory available during the

night. I complained to an official without any success; but I got my own

back on him by suggesting that he should at all events have a hole

made in the floor of the compartment to meet the possible needs of

passengers. And in fact I did wake up at a quarter to three in the

morning with a pressing need to micturate, having had the following

dream:

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        692

 

 

   A crowd of people, a meeting of students. - A count (Thun or Taaffe)

was  speaking.  He  was  challenged  to  say  something  about  the

Germans,  and  declared  with  a  contemptuous  gesture  that  their

favourite flower was a colt’s foot, and put some sort of dilapidated leaf

- or rather the crumpled skeleton of a leaf - into his buttonhole. I fired

up  -  so  I  fired  up,¹ though  I  was  surprised  at  my  taking  such  an

attitude.

      (Then,  less  distinctly:) It  was  as  though  I  was  in  the  Aula,  the

entrances were cordoned off and we had to escape. I made my way

through a series of beautifully furnished rooms, evidently ministerial or

public  apartments,  with  furniture  upholstered  in  a  colour  between

brown and violet; at last I came to a corridor, in which a housekeeper

was sitting, an elderly stout woman. I avoided speaking to her, but she

evidently thought I had a right to pass, for she asked whether sheshould accompany me with the lamp. I indicated to her, by word or

gesture, that she was to stop on the staircase; and I felt I was being

very cunning in thus avoiding inspection at the exit. I got downstairs

and found a narrow and steep ascending path, along which I went.

   (Becoming indistinct again) . . . It was as though the second problem

was to get out of the town, just as the first one had been to get out of

the house. I was driving in a cab and had ordered the driver to drive

me to a station. ‘I can’t drive with you along the railway-line itself’, I

said, after he had raised some objection, as though I had overtired

him. It was as if I had already driven with him for some of the distance

one  normally  travels  by  train.  The  stations  were  cordoned  off.  I

wondered  whether  to  go  to  Krems  or  Znaim,  but  reflected  that  the

Court would be in residence there, so I decided in favour of Graz, or

some such place. I was now sitting in the compartment, which was like

a carriage on the Stadtbahn; and in my buttonhole I had a peculiar

plaited, long-shaped object, and beside it some violet-brown violets

made of a stiff material. This greatly struck people. (At this point the

scene broke off.)

   Once more I was in front of the station, but this time in the company

of  an  elderly  gentleman.  I  thought  of  a  plan  for  remaining

unrecognized; and then saw that this plan had already been put into

effect. It was as though thinking and experiencing were one and the

same thing. He appeared to be blind, at all events with one eye, and I

handed him a male glass urinal (which we had to buy or had bought in

town). So I was a sick-nurse and had to give him the urinal because

he was blind. If the ticket-collector were to see us like that, he would

be  certain  to  let  us  get  away  without  noticing  us.  Here  the  man’s

attitude and his micturating penis appeared in plastic form. (This was

the point at which I awoke, feeling a need to micturate.)

 

   The dream as a whole gives one the impression of being in the

nature of a phantasy in which the dreamer was carried back to the

Revolutionary year 1848. Memories of that year had been recalled to

me by the Jubilee in 1898, as well as by a short trip which I had made

to the Wachau, in the course of which I had visited Emmersdorf,² the

place of retirement of the student-leader Fischhof, to whom certain

elements  in  the  manifest  content  of  the  dream  may  allude.  Myassociations then led me to England and to my brother’s house there.

He used often to tease his wife with the words ‘Fifty Years Ago’ (from

the title of one of Lord Tennyson’s poems), which his children used

then  to  correct  to  ‘fifteen  years  ago’.  This  revolutionary  phantasy,

however,  which  was  derived  from  ideas  aroused  in  me  by  seeing

Count  Thun,  was  like  the  façade  of  an  Italian  church  in  having  no

organic relation with the structure lying behind it. But it differed from

those façades in being disordered and full of gaps, and in the fact that

portions of the interior construction had forced their way through into it

at many points.

 

   ¹ This repetition crept into my record of the dream, apparently through inadvertence. I have

let it stand, since the analysis showed that it was significant.

   ² (Footnote added 1925:] This is a mistake, but not a slip this time. I only learnt later that the

Emmersdorf in the Wachau is not to be identified with the place of the same name which was
the refuge of the revolutionary leader Fischhof.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        693

 

   The first situation in the dream was an amalgam of several scenes,

which I can separate out. The insolent attitude adopted by the Count

in the dream was copied from a scene at my secondary school when I

was fifteen  years  old.  We  had  hatched  a  conspiracy  against  an

unpopular and ignorant master, the moving spirit of which had been

one of my school-fellows who since those days seemed to have taken

Henry VIII of England as his model. The leadership in the chief assault

was allotted to me, and the signal for open revolt was a discussion on

the significance of the Danube to Austria (cf. the Wachau). One of our

fellow-conspirators  had  been  the  only  aristocratic  boy  in  the  class,

who,  on  account  of  his  remarkable  length  of  limb,  was  called  ‘the

Giraffe’. He was standing up, like the Count in my dream, having been

taken to task by the school tyrant, the German language master. The

favourite flower and the putting into his buttonhole of something in the

nature of a flower (which last made me think of some orchids which I

had brought the same day for a woman friend and also of a rose of

Jericho)  were  a  striking  reminder  of  the  scene  in  one  ofShakespeare’s historical plays which represented the beginning of the

Wars of the Red and White Roses. (The mention of Henry VIII opened

the way to this recollection.) - From there it was only a short step to

red and white carnations. (Two little couplets, one in German and the

other in Spanish, slipped into the analysis at this point:

 

                                                                Rosen, Tulpen, Nelken,

                                                                alle Blumen welken.¹

 

                                                                Isabelita, no Ilores,

                                                                que se marchitan las flores.²

 

The appearance of a Spanish  couplet  led  back  to Figaro.) Here in

Vienna white carnations had become an emblem of anti-semitism, and

red ones of the Social Democrats. Behind this lay a recollection of a

piece of anti-semitic provocation during a railway journey in the lovely

Saxon  countryside  (cf. Anglo-Saxon).  -The  third  scene  which

contributed to the formation of the first situation in the dream dated

from  my  early  student  days.  There  was  a  discussion  in  a German

students’ club on the relation of philosophy to the natural sciences. I

was a green youngster, full of materialistic theories, and thrust myself

forward to give expression to an extremely one-sided point of view.

Thereupon someone who was my senior and my superior, someone

who  has  since  then  shown  his  ability  as  a  leader  of  men  and  an

organizer of large groups (and who also, incidentally, bears a name

derived  from  the  Animal  Kingdom),  stood  up  and  gave  us  a  good

talking-to: he too, he told us, had fed swine in his youth and returned

repentant to his father’s house. I fired up (as I did in the dream) and

replied boorishly that since I now knew that he had fed swine in his

youth I was no longer surprised at the tone of his speeches. (In the

dream I was surprised at my German-nationalist attitude.) There was

a general uproar and I was called upon from many sides to withdraw

my remarks, but I refused to do so. The man I had insulted was too

sensible to look upon the incident as a challenge, and let the affair

drop.

 

   ¹ [‘Roses, tulips, carnations: every flower fades.’]

   ² [‘Isabelita, do not weep because the flowers fade.’] 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        694

 

   The remaining elements of this first situation in the dream were

derived  from  deeper  layers.  What  was  the  meaning  of  the  Count’s

pronouncement about colt’s foot? To find the answer, I followed a train

of associations: colt’s foot [‘Huflattich’, literally ‘hoof lettuce’] - lettuce -

salad - dog-in-the-manger [‘Salathund’, literally ‘salad dog’]. Here was

a whole collection of terms of abuse: ‘Gir-affe’ [‘Affe’ is the German for

‘ape’],  ‘swine’,  ‘dog’  -  and  I  could  have  arrived  at  ‘donkey’  if  I  had

made  a  detour  through  another  name  and  insulted  yet  another

academic teacher. Moreover, I translated ‘colt’s foot’ - whether rightly

or  wrongly  I  could  not  tell  -  by  the  French  ‘pisse-en-lit’.  This

information was derived from Zola’s Germinal, in which a child was

told to pick some of that plant for salad. The French word for ‘dog’ -

‘chien’  -  reminded  me  of  the  major  function  (‘chier’  in  French,

compared with ‘pisser’ for the minor one). Soon, I thought, I should

have collected examples of impropriety in all three states of matter -

solid, liquid and gaseous; - for this same book, Germinal, which had

plenty to do with the approaching revolution, contained an account of

a very peculiar sort of competition - for the production of a gaseous

excretion  known  by  the  name  of  ‘flatus’.¹  I  now  saw  that  the  path

leading to flatus had been prepared far ahead: from flowers, through

the Spanish  couplet, Isabelita, Isabella  and  Ferdinand, Henry  VIII,

English history, and the Armada which sailed against England, after

whose  defeat  a  medal  was  struck,  bearing  the  inscription  ‘Flavit  et

dissipati sunt’², since the storm-blast had scattered the Spanish fleet. I

had thought, half seriously, of using those words as the heading to the

chapter  on  ‘Therapy’,  if  ever  I  got  so  far  as  producing  a  detailed

account of my theory and treatment of hysteria.

 

   ¹ Not in fact in Germinal but in La terre: a mistake which I only observed after I had

completed the analysis. - Notice the occurrence of the same letters in ‘Huflattich’ [‘colt’s foot’]
and ‘flatus’.

   ² [Footnote added 1925:] An unsolicited biographer, Dr. Fritz Wittels has charged me with

having  omitted  the  name  of  Jehovah  from  the  above  motto.  [Added  1930:]  The  Englishmedallion bears the deity’s name in Hebrew lettering on a cloud in the background. It is so
placed that it can be taken as being part either of the design or of the inscription.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        695

 

   Turning now to the second episode of the dream, I am unable to

deal with it in such detail - out of consideration for the censorship. For

I was putting myself in the place of an exalted personage of those

revolutionary times, who also had an adventure with an eagle [Adler]

and is said to have suffered from incontinence of the bowels, and so

on. I thought to myself that I should not be justified in passing the

censorship at this point, even though the greater part of the story was

told me by a Hofrat (a consiliarius aulicus [court councillor] - cf. Aula).

The  series  of  public  rooms  in  the  dream  were  derived  from  His

Excellency’s saloon carriage, of which I had succeeded in getting a

glimpse.  But  the  ‘rooms’  [Zimmer]  also  meant  ‘women’

[Frauenzimmer],  as  is  often  the  case  in  dreams  -  in  this  instance

‘public women’. In the figure of the housekeeper I was showing my

lack  of  gratitude  towards  a  witty  elderly  lady  and  ill  repaying  her

hospitality and the many good stories that I heard while I was stopping

in her house. -The allusion to the lamp went back to Grillparzer, who

introduced a charming episode of a similar kind, which he had actually

experienced, into his tragedy about Hero and Leander, Des Meeres

und  der  Liebe  Wellen [‘The Waves  of  the  Sea  and  of  Love’]  -  the

Armada and the storm.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1911:] In an interesting paper, Silberer (1910) has tried to show from this

part of my dream that the dream-work can succeed in reproducing not only the latent dream-
thoughts but also the psychical processes that take place during the formation of dreams.
(This  is  what  he  terms  ‘the  functional  phenomenon’.)  [Added  1914:]  But  he  is,  I  think,
overlooking  the  fact  that  ‘the  psychical  processes  that  take  place  during  the  formation  of
dreams’ were, like the rest, part of the material of my thoughts. In this boastful dream I was
evidently proud of having discovered those processes.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        696

    I must also refrain from any detailed analysis of the two remaining

episodes of the dream. I will merely pick out the elements leading to

the two childhood scenes on whose account alone I embarked upon a

discussion of this dream. It will rightly be suspected that what compels

me to make this suppression is sexual material; but there is no need

to rest content with this explanation. After all, there are many things

which  one  has  to  keep  secret  from  other  people  but  of  which  one

makes no secret to oneself; and the question here is not as to why I

am  obliged  to  conceal  the  solution  but  as  to  the  motives  for  the

internal  censorship  which  hid  the  true  content  of  the  dream  from

myself.  I  must  therefore  explain  that  the  analysis  of  these  three

episodes of the dream showed that they were impertinent boastings,

the issue of an absurd megalomania which had long been suppressed

in my waking life and a few of whose ramifications had even made

their way into the dream’s manifest content (e. g. ‘I felt I was being

very  cunning’),  and  which  incidentally  accounted  for  my  exuberant

spirits  during  the  evening  before  I  had  the  dream.  The  boasting

extended to all spheres; for instance, the mention of Graz went back

to the slang phrase ‘What’s the price of Graz? ', which expresses the

self-satisfaction  of  a  person  who  feels  extremely  well-off.  The  first

episode of the dream may also be included among the boastings by

anyone  who  will  bear  in  mind  the  great  Rabelais’  incomparable

account of the life and deeds of Gargantua and his son Pantagruel.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        697

 

   Here is the material relating to the two childhood scenes which I

have promised my readers. I had bought a new trunk for the journey,

of a brownish violet colour. This colour appears more than once in the

dream: the violet-brown violets made of a stiffish material and beside

them  a  thing  known  as  a  ‘Mädchenfänger’  [‘girl-catcher’]  -  and  the

furniture  in  the  ministerial  apartments.  It  is  commonly  believed  by

children that people are struck by anything new. The following scene

from my childhood has been described to me, and my memory of the

description has taken the place of my memory of the scene itself. Itappears that when I was two years old I still occasionally wetted the

bed,  and  when  I  was  reproached  for  this  I consoled  my  father  by

promising to buy him a nice new red bed in N., the nearest town of

any size. This was the origin of the parenthetical phrase in the dream

to the effect that we bought or had to buy the urinal in town: one must

keep one’s promises. (Notice, too, the juxtaposition in symbolism of

the male urinal and the female trunk or box.) This promise of mine

exhibited all the megalomania of childhood. We have already come

across the significant part played in dreams by children’s difficulties in

connection  with  micturition  (cf.  the  dream  reported  on p. 685).  We

have also learned from the psycho-analysis of neurotic subjects the

intimate  connection  between  bed-wetting  and  the  character  trait  of

ambition.

   When I was seven or eight years old there was another domestic

scene, which I can remember very clearly. One evening before going

to sleep I disregarded the rules which modesty lays down and obeyed

the calls of nature in my parents’ bedroom while they were present. In

the course of his reprimand, my father let fall the words: ‘The boy will

come to nothing.’ This must have been a frightful blow to my ambition,

for references to this scene are still constantly recurring in my dreams

and are always linked with an enumeration of my achievements and

successes,  as  though  I  wanted  to  say:  ‘You  see,  I have  come  to

something.’  This  scene,  then,  provided  the  material  for  the  final

episode of the dream, in which - in revenge, of course - the roles were

interchanged. The older man (clearly my father, since his blindness in

one eye referred to his unilateral glaucoma¹ )was now micturating in

front  of  me,  just  as  I  had  in  front  of  him  in  my  childhood.  In  the

reference to his glaucoma I was reminding him of the cocaine, which

had helped him in the operation, as though I had in that way kept my

promise. Moreover, I was making fun of him; I had to hand him the

urinal  because  he  was  blind,  and  I  revelled  in  allusions  to  my

discoveries in connection with the theory of hysteria, of which I felt so

proud.²

 

   ¹ There is another interpretation. He was one-eyed like Odin the father-god. - Odhins Trost.

- The consolation I offered him in the first childhood scene of buying him a new bed.

   ² Here is some further interpretative material. Handing him the glass reminded me of the

story of the peasant at the optician’s, trying glass after glass and still not being able to read. -(Peasant-catcher  [Bauerfänger,  ‘sharper]:  girl-catcher  [Mädchenfänger]  in  the  preceding
episode of the dream.) - The way in which the father in Zola’s La terre was treated among the
peasants after he had grown feeble-minded. -The tragic requital that lay in my father’s soiling
his bed like a child during the last days of his life; hence my appearance in the dream as a
sick-nurse. -’Here it was as though thinking and experiencing were one and the same thing.’
This recalled a strongly revolutionary literary play by Oskar Panizza, in which God the Father
is ignominiously treated as a paralytic old man. In his case will and deed were represented as
one and the same thing, and he had to be restrained from cursing and swearing by one of his
archangels, a kind of Ganymede, because his imprecations would be promptly fulfilled. - My
making plans was a reproach against my father dating from a later period. And indeed the
whole rebellious content of the dream, with its lèse majesté and its derision of the higher
authorities, went back to rebellion against my father. A Prince is known as the father of his
country;  the  father  is  the  oldest,  first,  and  for  children  the  only  authority,  and  from  his
autocratic power the other social authorities have developed in the course of the history of
human civilization - except in so far as the ‘matriarchy’ calls for a qualification of this assertion.
-The phrase ‘thinking and experiencing were one and the same thing’ had a reference to the
explanation of hysterical symptoms, and the ‘male urinal’ belonged in the same connection. I
need not explain to a Viennese the principle of the ‘Gschnas’. It consists in constructing what
appear to be rare, and precious objects out of trivial and preferably comic and worthless
materials (for instance, in making armour out of saucepans, wisps of straw and dinner rolls) -
a favourite pastime at bohemian parties here in Vienna. I had observed that this is precisely
what hysterical subjects do: alongside what has really happened to them, they unconsciously
build up frightful or perverse imaginary events which they construct out of the most innocent
and everyday material of their experience. It is to these phantasies that their symptoms are in
the first instance attached and not to their recollections of real events, whether serious or
equally innocent. This revelation had helped me over a number of difficulties and had given
me particular pleasure. What made it possible for me to refer to this by means of the dream-
element of the ‘ male urinal’ was as follows. I had been told that at the latest ‘Gschnas’-night a
poisoned chalice belonging to Lucrezia Borgia had been exhibited; its central and principal
constituent had been a male urinal of the type used in hospitals.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        698

 

   The two scenes of micturition from my childhood were in any case

closely linked to the topic of megalomania; but their emergence while I

was  travelling  to  Aussee  was  further  assisted  by  the  chance

circumstance that there was no lavatory attached to my compartment

and that I had reason to anticipate the predicament which in fact arose

in the morning. I awoke with the sensations of a physical need. One

might, I think, be inclined to suppose that these sensations were the

actual provoking agent of the dream; but I would prefer to take another

view, namely that the desire to micturate was only called up by the

dream-thoughts. It is quite unusual for me to be disturbed in my sleepby physical needs of any kind, especially at the hour at which I awoke

on this occasion - a quarter to three in the morning. And I may meet a

further objection by remarking that upon other journeys under more

comfortable conditions I have scarcely ever felt a need to micturate

when I have woken up early. But in any case it will do no harm to

leave the point unresolved.

 

   My experiences in analysing dreams have drawn my attention to the

fact that trains of thought reaching back to earliest childhood lead off

even from dreams which seem at first sight to have been completely

interpreted,  since  their  sources  and  instigating  wish  have  been

discovered without difficulty. I have therefore been compelled to ask

myself  whether  this  characteristic  may  not  be  a  further  essential

precondition of dreaming. Stated in general terms, this would imply

that  every  dream  was  linked  in  its  manifest  content  with  recent

experiences  and  in  its  latent  content  with  the  most  ancient

experiences. And I have in fact been able to show in my analysis of

hysteria that these ancient experiences have remained recent in the

proper  sense  of  the  word  up  to  the  immediate  present.  It  is  still

extremely hard to demonstrate the truth of this suspicion; and I shall

have to return in another connection (Chapter VII) to a consideration

of the probable part played by the earliest experiences of childhood in

the formation of dreams.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        699

 

   Of the three characteristics of memory in dreams enumerated at the

beginning  of  this  chapter,  one  -  the  preference  for  non-essential

material in the content of dreams - has been satisfactorily cleared up

by  being  traced  back  to  dream-distortion.  We  have  been  able  to

confirm the existence of the other two - the emphasis upon recent and

upon  infantile  material  -  but  we  have  not  been  able  to  account  for

them on the basis of the motives that lead to dreaming. These two

characteristics inclusion of both recent and infantile material, whose

explanation and appreciation remain to be discovered, must be kept inmind. Their proper place must be looked for elsewhere - either in the

psychology of the state of sleep or in the discussion of the structure of

the mental apparatus upon which we shall later embark, after we have

learnt that the interpretation of dreams is like a window through which

we can get a glimpse of the interior of that apparatus.

      There  is,  however,  another  inference  following  from  these  last

dream-analyses  to  which  I  will  draw  attention  at  once.  Dreams

frequently seem to have more than one meaning. Not only, as our

examples have shown, may they include several wish-fulfilments one

alongside the other; but a succession of meanings or wish-fulfilments

may  be  superimposed  on  one  another,  the  bottom  one  being  the

fulfilment of a wish dating from earliest childhood. And here again the

question arises whether it might not be more correct to assert that this

occurs ‘invariably’ rather than ‘frequently.’¹

 

     ¹ [Footnote  added  1914:]  The  fact  that  the  meanings  of  dreams  are  arranged  in

superimposed layers is one of the most delicate, though also one of the most interesting,
problems of dream-interpretation. Anyone who forgets this possibility will easily go astray and
be led into making untenable assertions upon the nature of dreams. Yet it is still a fact that far
too few investigations have been made into this matter. Hitherto the only thorough piece of
research  has  been  Otto  Rank’s  into  the  fairly  regular  stratification  of  symbols  in  dreams
provoked by pressure of the bladder.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        700

 

                                          (C)

 

                        THE SOMATIC SOURCES OF DREAMS

 

   If one tries to interest an educated layman in the problem of dreams

and,  with  that  end  in  view,  asks  him  what  in  his  opinion  are  the

sources  from  which  they  arise,  one  finds  as  a  rule  that  he  feels

confident of possessing the answer to this part of the question. He

thinks at once of the effects produced on the construction of dreams

by  digestive  disturbances  or  difficulties  -  ‘dreams  come  from

indigestion’ -, by postures accidentally assumed by the body and by

other small incidents during sleep. It never seems to occur to him thatwhen all these factors have been taken into account anything is left

over that needs explaining.

   I have already discussed at length in the opening chapter (Section

C)  the  part  assigned  by  scientific  writers  to  somatic  sources  of

stimulation in the formation of dreams; so that here I need only recall

the  results  of  that  enquiry.  We  found  that  three  different  kinds  of

somatic sources of stimulation were distinguished: objective sensory

stimuli arising from external objects, internal states of excitation of the

sense  organs  having  only  a  subjective  basis,  and  somatic  stimuli

derived from the interior of the body . We noticed moreover that the

authorities were inclined to push into the background, or to exclude

entirely, any possible psychical sources of dreams, as compared with

these somatic stimuli (cf. p. 552). In our examination of the claims

made on behalf of somatic sources of stimulation we arrived at the

following conclusions. The significance of objective excitations of the

sense  organs  (consisting  partly  of  chance  stimuli  during  sleep  and

partly  of  excitations  such  as  cannot  fail  to  impinge  even  upon  a

sleeping mind) is established from numerous observations and has

been  experimentally  confirmed  (cf. p.  538).  The  part  played  by

subjective  sensory  excitations  seems  to  be  demonstrated  by  the

recurrence in dreams of hypnagogic sensory images (cf. p. 543 f.).

And lastly it appears that, though it is impossible to prove that the

images  and  ideas  occurring  in  our  dreams  can  be  traced  back  to

internal somatic stimuli to the extent to which this has been asserted

to be the case, nevertheless this origin finds support in the universally

recognized  influence  exercised  upon  our  dreams  by  states  of

excitation in our digestive, urinary and sexual organs.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        701

 

      It  would  appear,  then,  that  ‘nervous  stimulation’  and  ‘somatic

stimulation’  are  the  somatic  sources  of  dreams  -  that  is  to  say,

according to many writers, their sole source.

   On the other hand, we have already found a number of doubts

expressed,  which  seemed  to  imply  a  criticism,  not  indeed  of  thecorrectness, but of the adequacy of the theory of somatic stimulation.

   However secure the supporters of this theory might feel in its factual

basis - especially as far as accidental and external nervous stimuli are

concerned, since these can be traced in the content of dreams without

any trouble at all - not one of them could fail to perceive that it is

impossible to attribute the wealth of ideational material in dreams to

external nervous stimuli alone. Miss Mary Whiton Calkins (1893, 312)

examined her own and another person’s dreams for six weeks with

this question in mind. She found that in only 13.2 per cent and 6.7 per

cent  of  them  respectively  was  it  possible  to  trace  the  element  of

external sense-perception; while only two cases in the collection were

derivable  from  organic  sensations.  Here  we  have  statistical

confirmation of what I had been led to suspect from a hasty survey of

my own experiences.

   It has often been proposed to separate off ‘dreams due to nervous

stimulation’  from  other  forms  of  dreams  as  a  sub-species  that  has

been thoroughly investigated. Thus Spitta divides dreams into ‘dreams

due  to  nervous  stimulation’  and  ‘dreams  due  to  association’.  This

solution was, however, bound to remain unsatisfactory so long as it

was impossible to demonstrate the link between the somatic sources

of  a  dream  and  its  ideational  content.  Thus,  in  addition  to  the  first

objection - the insufficient frequency of external sources of stimulation

-  there  was  a  second  one  -  the  insufficient  explanation  of  dreams

afforded by such sources. We have a right to expect the supporters of

this theory to give us explanations of two points; first, why it is that the

external stimulus of a dream is not perceived in its true character but

is invariably misunderstood (Cf. the alarm-clock dreams on p. 541 f.);

and  secondly,  why  it  is  that  the  reaction  of  the  perceiving  mind  to

these  misunderstood  stimuli  should  lead  to  results  of  such

unpredictable variety.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        702

 

   By way of answer to these questions, Strümpell (1877, 108 f.) tells

us that, because the mind is withdrawn from the external world duringsleep, it is unable to give a correct interpretation of objective sensory

stimuli and is obliged to construct illusions on the basis of what is in

many respects an indeterminate impression. To quote his own words:

‘As soon as a sensation or complex of sensations or a feeling or a

psychical process of any kind arises in the mind during sleep as a

result of an external or internal nervous stimulus and is perceived by

the  mind,  that  process  calls  up  sensory  images  from  the  circle  of

experiences left over in the mind from the waking state - that is to say,

earlier perceptions - which are either bare or accompanied by their

appropriate psychical values. The process surrounds itself, as it were,

with a larger or smaller number of images of this kind and through

them the impression derived from the nervous stimulus acquires its

psychical value. We speak here (just as we usually do in the case of

waking behaviour) of the sleeping mind "interpreting" the impressions

made by the nervous stimulus. The outcome of this interpretation is

what we describe as a "dream due to nervous stimulation", that is, a

dream  whose  components  are  determined  by  a  nervous  stimulus

producing its psychical effects in the mind according to the laws of

reproduction.’

      Wundt  is  saying  something  essentially  identical  with  this  theory

when he asserts that the ideas occurring in dreams are derived, for

the  most  part  at  least,  from  sensory  stimuli,  including  especially

coenaesthetic sensations, and are for that reason mainly imaginative

illusions  and  probably  only  to  a  small  extent  pure  mnemic  ideas

intensified into hallucinations. Strümpell (1877, 84) has hit upon an apt

simile  for  the  relation  which  subsists  on  this  theory  between  the

contents of a dream and its stimuli, when he writes that ‘it is as though

the ten fingers of a man who knows nothing of music were wandering

over the keys of a piano’. Thus a dream is not, on this view, a mental

phenomenon  based  on  psychical  motives,  but  the  outcome  of  a

physiological  stimulus  which  is  expressed  in  psychical  symptoms

because the apparatus upon which the stimulus impinges is capable

of no other form of expression. A similar presupposition also underlies,

for  instance,  the  famous  analogy  by  means  of  which  Meynert

attempted to explain obsessive ideas: the analogy of a clock-face on

which certain figures stand out by being more prominently embossed

than the rest. 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        703

 

   However popular the theory of the somatic stimulation of dreams

may have become and however attractive it may seem, its weak point

is easily displayed. Every somatic dream stimulus which requires the

sleeping  mental  apparatus  to  interpret  it  by  the  construction  of  an

illusion  may  give  rise  to  an  unlimited  number  of  such  attempts  at

interpretation - that is to say, it may be represented in the content of

the  dream  by  an  immense  variety  of  ideas.¹    But  the  theory  put

forward by Strümpell and Wundt is incapable of producing any motive

governing the relation between an external stimulus and the dream-

idea chosen for its interpretation - is incapable, that is, of explaining

what  Lipps  (1883,  170)  describes  as  the  ‘remarkable  choice  often

made’  by  these  stimuli  ‘in  the  course  of  their  productive  activity’.

Objections have further been raised against the presupposition upon

which the whole theory of illusion is based - the presupposition that

the  sleeping  mind  is  incapable  of  recognizing  the  true  nature  of

objective sensory stimuli. Burdach, the physiologist, showed us long

ago that even in sleep the mind is very well able to interpret correctly

the sense impressions that reach it and to react in accordance with

that correct interpretation; for he recalled the fact that particular sense

impressions  which  seem  important  to  the  sleeper  can  be  excepted

from  the  general  neglect  to  which  such  impressions  are  subjected

during sleep (as in the case of a nursing mother or wet-nurse and her

charge), and that a sleeper is much more certain to be woken by the

sound of his own name than by any indifferent auditory impression -

all of which implies that the mind distinguishes between sensations

during  sleep  (cf. p.  562).  Burdach  went  on  to  infer  from  these

observations that what we must presume during the state of sleep is

not an incapacity to interpret sensory stimuli but a lack of interest in

them.  The  same  arguments  which  were  used  by  Burdach  in  1830

were brought forward once more without any modifications by Lipps in

1883  in  his  criticism  of  the  theory  of  somatic  stimulation.  Thus  the

mind  seems  to  behave  like  the  sleeper  in  the  anecdote.  Whensomeone asked him if he was asleep, he replied ‘No’. But when his

questioner went on to say; ‘Then lend me ten florins’, he took refuge in

a subterfuge and replied: ‘I’m asleep.’

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914]: Mourly Vold has produced a two-volume work containing detailed

and precise reports of a series of experimentally produced dreams. I should recommend a
study of this work to anyone who wishes to convince himself of how little light is thrown on the
content of individual dreams by the conditions of the experiments described in it and of how
little  help  in  general  is  afforded  by  such  experiments  towards  an  understanding  of  the
problems of dreams.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        704

 

   The inadequacy of the theory of the somatic stimulation of dreams

can be demonstrated in other ways. Observation shows that external

stimuli  do  not  necessarily  compel  me  to  dream,  even  though  such

stimuli appear in the content of my dream when and if I do dream.

Supposing, let us say, that I am subjected to a tactile stimulus while I

am asleep. A variety of different reactions are then open to me. I may

disregard it, and when I wake up I may find, for instance, that my leg is

uncovered  or  that  there  is  some  pressure  on  my  arm;  pathology

provides very numerous instances in which various powerfully exciting

sensory and motor stimuli can remain without effect during sleep. Or

again, I may be aware of the sensation in my sleep - I may be aware

of it, as one might say, ‘through’ my sleep -(which is what happens as

a rule in the case of painful stimuli) but without my weaving the pain

into a dream. And thirdly, I may react to the stimulus by waking up so

as to get rid of it.¹ It is only as a fourth possibility that the nervous

stimulus  may  cause  me  to  dream.  Yet  the  other  possibilities  are

realized at least as frequently as this last one of constructing a dream.

And  this  could  not  happen  unless  the  motive  for  dreaming  lay

elsewhere than in somatic sources of stimulation.

   Certain other writers - Scherner and Volkelt, the philosopher, who

adopted Scherner’s views - formed a just estimate of the gaps which I

have  here  indicated  in  the  explanation  of  dreams  as  being  due  to

somatic stimulation. These writers attempted to define more precisely

the mental activities which lead to the production of such variegateddream-images from the somatic stimuli; in other words, they sought to

regard dreaming once again as something essentially mental - as a

psychical  activity.  Scherner  did  not  merely  depict  the  psychical

characteristics unfolded in the production of dreams in terms charged

with poetic feeling and glowing with life; he believed, too, that he had

discovered the principle according to which the mind deals with the

stimuli  presented  to  it.  On  his  view,  the  dream-work,  when  the

imagination is set free from the shackles of daytime, seeks to give a

symbolic  representation  of  the  nature  of  the  organ  from  which  the

stimulus  arises  and  of  the  nature  of  the  stimulus  itself.  Thus  he

provides  a  kind  of  ‘dream-book’  to  serve  as  a  guide  to  the

interpretation of dreams, which makes it possible to deduce from the

dream-images inferences as to the somatic feelings, the state of the

organs and the character of the stimuli concerned. ‘Thus the image of

a cat expresses a state of angry ill-temper, and the image of a smooth

and  lightly-coloured  loaf  of  bread  stands  for  physical  nudity.’  The

human body as a whole is pictured by the dream-imagination as a

house and the separate organs of the body by portions of a house. In

‘dreams with a dental stimulus’, an entrance-hall with a high, vaulted

roof corresponds to the oral cavity and a staircase to the descent from

the throat to the oesophagus. ‘In dreams due to headaches, the top of

the  head  is  represented  by  the  ceiling  of  a  room  covered  with

disgusting, toad-like spiders.’ A variety of such symbols are employed

by dreams to represent the same organ. ‘Thus the breathing lung will

be symbolically represented by a blazing furnace, with flames roaring

with a sound like the passage of air; the heart will be represented by

hollow boxes or baskets, the bladder by round, bag-shaped objects or,

more generally, by hollow ones.’ ‘It is of special importance that at the

end of a dream the organ concerned or its function is often openly

revealed, and as a rule in relation to the dreamer’s own body. Thus a

dream with a dental stimulus usually ends by the dreamer picturing

himself pulling a tooth out of his mouth.’

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1919:] Cf. Landauer (1918) on behaviour during sleep. Anyone can

observe persons asleep carrying out actions which obviously have a meaning. A man asleep
is not reduced to complete idiocy; on the contrary, he is capable of logical and deliberate acts.
                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        705

 

   This theory of dream-interpretation cannot be said to have been very

favourably received by other writers on the subject. Its main feature

seems to be its extravagance; and there has even been hesitation in

recognizing such justification as, in my opinion, it can lay claim to. As

will have been seen, it involves a revival of dream-interpretation by

means  of symbolism  -  the  same  method  that  was  employed  in

antiquity, except that the field from which interpretations are collected

is  restricted  within  the  limits  of  the  human  body.  Its  lack  of  any

technique of interpreting that can be grasped scientifically must greatly

narrow the application of Scherner’s theory. It seems to leave the door

open  to  arbitrary  interpretations,  especially  as  in  its  case,  too,  the

same stimulus can be represented in the dream content in a variety of

different ways. Thus even Scherner’s disciple, Volkelt, found himself

unable to confirm the view that the body was represented by a house.

Objections are also bound to arise from the fact that once again the

mind  is  saddled  with  the  dream-work  as  a  useless  and  aimless

function; for, according to the theory we are discussing, the mind is

content  with  making  phantasies  about  the  stimulus  with  which  it  is

occupied,  without  the  remotest  hint  at  anything  in  the  nature  of

disposing of the stimulus.

      There  is  one  particular  criticism,  however,  which  is  gravely

damaging to Scherner’s theory of the symbolization of somatic stimuli.

These stimuli are present at all times and it is generally held that the

mind is more accessible to them during sleep than when it is awake. It

is  difficult  to  understand,  then,  why  the  mind  does  not  dream

continuously all through the night, and, indeed, dream every night of

all  the  organs.  An  attempt  may  be  made  to  avoid  this  criticism  by

adding the further condition that in order to arouse dream-activity it is

necessary  for special  excitations  to  proceed  from  the  eyes,  ears,

teeth,  intestines,  etc.  But  the  difficulty  then  arises  of  proving  the

objective nature of such increases of stimulus - which is only possible

in a small number of cases. If dreams of flying are a symbolization of

the rising and sinking of the lobes of the lungs, then, as Strümpell has

already pointed out, either such dreams would have to be much morefrequent than they are or it would be necessary to prove an increase

in  the  activity  of  breathing  in  the  course  of  them.  There  is  a  third

possibility,  which  is  the  most  probable  of  all,  namely  that  special

motives  may  be  temporarily  operative  which  direct  the  attention  to

visceral  sensations  that  are  uniformly  present  at  all  times.  This

possibility,  however,  carries  us  beyond  the  scope  of  Scherner’s

theory.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        706

 

   The value of the views put forward by Scherner and Volkelt lies in

the fact that they draw attention to a number of characteristics of the

content  of  dreams  which  call  for  explanation  and  seem  to  promise

fresh  discoveries.  It  is  perfectly  true  that  dreams  contain

symbolizations of bodily organs and functions, that water in a dream

often points to a urinary stimulus, and that the male genitals can be

represented by an upright stick or a pillar, and so on. In the case of

dreams  in  which  the  field  of  vision  is  full  of  movement  and  bright

colours,  in  contrast  to  the  drabness  of  other  dreams,  it  is  scarcely

possible not to interpret them as ‘dreams with a visual stimulus’; nor

can one dispute the part played by illusions in the case of dreams

characterized by noise and a confusion of voices. Scherner reports a

dream of two rows of pretty, fair-haired boys standing opposite each

other on a bridge, and of their attacking each other and then going

back to their original position, till at last the dreamer saw himself sitting

down on a bridge and pulling a long tooth out of his jaw. Similarly

Volkelt reports a dream in which two rows of drawers in a cupboard

played a part and which once more ended with the dreamer pulling out

a tooth. Dream-formations such as these, which are recorded in great

numbers by the two authors, forbid our dismissing Scherner’s theory

as an idle invention without looking for its kernel of truth. The task,

then, that faces us is to find an explanation of another kind for the

supposed symbolization of what is alleged to be a dental stimulus.

 

   Throughout the whole of this discussion of the theory of the somaticsources of dreams I have refrained from making use of the argument

based upon my dream-analyses. If it can be proved, by a procedure

which other writers have not employed upon their dream-material, that

dreams possess a value of their own as psychical acts, that wishes

are  the  motive  for  their  construction  and  that  experiences  of  the

preceding day provide the immediate material for their content, then

any other theory of dreams, which neglects so important a procedure

of  research  and  accordingly  represents  dreams  as  a  useless  and

puzzling  psychical  reaction  to  somatic  stimuli,  stands  condemned

without there being any necessity for specific criticisms. Otherwise -

and this seems highly improbable - there would have to be two quite

different kinds of dreaming, one of which has come only under my

observation and the other only under that of the earlier authorities. All

that remains, therefore, is to find a place in my theory of dreams for

the facts upon which the current theory of the somatic stimulation of

dreams is based.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        707

 

   We have already taken the first step in this direction by advancing

the thesis (see p. 666 f.) that the dream-work is under the necessity of

combining into a unity all instigations to dreaming which are active

simultaneously.  We  found  that,  when  two  or  more  experiences

capable of creating an impression are left over from the previous day,

the wishes derived from them are combined in a single dream, and

similarly that the psychically significant impressions and the indifferent

experiences from the previous day are brought together in the dream-

material, provided always that it is possible to set up communicating

ideas  between  them.  Thus  a  dream  appears  to  be  a  reaction  to

everything  that  is  simultaneously  present  in  the  sleeping  mind  as

currently  active  material.  So  far  as  we  have  hitherto  analysed  the

material  of  dreams,  we  have  seen  it  as  a  collection  of  psychical

residues and memory-traces, to which (on account of the preference

shown for recent and infantile material) we have been led to attribute a

hitherto indefinable quality of being ‘currently active’. We can foresee,then, without any great difficulty, what will happen if fresh material in

the form of sensations is added during sleep to these currently active

memories. It is once again owing to the fact of their being currently

active that these sensory excitations are of importance for the dream;

they are united with the other currently active psychical material to

furnish  what  is  used  for  the  construction  of  the  dream.  To  put  it

another way, stimuli arising during sleep are worked up into a wish-

fulfilment  the  other  constituents  of  which  are  the  familiar  psychical

‘day’s residues’. This combination need not occur; as I have already

pointed  out,  there  is  more  than  one  way  of  reacting  to  a  somatic

stimulus during sleep. When it does occur, it means that it has been

possible  to  find  ideational  material  to  serve  as  the  content  of  the

dream of such a sort as to be able to represent both kinds of source of

the dream - the somatic and the psychical.

      The  essential  nature  of  the  dream  is  not  altered  by  the  fact  of

somatic  material  being  added  to  its  psychical  sources:  a  dream

remains the fulfilment of a wish, no matter in what way the expression

of that wish-fulfilment is determined by the currently active material.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        708

 

 

   I am prepared to leave room at this point for the operation of a

number  of  special  factors  which  can  lend  a  varying  importance  to

external stimuli in relation to dreams. As I picture it, a combination of

individual  factors,  physiological  and  accidental,  produced  by  the

circumstances of the moment, is what determines how a person shall

behave  in  particular  cases  of  comparatively  intense  objective

stimulation during sleep. The habitual or accidental depth of his sleep,

taken  in  conjunction  with  the  intensity  of  the  stimulus,  will  make  it

possible in one case for him to suppress the stimulus so that his sleep

is not interrupted and in another case will compel him to wake up or

will encourage an attempt to overcome the stimulus by weaving it into

a  dream.  In  accordance  with  these  various  possible  combinations,

external objective stimuli will find expression in dreams with greater orless frequency in one person than in another. In my own case, since I

am an excellent sleeper and obstinately refuse to allow anything to

disturb  my  sleep,  it  very  rarely  happens  that  external  causes  of

excitation find their way into my dreams; whereas psychical motives

obviously cause me to dream very easily. In fact I have only noted a

single dream in which an objective and painful source of stimulus is

recognizable;  and  it  will  be  most  instructive  to  examine  the  effect

which the external stimulus produced in this particular dream.

   I was riding on a grey horse, timidly and awkwardly to begin with, as

though I were only reclining upon it. I met one of my colleagues, P.,

who was sitting high on a horse, dressed in a tweed suit, and who

drew  my  attention  to  something  (probably  to  my  bad  seat).  I  now

began to find myself sitting more and more firmly and comfortably on

my  highly  intelligent  horse,  and  noticed  that  I  was  feeling  quite  at

home up there. My saddle was a kind of bolster, which completely

filled  the  space  between  its  neck  and  crupper.  In  this  way  I  rode

straight in between two vans. After riding some distance up the street,

I  turned  round  and  tried  to  dismount,  first  in  front  of  a  small  open

chapel that stood in the street frontage. Then I actually did dismount in

front of another chapel that stood near it. My hotel was in the same

street; I might have let the horse go to it on its own, but I preferred to

lead it there. It was as though I should have felt ashamed to arrive at it

on horseback. A hotel ‘boots’ was standing in front of the hotel; he

showed me a note of mine that had been found, and laughed at me

over it. In the note was written, doubly underlined: ‘No food’ and then

another remark (indistinct) such as ‘No work’, together with a vague

idea that I was in a strange town in which I was doing no work.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        709

 

   It would not be supposed at first sight that this dream originated

under  the  influence,  or  rather  under  the  compulsion,  of  a  painful

stimulus. But for some days before I had been suffering from boils

which made every movement a torture; and finally a boil the size of an

apple had risen at the base of my scrotum, which caused me the mostunbearable  pain  with  every  step  I  took.  Feverish  lassitude,  loss  of

appetite and the hard work with which I nevertheless carried on - all

these had combined with the pain to depress me. I was not properly

capable of discharging my medical duties. There was, however, one

activity for which, in view of the nature and situation of my complaint, I

should certainly have been less fitted than for any other, and that was

- riding. And this was precisely the activity in which the dream landed

me: it was the most energetic denial of my illness that could possibly

be imagined. I cannot in fact ride, nor have I, apart from this, had

dreams of riding. I have only sat on a horse once in my life and that

was without a saddle, and I did not enjoy it. But in this dream I was

riding as though I had no boil on my perineum - or rather because I

wanted not to have one. My saddle, to judge from its description, was

the poultice which had made it possible for me to fall asleep. Under its

assuaging influence I had probably been unaware of my pain during

the  first  hours  of  sleep.  The  painful  feelings  had  then  announced

themselves and sought to wake me; where upon the dream came and

said soothingly: ‘No! Go on sleeping! There’s no need to wake up. You

haven’t got a boil; for you’re riding on a horse, and it’s quite certain

that you couldn’t ride if you had a boil in that particular place.’ And the

dream was successful. The pain was silenced, and I went on sleeping.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        710

 

   But the dream was not content with ‘suggesting away’ my boil by

obstinately insisting upon an idea that was inconsistent with it and so

behaving like the hallucinatory delusion of the mother who had lost her

child or the merchant whose losses had robbed him of his fortune.¹

The details of the sensation which was being repudiated and of the

picture which was employed in order to repress that sensation also

served the dream as a means of connecting other material that was

currently  active  in  my  mind  with  the  situation  in  the  dream  and  of

giving  that  material  representation.  I  was  riding  on  a grey  horse,

whose colour corresponded precisely to the pepper-and-salt colour of

the suit my colleague P. was wearing when I had last met him in thecountry. The cause of my boils had been ascribed to my eating highly-

spiced food - an aetiology that was at least preferable to the sugar

which might also occur to one in connection with boils. My friend P.

liked to ride the high horse over me ever since he had taken over one

of  my  women  patients  on  whom  I  had  pulled  off  some  remarkable

feats. (In the dream I began by riding tangentially - like the feat of a

trick rider.) But in fact, like the horse in the anecdote of the Sunday

horseman, this patient had taken me wherever she felt inclined. Thus

the horse acquired the symbolic meaning of a woman patient. (It was

highly intelligent in the dream.) ‘I felt quite at home up there’ referred

to  the  position  I  had  occupied  in  this  patient’s  house  before  I  was

replaced by P. Not long before, one of my few patrons among the

leading physicians in this city had remarked to me in connection with

this same house: ‘You struck me as being firmly in the saddle there.’ It

was  a  remarkable feat,  too,  to  be  able  to  carry  on  my

psychotherapeutic work for eight or ten hours a day while I was having

so much pain. But I knew that I could not go on long with my peculiarly

difficult work unless I was in completely sound physical health; and my

dream was full of gloomy allusions to the situation in which I should

then find myself. (The note which neurasthenics bring with them to

show  the  doctor; no  work,  no  food.)  In  the  course  of  further

interpretation I saw that the dream-work had succeeded in finding a

path from the wishful situation of riding to some scenes of quarrelling

from my very early childhood which must have occurred between me

and a nephew of mine, a year my senior, who was at present living in

England. Furthermore, the dream had derived some of its elements

from  my  travels  in  Italy:  the  street  in  the  dream  was  composed  of

impressions of Verona and Siena. A still deeper interpretation led to

sexual dream-thoughts, and I recalled the meaning which references

to Italy seem to have had in the dreams of a woman patient who had

never  visited  that  lovely  country:  ‘gen Italien  [to  Italy]’  -  ‘Genitalien

[genitals]’; and this was connected, too, with the house in which I had

preceded my friend P. as physician, as well as with the situation of my

boil.

 

    ¹ Cf.  the  passage  in  Griesinger  and  my  remarks  in  my  second  paper  on  the  neuro-

psychoses of defence (Freud, 1896b).
                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        711

 

 

   In another dream I similarly succeeded in warding off a threatened

interruption of my sleep which came this time from a sensory stimulus.

In  this  case  it  was  only  by  chance,  however,  that  I  was  able  to

discover the link between the dream and its accidental stimulus and

thus to understand the dream. One morning at the height of summer,

while  I  was  staying  at  a  mountain  resort  in  the  Tyrol,  I  woke  up

knowing  I  had  had  a  dream  that the  Pope  was  dead.  I  failed  to

interpret this dream - a non-visual one - and only remembered as part

of its basis that I had read in a newspaper a short time before that his

Holiness was suffering from a slight indisposition. In the course of the

morning, however, my wife asked me if I had heard the frightful noise

made by the pealing of bells that morning. I had been quite unaware

of them, but I now understood my dream. It had been a reaction on

the  part  of  my  need  for  sleep  to  the  noise  with  which  the  pious

Tyrolese had been trying to wake me. I had taken my revenge on

them by drawing the inference which formed the content of the dream,

and I had then continued my sleep without paying any more attention

to the noise.

 

   The dreams quoted in earlier chapters included several which might

serve  as  instances  of  the  working-over  of  such  so-called  nervous

stimuli. My dream of drinking water in great gulps is an example. The

somatic stimulus was apparently its only source, and the wish derived

from the sensation (the thirst, that is) was apparently its only motive.

The  case  is  similar  with  other  simple  dreams  in  which  a  somatic

stimulus seems able by itself to construct a wish. The dream of the

woman patient who threw off the cooling apparatus from her cheek

during the night presents an unusual method of reacting to a painful

stimulus  with  a  wish-fulfilment:  it  appears  as  though  the  patient

succeeded  temporarily  in  making  herself  analgesic,  while  ascribing

her pains to someone else.

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        712

 

   My dream of the three Fates was clearly a hunger dream. But it

succeeded  in  shifting  the  craving  for  nourishment  back  to  a  child’s

longing for his mother’s breast, and it made use of an innocent desire

as  a  screen  for  a  more  serious  one  which  could  not  be  so  openly

displayed. My dream about Count Thun showed how an accidental

physical need can be linked up with the most intense (but at the same

time  the  most  intensely  suppressed)  mental  impulses.  And  a  case

such as that related by Garnier (1872, 1, 476) of how the First Consul

wove the noise of an exploding bomb into a battle dream before he

woke up from it reveals with quite special clarity the nature of the sole

motive  that  leads  mental  activity  to  concern  itself  with  sensations

during  sleep.  A  young  barrister,  fresh  from  his  first  important

bankruptcy proceedings, who dropped asleep one afternoon, behaved

in just the same way as the great Napoleon. He had a dream of a

certain  G.  Reich  of Husyatin  whom  he  had  come  across  during  a

bankruptcy  case;  the  name  ‘Husyatin’  kept  on  forcing  itself  on  his

notice, till he woke up and found that his wife (who was suffering from

a bronchial catarrh) was having a violent fit of coughing [in German

‘husten’].

   Let us compare this dream of the first Napoleon (who, incidentally,

was an extremely sound sleeper) with that of the sleepy student who

was  roused  by  his  landlady  and  told  that  it  was  time  to  go  to  the

hospital,  and  who  proceeded  to  dream  that  he  was  in  bed  at  the

hospital and then slept on, under the pretext that as he was already in

the hospital there was no need for him to get up and go there. This

latter  dream  was  clearly  a  dream  of  convenience.  The  dreamer

admitted  his  motive  for  dreaming  without  any  disguise;  but  at  the

same time he gave away one of the secrets of dreaming in general. All

dreams  are  in  a  sense  dreams  of  convenience:  they  serve  the

purpose of prolonging sleep instead of waking up. Dreams are the

GUARDIANS of  sleep  and  not  its  disturbers.  We  shall  have  occasion

elsewhere to justify this view of them in relation to awakening factors

of a psychical kind; but we are already in a position to show that it is

applicable to the part played by objective external stimuli. Either themind pays no attention at all to occasions for sensation during sleep -

if  it  is  able  to  do  this  despite  the  intensity  of  the  stimuli  and  the

significance which it knows attaches to them; or it makes use of a

dream  in  order  to  deny  the  stimuli;  or,  thirdly,  if  it  is  obliged  to

recognize them, it seeks for an interpretation of them which will make

the  currently  active  sensation  into  a  component  part  of  a  situation

which  is  wished  for  and  which  is  consistent  with  sleeping.  The

currently active sensation is woven into a dream in order to rob it of

reality.  Napoleon  could  sleep  on  -  with  a  conviction  that  what  was

trying to disturb him was only a dream-memory of the thunder of the

guns at Arcole.¹

 

   ¹ The two sources from which I know this dream do not agree in their account of it.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        713

 

   Thus the wish to sleep (which the conscious ego is concentrated

upon,  and  which,  together  with  the  dream-censorship  and  the

‘secondary  revision’  which  I  shall  mention  later,  constitute  the

conscious ego’s share in dreaming) must in every case be reckoned

as  one  of  the  motives  for  the  formation  of  dreams,  and  every

successful  dream  is  a  fulfilment  of  that  wish.  We  shall  discuss

elsewhere the relations subsisting between this universal, invariably

present and unchanging wish to sleep and the other wishes, of which

now one and now another is fulfilled by the content of the dream. But

we have found in the wish to sleep the factor that is able to fill the gap

in the theory of Strümpell and Wundt and to explain the perverse and

capricious  manner  in  which  external  stimuli  are  interpreted.  The

correct interpretation, which the sleeping mind is perfectly capable of

making, would involve an active interest and would require that sleep

should  be  brought  to  an  end;  for  that  reason,  of  all  the  possible

interpretations, only those are admitted which are consistent with the

absolute  censorship  exercised  by  the  wish  to  sleep.  ‘It  is  the

nightingale and not the lark.’ For if it were the lark it would mean the

end  of  the  lovers’  night.  Among  the  interpretations  of  the  stimulus

which are accordingly admissible, that one is then selected which canprovide  the  best  link  with  the  wishful  impulses  lurking  in  the  mind.

Thus everything is unambiguously determined and nothing is left to

arbitrary decision. The misinterpretation is not an illusion but, as one

might say, an evasion. Here once again, however, just as when, in

obedience  to  the  dream-censorship,  a  substitution  is  effected  by

displacement, we have to admit that we are faced by an act which

deviates from normal psychical processes.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        714

 

 

      When  external  nervous  stimuli  and  internal  somatic  stimuli  are

intense  enough  to  force  psychical  attention  to  themselves,  then  -

provided  that  their  outcome  is  dreaming  and  not  waking  up  -  they

serve as a fixed point for the formation of a dream, a nucleus in its

material; a wish-fulfilment is then looked for that shall correspond to

this  nucleus,  just  as  (see  above)  intermediate  ideas  are  looked  for

between two psychical dream stimuli. To that extent it is true that in a

number of dreams the content of the dream is dictated by the somatic

element.  In  this  extreme  instance  it  may  even  happen  that  a  wish

which is not actually a currently active one is called up for the sake of

constructing a dream. A dream, however, has no alternative but to

represent a wish in the situation of having been fulfilled; it is, as it

were,  faced  with  the  problem  of  looking  for  a  wish  which  can  be

represented  as  fulfilled  by  the  currently  active  sensation.  If  this

immediate material is of a painful or distressing kind, that does not

necessarily  mean  that  it  cannot  be  used  for  the  construction  of  a

dream. The mind has wishes at its disposal whose fulfilment produces

unpleasure. This seems self-contradictory; but it becomes intelligible

when we take into account the presence of two psychical agencies

and a censorship between them.

   As we have seen, there are ‘repressed’ wishes in the mind, which

belong  to  the  first  system  and  whose  fulfilment  is  opposed  by  the

second system. In saying that there are such wishes I am not making

a historical statement to the effect that they once existed and werelater  abolished.  The  theory  of  repression,  which  is  essential  to  the

study of the psychoneuroses, asserts that these repressed wishes still

exist  -  though  there  is  a  simultaneous  inhibition  which  holds  them

down. Linguistic usage hits the mark in speaking of the ‘suppression’

of these impulses. The psychical arrangements that make it possible

for such impulses to force their way to realization remain in being and

in working order. Should it happen, however, that a suppressed wish

of this kind is carried into effect, and that its inhibition by the second

system  (the system that is admissible to consciousness) is defeated,

this defeat finds expression as unpleasure. In conclusion: if sensations

of an unpleasurable nature arising from somatic sources occur during

sleep, the dream-work makes use of that event in order to represent -

subject  to  the  continuance  of  the  censorship  to  a  greater  or  less

degree - the fulfilment of some wish which is normally suppressed.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        715

 

   This state of affairs is what makes possible one group of anxiety-

dreams - dream-structures unpropitious from the point of view of the

wish-theory. A second group of them reveal a different mechanism; for

anxiety  in  dreams  may  be  psychoneurotic  anxiety:  it  may  originate

from psychosexual excitations - in which case the anxiety corresponds

to  repressed  libido.  Where  this  is  so,  the  anxiety,  like  the  whole

anxiety-dream, has the significance of a neurotic symptom, and we

come  near  the  limit  at  which  the  wish-fulfilling  purpose  of  dreams

breaks down. But there are some anxiety dreams in which the feeling

of  anxiety  is  determined  somatically  -  where,  for  instance,  there

happens to be difficulty in breathing owing to disease of the lungs or

heart - and in such cases the anxiety is exploited in order to assist the

fulfilment in the form of dreams of energetically suppressed wishes

which, if they had been dreamt about for psychical reasons, would

have led to a similar release of anxiety. But there is no difficulty in

reconciling these two apparently different groups. In both groups of

dreams two psychical factors are involved: an inclination towards an

affect and an ideational content; and these are intimately related toeach other. If one of them is currently active, it calls up the other even

in a dream; in the one case the somatically determined anxiety calls

up the suppressed ideational content, and in the other the ideational

content with its accompanying sexual excitation, having been set free

from repression, calls up a release of anxiety. We can put it that in the

first  case  a  somatically  determined  affect  is  given  a  psychical

interpretation; while in the other case, though the whole is psychically

determined, the content which had been suppressed is easily replaced

by  a  somatic  interpretation  appropriate  to  anxiety.  The  difficulties

which all this offers to our understanding have little to do with dreams:

they arise from the fact that we are here touching on the problem of

the generation of anxiety and on the problem of repression.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        716

 

   There can be no doubt that physical coenaesthesia is among the

internal somatic stimuli which can dictate the content of dreams. It can

do so, not in the sense that it can provide the dream’s content, but in

the sense that it can force upon the dream-thoughts a choice of the

material to be represented in the content by putting forward one part

of  the  material  as  being  appropriate  to  its  own  character  and  by

holding back another part. Apart from this, the coenaesthetic feelings

left over from the preceding day link themselves up, no doubt, with the

psychical  residues  which  have  such  an  important  influence  on

dreams. This general mood may persist unchanged in the dream or it

may be mastered, and thus, if it is unpleasurable, may be changed

into its opposite.

 

   Thus, in my opinion, somatic sources of stimulation during sleep

(that is to say, sensations during sleep), unless they are of unusual

intensity, play a similar part in the formation of dreams to that played

by recent but indifferent impressions left over from the previous day. I

believe, that is, that they are brought in to help in the formation of a

dream if they fit in appropriately with the ideational content derived

from  the  dream’s  psychical  sources,  but  otherwise  not.  They  aretreated  like  some  cheap  material  always  ready  to  hand,  which  is

employed whenever it is needed, in contrast to a precious material

which itself prescribes the way in which it shall be employed. If, to take

a simile, a patron of the arts brings an artist some rare stone, such as

a piece of onyx, and asks him to create a work of art from it, then the

size of the stone, its colour and markings, help to decide what head or

what  scene  shall  be  represented  in  it.  Whereas  in  the  case  of  a

uniform and plentiful material such as marble or sandstone, the artist

merely follows some idea that is present in his own mind. It is only in

this way, so it seems to me, that we can explain the fact that dream-

content  provided  by  somatic  stimuli  of  no  unusual  intensity  fails  to

appear in every dream or every night.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] Rank has shown in a number of papers that certain arousal

dreams produced by organic stimuli (dreams with a urinary stimulus and dreams of emission
or orgasm) are especially suited to demonstrate the struggle between the need to sleep and
the claims of organic needs, as well as the influence of the latter upon the content of dreams.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        717

 

   I can perhaps best illustrate my meaning by an example, which,

moreover, will bring us back to dream-interpretation.

   One day I had been trying to discover what might be the meaning of

the feelings of being inhibited, of being glued to the spot, of not being

able  to  get  something  done,  and  so  on,  which  occur  so  often  in

dreams and are so closely akin to feelings of anxiety. That night I had

the following dream:

   I was very incompletely dressed and was going upstairs from a flat

on the ground floor to a higher storey. I was going up three steps at a

time and was delighted at my agility. Suddenly I saw a maid-servant

coming down the stairs - coming towards me, that is. I felt ashamed

and tried to hurry, and at this point the feeling of being inhibited set in:

I was glued to the steps and unable to budge from the spot.

   ANALYSIS. -The situation in the dream is taken from everyday reality. I

occupy two flats in a house in Vienna, which are connected only by

the public staircase. My consulting-room and study are on the upperground floor and my living rooms are one storey higher. When, late in

the evening, I have finished my work down below, I go up the stairs to

my bedroom. On the evening before I had the dream, I had in fact

made this short journey in rather disordered dress - that is to say, I

had taken off my collar and tie and cuffs. In the dream this had been

turned into a higher degree of undress, but, as usual, an indeterminate

one. I usually go upstairs two or three steps at a time; and this was

recognized in the dream itself as a wish-fulfilment: the ease with which

I achieved it reassured me as to the functioning of my heart. Further,

this method of going upstairs was an effective contrast to the inhibition

in  the  second  half  of  the  dream.  It  showed  me  -  what  needed  no

proving  -  that  dreams  find  no  difficulty  in  representing  motor  acts

carried out to perfection. (One need only recall dreams of flying.)

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        718

 

   The staircase up which I was going, however, was not the one in my

house. At first I failed to recognize it and it was only the identity of the

person  who  met  me  that  made  it  clear  to  me  what  locality  was

intended. This person was the maid-servant of the old lady whom I

was  visiting  twice  a  day  in  order  to  give  her  injections;  and  the

staircase, too, was just like the one in her house which I had to go up

twice a day.

   Now how did this staircase and this female figure come to be in my

dream? The feeling of shame at not being completely dressed is no

doubt of a sexual nature; but the maid-servant whom I dreamt about

was older than I am, surly and far from attractive. The only answer to

the problem that occurred to me was this. When I paid my morning

visits to this house I used as a rule to be seized with a desire to clear

my throat as I went up the stairs and the product of my expectoration

would fall on the staircase. For on neither of these floors was there a

spittoon;  and  the  view  I  took  was  that  the  cleanliness  of  the  stairs

should not be maintained at my expense but should be made possible

by the provision of a spittoon. The concierge, an equally elderly and

surly  woman  (but  of  cleanly  instincts,  as  I  was  prepared  to  admit),looked at the matter in a different light. She would lie in wait for me to

see whether I should again make free of the stairs, and, if she found

that I did, I used to hear her grumbling audibly; and for several days

afterwards she would omit the usual greeting when we met. The day

before  I  had  the  dream  the  concierge’s  party  had  received  a

reinforcement  in  the  shape  of  the  maid-servant.  I  had,  as  usual,

concluded my hurried visit to the patient, when the servant stopped

me  in  the  hall  and  remarked:  ‘You  might  have  wiped  your  boots,

doctor, before you came into the room to-day. You’ve made the red

carpet  all  dirty  again  with  your  feet.’  This  was  the  only  claim  the

staircase and the maid-servant had to appearing in my dream.

   There was an internal connection between my running up the stairs

and my spitting on the stairs. Pharyngitis as well as heart trouble are

both  regarded  as  punishments  for  the  vice  of  smoking.  And  on

account of that habit my reputation for tidiness was not of the highest

with the authorities in my own house any more than in the other; so

that the two were fused into one in the dream.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        719

 

   I must postpone my further interpretation of this dream till I can

explain the origin of the typical dream of being incompletely dressed. I

will only point out as a provisional conclusion to be drawn from the

present dream that a sensation of inhibited movement in dreams is

produced whenever the particular context requires it. The cause of this

part  of  the  dream’s  content  cannot  have  been  that  some  special

modification  in  my  powers  of  movement  had  occurred  during  my

sleep,  since  only  a  moment  earlier  I  had  seen  myself  (almost  as

though to confirm this fact) running nimbly up the stairs.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        720

 

                                          (D)

                                     TYPICAL DREAMS

 

   We are not in general in a position to interpret another person’s

dream unless he is prepared to communicate to us the unconscious

thoughts that lie behind its content. The practical applicability of our

method of interpreting dreams is in consequence severely restricted.¹

We  have  seen  that,  as  a  general  rule,  each  person  is  at  liberty  to

construct his dream-world according to his individual peculiarities and

so to make it unintelligible to other people. It now appears, however,

that, in complete contrast to this, there are a certain number of dreams

which  almost  everyone  has  dreamt  alike  and  which  we  are

accustomed to assume must have the same meaning for everyone. A

special interest attaches, moreover, to these typical dreams because

they presumably arise from the same sources in every case and thus

seem  particularly  well  qualified  to  throw  light  on  the  sources  of

dreams.

   It is therefore with quite particular anticipations that we shall attempt

to apply our technique of dream-interpretation to these typical dreams;

and it is with great reluctance that we shall have to confess that our art

disappoints our expectations precisely in relation to this material. If we

attempt  to  interpret  a  typical  dream,  the  dreamer  fails  as  a  rule  to

produce the associations which would in other cases have led us to

understand  it,  or  else  his  associations  become  obscure  and

insufficient so that we cannot solve our problem with their help. We

shall learn in a later portion of this work why this is so and how we can

make up for this defect in our technique. My readers will also discover

why it is that at the present point I am able to deal only with a few

members  of  the  group  of  typical  dreams  and  must  postpone  my

consideration of the rest until this later point in my discussion.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1925:] This assertion that our method of interpreting dreams cannot be

applied unless we have access to the dreamer’s associative material requires supplementing:
our interpretative activity is in one instance independent of these associations - if, namely, the
dreamer has employed symbolic elements in the content of the dream. In such case we make
use of what is, strictly speaking, a second and auxiliary method of dream-interpretation. (See
below.)
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams                                                                                        721

 

                  (a)  EMBARRASING DREAMS OF BEING NAKED

 

   Dreams of being naked or insufficiently dressed in the presence of

strangers sometimes occur with the additional feature of there being a

complete  absence  of  any  such  feeling  as  shame  on  the  dreamer’s

part.  We  are  only  concerned  here,  however,  with  those  dreams  of

being naked in which one does feel shame and embarrassment and

tries to escape or hide, and is then overcome by a strange inhibition

which  prevents  one  from  moving  and  makes  one  feel  incapable  of

altering one’s distressing situation. It is only with this accompaniment

that the dream is typical; without it, the gist of its subject-matter may

be included in every variety of context or may be ornamented with

individual  trimmings.  Its  essence  lies  in  a  distressing  feeling  in  the

nature  of  shame  and  in  the  fact  that  one  wishes  to  hide  one’s

nakedness, as a rule by locomotion, but finds one is unable to do so. I

believe the great majority of my readers will have found themselves in

this situation in dreams.

   The nature of the undress involved is customarily far from clear. The

dreamer may say ‘I was in my chemise’, but this is rarely a distinct

picture. The kind of undress is usually so vague that the description is

expressed as an alternative: ‘I was in my chemise or petticoat.’ As a

rule the defect in the dreamer’s toilet is not so grave as to appear to

justify the shame to which it gives rise. In the case of a man who has

worn  the  Emperor’s  uniform,  nakedness  is  often  replaced  by  some

breach of the dress regulations: ‘I was walking in the street without my

sabre and saw some officers coming up’, or ‘I was without my necktie’,

or ‘I was wearing civilian check trousers’, and so on.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        722

 

      The  people  in  whose  presence  one  feels  ashamed  are  almost

always strangers, with their features left indeterminate. In the typical

dream it never happens that the clothing which causes one so muchembarrassment is objected to or so much as noticed by the onlookers.

On  the  contrary,  they  adopt  indifferent  or  (as  I  observed  in  one

particularly clear dream) solemn and stiff expressions of face. This is a

suggestive point.

      The  embarrassment  of  the  dreamer  and  the  indifference  of  the

onlookers offer us, when taken together, a contradiction of the kind

that is so common in dreams. It would after all be more in keeping with

the dreamer’s feelings if strangers looked at him in astonishment and

derision  or  with  indignation.  But  this  objectionable  feature  of  the

situation  has,  I  believe,  been  got  rid  of  by  wish-fulfilment,  whereas

some force has led to the retention of the other features; and the two

portions  of  the  dream  are  consequently  out  of  harmony  with  each

other. We possess an interesting piece of evidence that the dream in

the form in which it appears - partly distorted by wish-fulfilment - has

not been rightly understood. For it has become the basis of a fairy tale

which is familiar to us all in Hans Andersen’s version, The Emperor’s

New Clothes,  and  which  has  quite  recently  been  put  into  verse  by

Ludwig Fulda in his Der Talisman. Hans Andersen’s fairy tale tells us

how two impostors weave the Emperor a costly garment which, they

say, will be visible only to persons of virtue and loyalty. The Emperor

walks out in this invisible garment, and all the spectators, intimidated

by the fabric’s power to act as a touchstone, pretend not to notice the

Emperor’s nakedness.

   This is just the situation in our dream. It is hardly rash to assume

that  the  unintelligibility  of  the  dream’s  content,  as  it  exists  in  the

memory has led to its being recast in a form designed to make sense

of the situation. That situation, however, is in the process deprived of

its original meaning and put to extraneous uses. But, as we shall see

later,  it  is  a  common  thing  for  the  conscious  thought-activity  of  a

second psychical system to misunderstand the content of a dream in

this way, and this misunderstanding must be regarded as one of the

factors in determining the final form assumed by dreams. Moreover

we  shall  learn  that  similar  misunderstandings  (taking  place,  once

again, within one and the same psychical personality) play a major

part in the construction of obsessions and phobias.

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        723

 

   In the case of our dream we are in a position to indicate the material

upon which the misinterpretation is based. The impostor is the dream

and the Emperor is the dreamer himself; the moralizing purpose of the

dream reveals an obscure knowledge of the fact that the latent dream-

content is concerned with forbidden wishes that have fallen victim to

repression. For the context in which dreams of this sort appear during

my analyses of neurotics leaves no doubt that they are based upon

memories from earliest childhood. It is only in our childhood that we

are seen in inadequate clothing both by members of our family and by

strangers - nurses, maid-servants, and visitors; and it is only then that

we feel no shame at our nakedness.¹ We can observe how undressing

has an almost intoxicating effect on many children even in their later

years, instead of making them feel ashamed. They laugh and jump

about and slap themselves, while their mother, or whoever else may

be there, reproves them and says: ‘Ugh! Shocking! You mustn’t ever

do  that!’  Children  frequently  manifest  a  desire  to  exhibit.  One  can

scarcely pass through a country village in our part of the world without

meeting some child of two or three who lifts up his little shirt in front of

one - in one’s honour, perhaps. One of my patients has a conscious

memory of a scene in his eighth year, when at bed-time he wanted to

dance into the next room where his little sister slept, dressed in his

night-shirt,  but  was  prevented  by  his  nurse.  In  the  early  history  of

neurotics an important part is played by exposure to children of the

opposite sex; in paranoia delusions of being observed while dressing

and undressing are to be traced back to experiences of this kind; while

among persons who have remained at the stage of perversion there is

one class in which this infantile impulse has reached the pitch of a

symptom - the class of ‘exhibitionists’.

 

   ¹ A  child  plays  a  part  in  the  fairy  tale  as  well;  for  it  was  a  small  child  who  suddenly

exclaimed: ‘But he has nothing on!’
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        724 

   When we look back at this unashamed period of childhood it seems

to us a Paradise; and Paradise itself is no more than a group phantasy

of the childhood of the individual. That is why mankind were naked in

Paradise and were without shame in one another’s presence; till a

moment arrived when shame and anxiety awoke, expulsion followed,

and sexual life and the tasks of cultural activity began. But we can

regain  this  Paradise  every  night  in  our  dreams.  I  have  already

expressed a suspicion that impressions of earliest childhood (that is,

from the prehistoric epoch until about the end of the third year of life)

strive to achieve reproduction, from their very nature and irrespectively

perhaps of their actual content, and that their repetition constitutes the

fulfilment  of  a  wish.  Thus  dreams  of  being  naked  are  dreams  of

exhibiting.¹

   The core of a dream of exhibiting lies in the figure of the dreamer

himself (not as he was as a child but as he appears at the present

time) and his inadequate clothing (which emerges indistinctly, whether

owing to superimposed layers of innumerable later memories of being

in undress or as a result of the censorship). Added to these are the

figures of the people in whose presence the dreamer feels ashamed. I

know  of  no  instance  in  which  the  actual  spectators  of  the  infantile

scene of exhibiting have appeared in the dream; a dream is scarcely

ever a simple memory. Curiously enough, the people upon whom our

sexual  interest  was  directed  in  childhood  are  omitted  in  all  the

reproductions which occur in dreams, in hysteria and in obsessional

neurosis. It is only in paranoia that these spectators reappear and,

though they remain invisible, their presence is inferred with fanatical

conviction. What takes their place in dreams - ‘a lot of strangers’ who

take no notice of the spectacle that is offered - is nothing more nor

less than the wishful contrary of the single familiar individual before

whom the dreamer exposed himself. Incidentally, ‘a lot of strangers’

frequently  appear  in  dreams  in  many  other  connections,  and  they

always stand as the wishful contrary of ‘secrecy’. It is to be noticed

that even in paranoia, where the original state of things is restored,

this reversal into a contrary is observed. The subject feels that he is

no longer alone, he has no doubt that he is being observed, but the

observers are ‘a lot of strangers’ whose identity is left curiously vague. 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1911:] Ferenczi has recorded a number of interesting dreams of being

naked dreamt by women. There was no difficulty in tracing these back to the infantile desire to
exhibit; but they differed in some respects from the ‘typical’ dreams of being naked which I
have discussed in the text.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        725

 

   In addition to this, repression plays a part in dreams of exhibiting; for

the distress felt in such dreams is a reaction on the part of the second

system against the content of the scene of exhibiting having found

expression  in  spite  of  the  ban  upon  it.  If  the  distress  was  to  be

avoided, the scene should never have been revived.

      We  shall  return  later  to  the  feeling  of  being  inhibited.  It  serves

admirably in dreams to represent a conflict in the will or a negative.

The  unconscious  purpose  requires  the  exhibiting  to  proceed;  the

censorship demands that it shall be stopped.

   There can be no doubt that the connections between our typical

dreams  and  fairy  tales  and  the  material  of  other  kinds  of  creative

writing are neither few nor accidental. It sometimes happens that the

sharp eye of a creative writer has an analytic realization of the process

of transformation of which he is habitually no more than the tool. If so,

he may follow the process in a reverse direction and so trace back the

imaginative  writing  to  a  dream.  One  of  my  friends  has  drawn  my

attention  to  the  following  passage  in  Gottfried  Keller’s Der  grüner

Heinrich: ‘I hope, my dear Lee, that you may never learn from your

own personal experience the peculiar and piquant truth of the plight of

Odysseus when he appeared, naked and covered with mud, before

the eyes of Nausicaä and her maidens! Shall I tell you how that can

happen? Let us look into our example. If you are wandering about in a

foreign land, far from your home and from all that you hold dear, if you

have seen and heard many things, have known sorrow and care, and

are wretched and forlorn, then without fail you will dream one night

that you are coming near to your home; you will see it gleaming and

shining  in  the  fairest  colours,  and  the  sweetest,  dearest  and  most

beloved forms will move towards you. Then suddenly you will becomeaware that you are in rags, naked and dusty. You will be seized with a

nameless shame and dread, you will seek to find covering and to hide

yourself, and you will awake bathed in sweat. This, so long as men

breathe,  is  the  dream  of  the  unhappy  wanderer;  and  Homer  has

evoked the picture of his plight from the deepest and eternal nature of

man.’

   The deepest and eternal nature of man, upon whose evocation in

his hearers the poet is accustomed to rely, lies in those impulses of

the mind which have their roots in a childhood that has since become

prehistoric. Suppressed and forbidden wishes from childhood break

through in the dream behind the exile’s unobjectionable wishes which

are  capable  of  entering  consciousness;  and  that  is  why  the  dream

which finds concrete expression in the legend of Nausicaä ends as a

rule as an anxiety-dream.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        726

 

   My own dream (recorded on p. 717) of running upstairs and of soon

afterwards finding myself glued to the steps was equally a dream of

exhibiting, since it bears the essential marks of being one. It should be

possible,  therefore,  to  trace  it  back  to  experiences  during  my

childhood, and if these could be discovered they should enable us to

judge how far the maid-servant’s behaviour to me - her accusing me

of dirtying the carpet - helped to give her her place in my dream. I can,

as it happens, provide the necessary particulars. In a psycho-analysis

one learns to interpret propinquity in time as representing connection

in subject-matter. Two thoughts which occur in immediate sequence

without any apparent connection are in fact part of a single unity which

has to be discovered; in just the same way, if I write an ‘a’ and a ‘b’ in

succession, they have to be pronounced as a single syllable ‘ab’. The

same is true of dreams. The staircase dream to which I have referred

was one of a series of dreams; and I understood the interpretation of

the  other  members  of  the  series.  Since  this  particular  dream  was

surrounded by the others it must have dealt with the same subject.

Now these other dreams were based on a recollection of a nurse inwhose charge I had been from some date during my earliest infancy

till I was two and a half. I even retain an obscure conscious memory of

her. According to what I was told not long ago by my mother, she was

old and ugly, but very sharp and efficient. From what I can infer from

my own dreams her treatment of me was not always excessive in its

amiability and her words could be harsh if I failed to reach the required

standard  of  cleanliness.  And  thus  the  maid  servant,  since  she  had

undertaken the job of carrying on this educational work, acquired the

right to be treated in my dream as a reincarnation of the prehistoric old

nurse. It is reasonable to suppose that the child loved the old woman

who taught him these lessons, in spite of her rough treatment of him.¹

 

   ¹ Here is an ‘over-interpretation’ of the same dream. Since ‘spuken [haunting]’ is an activity

of spirits, ‘spucken [spitting] on the stairs’ might be loosely rendered as ‘esprit d’escalier’. This
last phrase is equivalent to lack of ready repartee [‘Schlagfertigkeit’, literally ‘readiness to
strike’] - a failing to which I must in fact plead guilty. Was my nurse, I wonder, equally wanting
in that quality?
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        727

 

  (b)  DREAMS OF THE DEATH OF PERSONS OF WHOM THE DREAMER IS FOND

 

   Another group of dreams which may be described as typical are

those containing the death of some loved relative - for instance, of a

parent,  of  a  brother  or  sister,  or  of  a  child.  Two  classes  of  such

dreams must at once be distinguished: those in which the dreamer is

unaffected by grief, so that on awakening he is astonished at his lack

of feeling, and those in which the dreamer feels deeply pained by the

death and may even weep bitterly in his sleep.

   We need not consider the dreams of the first of these classes, for

they have no claim to be regarded as ‘typical’. If we analyse them, we

find that they have some meaning other than their apparent one, and

that  they  are  intended  to  conceal  some  other  wish.  Such  was  the

dream of the aunt who saw her sister’s only son lying in his coffin.

(See p. 647.)  It did not mean that she wished her little nephew dead;

as  we  have  seen,  it  merely  concealed  a  wish  to  see  a  particular

person of whom she was fond and whom she had not met for a longtime - a person whom she had once before met after a similarly long

interval beside the coffin of another nephew. This wish, which was the

true content of the dream, gave no occasion for grief, and no grief,

therefore, was felt in the dream. It will be noticed that the affect felt in

the dream belongs to its latent and not to its manifest content, and that

the  dream’s affective  content  has  remained  untouched  by  the

distortion which has overtaken its ideational content.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        728

 

   Very different are the dreams of the other class - those in which the

dreamer imagines the death of a loved relative and is at the same time

painfully  affected.  The  meaning  of  such  dreams,  as  their  content

indicates, is a wish that the person in question may die. And since I

must expect that the feelings of all of my readers and any others who

have  experienced  similar  dreams  will  rebel  against  my  assertion,  I

must  try  to  base  my  evidence  for  it  on  the  broadest  possible

foundation.

   I have already discussed a dream which taught us that the wishes

which are represented in dreams as fulfilled are not always present-

day wishes. They may also be wishes of the past which have been

abandoned, overlaid and repressed, and to which we have to attribute

some sort of continued existence only because of their re-emergence

in a dream. They are not dead in our sense of the word but only like

the shades in the Odyssey, which awoke to some sort of life as soon

as they had tasted blood. In the dream of the dead child in the ‘case’

(p. 154) what was involved was a wish which had been an immediate

one fifteen years earlier and was frankly admitted as having existed at

that time. I may add - and this may not be without its bearing upon the

theory of dreams - that even behind this wish there lay a memory from

the dreamer’s earliest childhood. When she was a small child - the

exact date could not be fixed with certainty - she had heard that her

mother  had  fallen  into  a  deep  depression  during  the  pregnancy  of

which she had been the fruit and had passionately wished that the

child  she  was  bearing  might  die.  When  the  dreamer  herself  wasgrown-up and pregnant, she merely followed her mother’s example.

   If anyone dreams, with every sign of pain, that his father or mother

or  brother  or  sister  has  died,  I  should  never  use  the  dream  as

evidence that he wishes for that person’s death of at the present time.

The theory of dreams does not require as much as that; it is satisfied

with the inference that this death has been wished for at some time or

other  during  the  dreamer’s  childhood.  I  fear,  however,  that  this

reservation  will  not  appease  the  objectors;  they  will  deny  the

possibility of their ever having had such a thought with just as much

energy as they insist that they harbour no such wishes now. I must

therefore reconstruct a portion of the vanished mental life of children

on the basis of the evidence of the present.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] Cf. my ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year Old Boy’ (1909b) and

my paper ‘On the Sexual Theories of Children’ (1908c).
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        729

 

 

   Let us first consider the relation of children to their brothers and

sisters. I do not know why we presuppose that that relation must be a

loving one; for instances of hostility between adult brothers and sisters

force  themselves  upon  everyone’s  experience  and  we  can  often

establish  the  fact  that  the  disunity  originated  in  childhood  or  has

always existed. But it is further true that a great many adults, who are

on affectionate terms with their brothers and sisters and are ready to

stand  by  them  to-day,  passed  their  childhood  on  almost  unbroken

terms  of  enmity  with  them.  The  elder  child  ill-treats  the  younger,

maligns him and robs him of his toys; while the younger is consumed

with impotent rage against the elder, envies and fears him, or meets

his oppressor with the first stirrings of a love of liberty and a sense of

justice. Their parents complain that the children do not get on with one

another, but cannot discover why. It is easy to see that the character

of even a good child is not what we should wish to find it in an adult.

Children are completely egoistic; they feel their needs intensely and

strive ruthlessly to satisfy them - especially as against the rivals, otherchildren, and first and foremost as against their brothers and sisters.

But we do not on that account call a child ‘bad’, we call him ‘naughty’;

he is no more answerable for his evil deeds in our judgement than in

the eyes of the law. And it is right that this should be so; for we may

expect that, before the end of the period which we count as childhood,

altruistic impulses and morality will awaken in the little egoist and (to

use  Meynert’s  terms)  a  secondary  ego  will  overlay  and  inhibit  the

primary  one.  It  is  true,  no  doubt,  that  morality  does  not  set  in

simultaneously  all  along  the  line  and  that  the  length  of  non-moral

childhood varies in different individuals. If this morality fails to develop,

we  like  to  talk  of  ‘degeneracy’,  though  what  in  fact  faces  us  is  an

inhibition  in  development.  After  the  primary  character  has  already

been overlaid by later development, it can still be laid bare again, at all

events in part, in cases of hysterical illness. There is a really striking

resemblance between what is known as the hysterical character and

that  of  a  naughty  child.  Obsessional  neurosis,  on  the  contrary,

corresponds to a super-morality imposed as a reinforcing weight upon

fresh stirrings of the primary character.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        730

 

   Many people, therefore, who love their brothers and sisters and

would feel bereaved if they were to die, harbour evil wishes against

them in their unconscious, dating from earlier times; and these are

capable of being realized in dreams.

   It is of quite particular interest, however, to observe the behaviour of

small children up to the age of two or three or a little older towards

their younger brothers and sisters. Here, for instance, was a child who

had so far been the only one; and now he was told that the stork had

brought a new baby. He looked the new arrival up and down and then

declared decisively: ‘The stork can take him away again!’¹ I am quite

seriously of the opinion that a child can form a just estimate of the set-

back he has to expect at the hands of the little stranger. A lady of my

acquaintance,  who  is  on  very  good  terms  to-day  with  a  sister  four

years her junior, tells me that she greeted the news of her first arrivalwith this qualification: ‘But all the same I shan’t give her my red cap!’

Even if a child only comes to realize the situation later on, his hostility

will date from that moment. I know of a case in which a little girl of less

than three tried to strangle an infant in its cradle because she felt that

its continued presence boded her no good. Children at that time of life

are capable of jealousy of any degree of intensity and obviousness.

Again, if it should happen that the baby sister does in fact disappear

after a short while, the elder child will find the whole affection of the

household once more concentrated upon himself. If after that the stork

should  bring  yet  another  baby,  it  seems  only  logical  that  the  little

favourite should nourish a wish that his new competitor may meet with

the same fate as the earlier one, so that he himself may be as happy

as he was originally and during the interval.² Normally, of course, this

attitude  of  a  child  towards  a  younger  brother  or  sister  is  a  simple

function of the difference between their ages. Where the gap in time is

sufficiently long, an elder girl will already begin to feel the stirring of

her maternal instincts towards the helpless new born baby.

 

    ¹ [Footnote added  1909:]  The  three-and-a-half-year-old  Hans  (whose  phobia  was  the

subject of the analysis mentioned in the preceding footnote) exclaimed shortly after the birth
of a sister, while he was suffering from a feverish sore throat: ‘I don’t want a baby sister!’
During his neurosis eighteen months later he frankly confessed to a wish that his mother
might drop the baby into the bath so that the would die. At the same time, Hans was a good-
natured  and  affectionate  child,  who  soon  grew  fond  of  this  same  sister  and  particularly
enjoyed taking her under his wing.

   ² [Footnote added 1914:] Deaths that are experienced in this way in childhood may quickly

be forgotten in the family; but psycho-analytic research shows that they have a very important
influence on subsequent neuroses.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        731

 

      Hostile  feelings  towards  brothers  and  sisters  must  be  far  more

frequent in childhood than the unseeing eye of the adult observer can

perceive.¹

   In the case of my own children, who followed each other in rapid

succession, I neglected the opportunity of carrying out observations of

this kind; but I am now making up for this neglect by observing a small

nephew,  whose  autocratic  rule  was  upset,  after  lasting  for  fifteenmonths, by the appearance of a female rival. I am told, it is true, that

the young man behaves in the most chivalrous manner to his little

sister, that he kisses her hand and strokes her; but I have been able to

convince myself that even before the end of his second year he made

use of his powers of speech for the purpose of criticizing someone

whom  he  could  not  fail  to  regard  as  superfluous.  Whenever  the

conversation touched upon her he used to intervene in it and exclaim

petulantly: ‘Too ‘ickle! too ‘ickle!’ During the last few months the baby’s

growth has made enough progress to place her beyond this particular

ground for contempt, and the little boy has found a different basis for

his assertion that she does not deserve so much attention: at every

suitable  opportunity  he  draws  attention  to  the  fact  that  she  has  no

teeth.²  We  all  of  us  recollect  how  the  eldest  girl  of  another  of  my

sisters, who was then a child of six, spent half an hour in insisting

upon each of her aunts in succession agreeing with her: ‘Lucie can’t

understand that yet, can she?’ she kept asking. Lucie was her rival -

two and a half years her junior.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] Since this was written, a large number of observations have been

made and recorded in the literature of psycho-analysis upon the originally hostile attitude of
children towards their brothers and sisters and one of their parents. The author and poet
Spitteler  has  given  us  a  particularly  genuine  and  naïve  account  of  this  childish  attitude,
derived from his own childhood: ‘Moreover there was a second Adolf there: a little creature
who they alleged was my brother, though I could not see what use he was and still less why
they made as much fuss of him as of me myself. I was sufficient so far as I was concerned;
why should I want a brother? And he was not merely useless, he was positively in the way.
When I pestered my grandmother, he wanted to pester her too. When I was taken out in the
perambulator, he sat opposite to me and took up half the space, so that we were bound to
kick each other with our feet.’

   ² [Footnote added 1909:] Little Hans, when he was three and a half, gave vent to a crushing

criticism of his sister in the same words. It was because of her lack of teeth, he supposed, that
she was unable to talk.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        732

 

   In none of my women patients, to take an example, have I failed to

come upon this dream of the death of a brother or sister, which tallies

with an increase in hostility. I have only found a single exception; and

it  was  easy  to  interpret  this  as  a  confirmation  of  the  rule.  On  oneoccasion during an analytic session I was explaining this subject to a

lady,  since  in  view  of  her  symptom  its  discussion  seemed  to  me

relevant. To my astonishment she replied that she had never had such

a dream. Another dream, however, occurred to her, which ostensibly

had no connection with the topic - a dream which she had first dreamt

when she was four years old and at that time the youngest of the

family, and which she had dreamt repeatedly since: A whole crowd of

children - all her brothers, sisters and cousins of both sexes - were

romping  in  a  field.  Suddenly  they  all  grew  wings,  flew  away  and

disappeared. She had no idea what this dream meant; but it is not

hard to recognize that in its original form it had been a dream of the

death  of  all  her  brothers  and  sisters,  and  had  been  only  slightly

influenced by the censorship. I may venture to suggest the following

analysis. On the occasion of the death of one of this crowd of children

(in  this  instance  the  children  of  two  brothers  had  been  brought  up

together as a single family) the dreamer, not yet four years old at the

time, must have asked some wise grown-up person what became of

children when they were dead. The reply must have been: ‘They grow

wings and turn into little angels.’ In the dream which followed upon this

piece of information all the dreamer’s brothers and sisters had wings

like angels and - which is the main point - flew away. Our little baby-

killer was left alone, strange to say: the only survivor of the whole

crowd!  We  can  hardly  be  wrong  in  supposing  that  the  fact  of  the

children romping in field before flying away points to butterflies. It is as

though the child was led by the same chain of thought as the peoples

of antiquity to picture the soul as having a butterfly’s wings.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        733

 

   At this point someone will perhaps interrupt: ‘Granted that children

have hostile impulses towards their brothers and sisters, how can a

child’s mind reach such a pitch of depravity as to wish for the death of

his rivals or of playmates stronger than himself, as though the death

penalty were the only punishment for every crime?’ Anyone who talks

like this has failed to bear in mind that a child’s idea of being ‘dead’has nothing much in common with ours apart from the word. Children

know nothing of the horrors of corruption, of freezing in the ice-cold

grave, of the terrors of eternal nothingness - ideas which grown-up

people find it so hard to tolerate, as is proved by all the myths of a

future life. The fear of death has no meaning to a child; hence it is that

he will play with the dreadful word and use it as a threat against a

playmate: ‘If you do that again, you’ll die, like Franz!’ Meanwhile the

poor  mother  gives  a  shudder  and  remembers,  perhaps,  that  the

greater half of the human race fail to survive their childhood years. It

was actually possible for a child, who was over eight years old at the

time, coming home from a visit to the Natural History Museum, to say

to his mother: ‘I’m so fond of you, Mummy: when you die I’II have you

stuffed and I’II keep you in this room, so that I can see you all the

time.’ So little resemblance is there between a child’s idea of being

dead and our own!¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1909:] I was astonished to hear a highly intelligent boy often remark after

the sudden death of his father: ‘I know father’s dead, but what I can’t understand is why he
doesn’t come home to supper.' - [Added 1919:] Further material on this subject will be found in
the first volumes of the periodical Imago, under the standing rubric of ‘Vom wahren Wesen der
Kinderseele'.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        734

 

   To children, who, moreover, are spared the sight of the scenes of

suffering which precede death, being ‘dead’ means approximately the

same as being ‘gone’ - not troubling the survivors any longer. A child

makes no distinction as to how this absence is brought about: whether

it is due to a journey, to a dismissal, to an estrangement, or to death.¹

If, during a child’s prehistoric epoch, his nurse has been dismissed,

and  if  soon  afterwards  his  mother  has  died,  the  two  events  are

superimposed  on  each  other  in  a  single  series  in  his  memory  as

revealed in analysis. When people are absent, children do not miss

them with any great intensity; many mothers have learnt this to their

sorrow  when,  after  being  away  from  home  for  some  weeks  on  a

summer holiday, they are met on their return by the news that the

children have not once asked after their mummy. If their mother doesactually make the journey to that ‘undiscover’d country, from whose

bourn no traveller returns’, children seem at first to have forgotten her,

and it is only later on that they begin to call their dead mother to mind.

   Thus if a child has reasons for wishing the absence of another, there

is nothing to restrain him from giving his wish the form of the other

child  being  dead.  And  the  psychical  reaction  to  dreams  containing

death-wishes  proves  that,  in  spite  of  the  different  content  of  these

wishes in the case of children, they are nevertheless in some way or

other the same as wishes expressed in the same terms by adults.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added  1919:]  An  observation  made  by  a  parent  who  had  a  knowledge  of

psycho-analysis  caught  the  actual  moment  at  which  his  highly  intelligent  four-year-old
daughter perceived the distinction between being ‘gone’ and being ‘dead’. The little girl had
been troublesome at meal-time and noticed that one of the maids at the pension where they
were staying was looking at her askance. ‘I wish Josefine was dead’, was the child’s comment
to her father. ‘Why dead?’ enquired her father soothingly; ‘wouldn’t it do if she went away?’
‘No’, replied the child; ‘then she’d come back again.’ The unbounded self-love (the narcissism)
of children regards any interference as an act of lèse majesté; and their feelings demand (like
the Draconian code) that any such crime shall receive the one form of punishment which
admits of no degrees.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        735

 

 

   If, then, a child’s death-wishes against his brothers and sisters are

explained by the childish egoism which makes him regard them as his

rivals, how are we to explain his death-wishes against his parents,

who  surround  him  with  love  and  fulfil  his  needs  and  whose

preservation that same egoism should lead him to desire?

   A solution of this difficulty is afforded by the observation that dreams

of  the  death  of  parents  apply  with  preponderant  frequency  to  the

parent  who  is  of  the  same  sex  as  the  dreamer:  that  men,  that  is,

dream mostly of their father’s death and women of their mother’s. I

cannot pretend that this is universally so, but the preponderance in the

direction I have indicated is so evident that it requires to be explained

by a factor of general importance.¹ It is as though - to put it bluntly - a

sexual preference were making itself felt at an early age: as though

boys regarded their fathers and girls their mothers as their rivals inlove, whose elimination could not fail to be to their advantage.

   Before this idea is rejected as a monstrous one, it is as well in this

case, too, to consider the real relations obtaining - this time between

parents and children. We must distinguish between what the cultural

standards  of  filial  piety  demand  of  this  relation  and  what  everyday

observation shows it in fact to be. More than one occasion for hostility

lies concealed in the relation between parents and children - a relation

which affords the most ample opportunities for wishes to arise which

cannot pass the censorship.

      Let  us  consider  first  the  relation  between  father  and  son.  The

sanctity which we attribute to the rules laid down in the Decalogue

has, I think, blunted our powers of perceiving the real facts. We seem

scarcely to venture to observe that the majority of mankind disobey

the Fifth Commandment. Alike in the lowest and in the highest strata

of human society filial piety is wont to give way to other interests. The

obscure information which is brought to us by mythology and legend

from the primaeval ages of human society gives an unpleasing picture

of the father’s despotic power and of the ruthlessness with which he

made use of it. Kronos devoured his children, just as the wild boar

devours the sow’s litter; while Zeus emasculated his father² and made

himself ruler in his place. The more unrestricted was the rule of the

father in the ancient family, the more must the son, as his destined

successor, have found himself in the position of an enemy, and the

more impatient must he have been to become ruler himself though his

father’s death. Even in our middle-class families fathers are as a rule

inclined to refuse their sons independence and the means necessary

to secure it and thus to foster the growth of the germ of hostility which

is inherent in their relation. A physician will often be in a position to

notice how a son’s grief at the loss of his father cannot suppress his

satisfaction at having at length won his freedom. In our society to-day

fathers  are  apt  to  cling  desperately  to  what  is  left  of  a  now  sadly

antiquated protestas patris familias;  and  an  author  who,  like  Ibsen,

brings  the  immemorial  struggle  between  fathers  and  sons  into

prominence in his writings may be certain of producing his effect.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1925:] The situation is often obscured by the emergence of a self-

punitive impulse, which threatens the dreamer, by way of a moral reaction, with the loss of the
parent whom he loves.   ² [Footnote added 1909:] Or so he is reported to have done according to some myths.

According to others, emasculation was only carried out by Kronos on his father Uranus. For
the mythological significance of this theme, cf. Rank, 1909, [added 1914:] and Rank, 1912c,
Chapter IX, Section 2.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        736

 

   Occasions for conflict between a daughter and her mother arise

when the daughter begins to grow up and long for sexual liberty, but

finds  herself  under  her  mother’s  tutelage;  while  the  mother,  on  the

other  hand,  is  warned  by  her  daughter’s  growth  that  the  time  has

come  when  she  herself  must  abandon  her  claims  to  sexual

satisfaction.

   All of this is patent to the eyes of everyone. But it does not help us in

our endeavour to explain dreams of a parent’s death in people whose

piety towards their parents has long been unimpeachably established.

Previous discussions, moreover, will have prepared us to learn that

the death-wish against parents dates back to earliest childhood.

   This supposition is confirmed with a certainty beyond all doubt in the

case  of  psychoneurotics  when  they  are  subjected  to  analysis.  We

learn from them that a child’s sexual wishes - if in their embryonic

stage they deserve to be so described - awaken very early, and that a

girl’s first affection is for her father and a boy’s first childish desires are

for his mother. Accordingly, the father becomes a disturbing rival to

the boy and the mother to the girl; and I have already shown in the

case of brothers and sisters how easily such feelings can lead to a

death-wish.  The  parents  too  give  evidence  as  a  rule  of  sexual

partiality: a natural predilection usually sees to it that a man tends to

spoil his little daughters, while his wife take her sons’ part; though both

of them, where their judgement is not disturbed by the magic of sex,

keep a strict eye upon their children’s education. The child is very well

aware of this partiality and turns against that one of his parents who is

opposed to showing it. Being loved by an adult does not merely bring

a child the satisfaction of a special need; it also means that he will get

what he wants in every other respect as well. Thus he will be following

his own sexual instinct and at the same time giving fresh strength tothe inclination shown by his parents if his choice between them falls in

with theirs.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        737

 

      The  signs  of  these  infantile  preferences  are  for  the  most  part

overlooked; yet some of them are to be observed even after the first

years of childhood. An eight-year-old girl of my acquaintance, if her

mother is called away from the table, makes use of the occasion to

proclaim herself her successor: ‘I’m going to be Mummy now. Do you

want some more greens, Karl? Well, help yourself, then!’ and so on. A

particularly gifted and lively girl of four, in whom this piece of child

psychology is especially transparent, declared quite openly: ‘Mummy

can go away now. Then Daddy must marry me and I’II be his wife.’

Such a wish occurring in a child is not in the least inconsistent with her

being tenderly attached to her mother. If a little boy is allowed to sleep

beside his mother when his father is away from home, but has to go

back to the nursery and to someone of whom he is far less fond as

soon as his father returns, he may easily begin to form a wish that his

father should always be away, so that he himself could keep his place

beside  his  dear,  lovely  Mummy.  One  obvious  way  of  attaining  this

wish would be if his father were dead; for the child has learnt one thing

by  experience  namely  that  ‘dead’  people,  such  as  Grandaddy,  are

always away and never come back.

 

   Though observations of this kind on small children fit in perfectly

with  the  interpretation  I  have  proposed,  they  do  not  carry  such

complete  conviction  as  is  forced  upon  the  physician  by  psycho-

analyses of adult neurotics. In the latter case dreams of the sort we

are considering are introduced into the analysis in such a context that

it is impossible to avoid interpreting them as wishful dreams.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        738

    One day one of my women patients was in a distressed and tearful

mood. ‘I don’t want ever to see my relations again’, she said, ‘they

must think me horrible.’ She then went on, with almost no transition, to

say that she remembered a dream, though of course she had no idea

what it meant. When she was four years old she had a dream that a

lynx or a fox was walking on the roof; then something had fallen down

or she had fallen down; and then her mother was carried out of the

house dead - and then she wept bitterly. I told her that this dream

must mean that when she was a child she had wished she could see

her mother dead, and that it must be on account of the dream that she

felt her relations must think her horrible. I had scarcely said this when

she produced some material which threw light on the dream. ‘Lynx

eye’ was a term of abuse that had been thrown at her by a street-

urchin when she was a very small child. When she was three years

old, a tile off the roof had fallen on her mother’s head and made it

bleed violently.

   I once had an opportunity of making a detailed study of a young

woman  who  passed  through  a  variety  of  psychical  conditions.  Her

illness began with a state of confusional excitement during which she

displayed a quite special aversion to her mother, hitting and abusing

her whenever she came near her bed, while at the same period she

was docile and affectionate towards a sister who was many years her

senior.  This  was  followed  by  a  state  in  which  she  was  lucid  but

somewhat apathetic and suffered from badly disturbed sleep. It was

during this phase that I began treating her and analysing her dreams.

An immense number of these dreams were concerned, with a greater

or less degree of disguise, with the death of her mother: at one time

she would be attending an old woman’s funeral, at another she and

her sister would be sitting at table dressed in mourning. There could

be no question as to the meaning of these dreams. As her condition

improved  still  further,  hysterical  phobias  developed.  The  most

tormenting of these was a fear that something might have happened

to her mother. She was obliged to hurry home, wherever she might

be, to convince herself that her mother was still alive. This case, taken

in conjunction with what I had learnt from other sources, was highly

instructive: it exhibited, translated as it were into different languages,

the various ways in which the psychical apparatus reacted to one andthe same exciting idea. In the confusional state, in which, as I believe,

the  second  psychical  agency  was  overwhelmed  by  the  normally

suppressed first one, her unconscious hostility to her mother found a

powerful motor expression. When the calmer condition set in, when

the rebellion was suppressed and the domination of the censorship re-

established,  the  only  region  left  open  in  which  her  hostility  could

realize the wish for her mother’s death was that of dreaming . When a

normal state was still more firmly established, it led to the production

of her exaggerated worry about her mother as a hysterical counter-

reaction and defensive phenomenon. In view of this it is no longer

hard to understand why hysterical girls are so often attached to their

mothers with such exaggerated affection.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        739

 

   On another occasion I had an opportunity of obtaining a deep insight

into  the  unconscious  mind  of  a  young  man  whose  life  was  made

almost impossible by an obsessional neurosis. He was unable to go

out into the street because he was tortured by the fear that he would

kill everyone he met. He spent his days in preparing his alibi in case

he might be charged with one of the murders committed in the town. It

is unnecessary to add that he was a man of equally high morals and

education.  The  analysis  (which,  incidentally,  led  to  his  recovery)

showed that the basis of this distressing obsession was an impulse to

murder  his  somewhat  over-severe  father.  This  impulse,  to  his

astonishment, had been consciously expressed when he was seven

years  old,  but  it  had,  of  course,  originated  much  earlier  in  his

childhood.  After  his  father’s  painful  illness  and  death,  the  patient’s

obsessional self-reproaches appeared - he was in his thirty-first year

at the time - taking the shape of a phobia transferred on to strangers.

A person, he felt, who was capable of wanting to push his own father

over a precipice from the top of a mountain was not to be trusted to

respect the lives of those less closely related to him; he was quite right

to shut himself up in his room.

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        740

 

 

   In my experience, which is already extensive, the chief part in the

mental  lives  of  all  children  who  later  become  psychoneurotics  is

played by their parents. Being in love with the one parent and hating

the  other  are  among  the  essential  constituents  of  the  stock  of

psychical impulses which is formed at that time and which is of such

importance in determining the symptoms of the later neurosis. It is not

my belief, however, that psychoneurotics differ sharply in this respect

from other human beings who remain normal - that they are able, that

is, to create something absolutely new and peculiar to themselves. It

is  far  more  probable  -  and  this  is  confirmed  by  occasional

observations on normal children - that they are only distinguished by

exhibiting on a magnified scale feelings of love and hatred to their

parents which occur less obviously and less intensely in the minds of

most children.

   This discovery is confirmed by a legend that has come down to us

from classical antiquity: a legend whose profound and universal power

to move can only be understood if the hypothesis I have put forward in

regard to the psychology of children has an equally universal validity.

What I have in mind is the legend of King Oedipus and Sophocles’

drama which bears his name.

      Oedipus,  son  of  Laïus,  King  of  Thebes,  and  of  Jocasta,  was

exposed as an infant because an oracle had warned Laius that the still

unborn child would be his father’s murderer. The child was rescued,

and grew up as a prince in an alien court, until, in doubts as to his

origin,  he  too  questioned  the  oracle  and  was  warned  to  avoid  his

home since he was destined to murder his father and take his mother

in marriage. On the road leading away from what he believed was his

home, he met King Laïus and slew him in a sudden quarrel. He came

next  to  Thebes  and  solved  the  riddle  set  him  by  the  Sphinx  who

barred his way. Out of gratitude the Thebans made him their king and

gave him Jocasta’s hand in marriage. He reigned long in peace and

honour, and she who, unknown to him, was his mother bore him two

sons  and  two  daughters.  Then  at  last  a  plague  broke  out  and  theThebans made enquiry once more of the oracle. It is at this point that

Sophocles’ tragedy opens. The messengers bring back the reply that

the plague will cease when the murderer of Laïus has been driven

from the land.

 

                                                But he, where is he? Where shall now be read
                                                The fading record of this ancient guilt?

 

The action of the play consists in nothing other than the process of

revealing,  with  cunning  delays  and  ever-mounting  excitement  -  a

process that can be likened to the work of a psycho-analysis - that

Oedipus himself is the murderer of Laïus, but further that he is the son

of  the  murdered  man  and  of  Jocasta.  Appalled  at  the  abomination

which  he  has  unwittingly  perpetrated,  Oedipus  blinds  himself  and

forsakes his home. The oracle has been fulfilled.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        741

 

   Oedipus Rex is what is known as a tragedy of destiny. Its tragic

effect is said to lie in the contrast between the supreme will of the

gods  and  the  vain  attempts  of  mankind  to  escape  the  evil  that

threatens  them.  The  lesson  which,  it  is  said,  the  deeply  moved

spectator should learn from the tragedy is submission to the divine will

and  realization  of  his  own  impotence.  Modern  dramatists  have

accordingly  tried  to  achieve  a  similar  tragic  effect  by  weaving  the

same contrast into a plot invented by themselves. But the spectators

have looked on unmoved while a curse or an oracle was fulfilled in

spite of all the efforts of some innocent man: later tragedies of destiny

have failed in their effect.

   If Oedipus Rex moves a modern audience no less than it did the

contemporary Greek one, the explanation can only be that its effect

does not lie in the contrast between destiny and human will, but is to

be looked for in the particular nature of the material on which that

contrast  is  exemplified.  There  must  be  something  which  makes  a

voice within us ready to recognize the compelling force of destiny in

the Oedipus,  while  we  can  dismiss  as  merely  arbitrary  suchdispositions as are laid down in Die Ahnfrau or other modern tragedies

of destiny. And a factor of this kind is in fact involved in the story of

King Oedipus. His destiny moves us only because it might have been

ours - because the oracle laid the same curse upon us before our birth

as upon him. It is the fate of all of us, perhaps, to direct our first sexual

impulse  towards  our  mother  and  our  first  hatred  and  our  first

murderous wish against our father. Our dreams convince us that that

is so. King Oedipus, who slew his father Laïus and married his mother

Jocasta, merely shows us the fulfilment of our own childhood wishes.

But, more fortunate than he, we have meanwhile succeeded, in so far

as  we  have  not  become  psychoneurotics,  in  detaching  our  sexual

impulses  from  our  mothers  and  in  forgetting  our  jealousy  of  our

fathers. Here is one in whom these primaeval wishes of our childhood

have been fulfilled, and we shrink back from him with the whole force

of the repression by which those wishes have since that time been

held down within us. While the poet, as he unravels the past, brings to

light  the  guilt  of  Oedipus,  he  is  at  the  same  time  compelling  us  to

recognize our own inner minds, in which those same impulses, though

suppressed, are still to be found. The contrast with which the closing

Chorus leaves us confronted -

 

                              . . . Fix on Oedipus your eyes,
Who resolved the dark enigma, noblest champion and most wise.
Like a star his envied fortune mounted beaming far and wide:
Now he sinks in seas of anguish, whelmed beneath a raging tide . . .

 

- strikes as a warning at ourselves and our pride, at us who since our

childhood have grown so wise and so mighty in our own eyes. Like

Oedipus, we live in ignorance of these wishes, repugnant to morality,

which have been forced upon us by Nature, and after their revelation

we may all of us well seek to close our eyes to the scenes of our

childhood.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] None of the findings of psycho-analytic research has provoked

such embittered denials, such fierce opposition - or such amusing contortions - on the part of
critics  as  this  indication  of  the  childhood  impulses  towards  incest  which  persist  in  the
unconscious.  An  attempt  has  even  been  made  recently  to  make  out,  in  the  face  of  all
experience, that the incest should only be taken as ‘symbolic’. - Ferenczi (1912) has proposed
an  ingenious  ‘over-interpretation’  of  the  Oedipus  myth,  based  on  a  passage  in  one  of
Schopenhauer’s letters. - [Added 1919:] Later studies have shown that the ‘Oedipus complex’,which was touched upon for the first time in the above paragraphs in the Interpretation of
Dreams, throws a light of undreamt-of importance on the history of the human race and the
evolution of religion and morality - (See my Totem and Taboo, 1912-13.)
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        742

 

   There is an unmistakable indication in the text of Sophocles’ tragedy

itself that the legend of Oedipus sprang from some primaeval dream-

material  which  had  as  its  content  the  distressing  disturbance  of  a

child’s relation to his parents owing to the first stirrings of sexuality. At

a point when Oedipus, though he is not yet enlightened, has begun to

feel troubled by his recollection of the oracle, Jocasta consoles him by

referring to a dream which many people dream, though, as she thinks,

it has no meaning:

 

                                                Many a man ere now in dreams hath lain
                                                With her who bare him. He hath least annoy
                                                Who with such omens troubleth not his mind.

 

To-day, just as then, many men dream of having sexual relations with

their  mothers,  and  speak  of  the  fact  with  indignation  and

astonishment. It is clearly the key to the tragedy and the complement

to the dream of the dreamer’s father being dead. The story of Oedipus

is the reaction of the imagination to these two typical dreams. And just

as  these  dreams,  when  dreamt  by  adults,  are  accompanied  by

feelings of repulsion, so too the legend must include horror and self-

punishment.  Its  further  modification  originates  once  again  in  a

misconceived secondary revision of the material, which has sought to

exploit it for theological purposes. (Cf. the dream-material in dreams of

exhibiting, p. 721 f.)  The  attempt  to  harmonize  divine  omnipotence

with  human  responsibility  must  naturally  fail  in  connection  with  this

subject-matter just as with any other.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        743

  

      Another  of  the  great  creations  of  tragic  poetry,  Shakespeare’s

Hamlet,  has  its  roots  in  the  same  soil  as Oedipus  Rex.  But  the

changed treatment of the same material reveals the whole difference

in the mental life of these two widely separated epochs of civilization:

the secular advance of repression in the emotional life of mankind. In

the Oedipus the child’s wishful phantasy that underlies it is brought

into the open and realized as it would be in a dream. In Hamlet it

remains repressed; and - just as in the case of a neurosis - we only

learn  of  its  existence  from  its  inhibiting  consequences.  Strangely

enough,  the  overwhelming  effect  produced  by  the  more  modern

tragedy has turned out to be compatible with the fact that people have

remained completely in the dark as to the hero’s character. The play is

built up on Hamlet’s hesitations over fulfilling the task of revenge that

is assigned to him; but its text offers no reasons or motives for these

hesitations and an immense variety of attempts at interpreting them

have  failed  to  produce  a  result.  According  to  the  view  which  was

originated  by  Goethe  and  is  still  the  prevailing  one  to-day,  Hamlet

represents the type of man whose power of direct action is paralysed

by an excessive development of his intellect. (He is ‘sicklied o’er with

the pale cast of thought.’) According to another view, the dramatist

has tried to portray a pathologically irresolute character which might

be  classed  as  neurasthenic.  The  plot  of  the  drama  shows  us,

however,  that  Hamlet  is  far  from  being  represented  as  a  person

incapable  of  taking  any  action.  We  see  him  doing  so  on  two

occasions:  first  in  a  sudden  outburst  of  temper,  when  he  runs  his

sword through the eavesdropper behind the arras, and secondly in a

premeditated and even crafty fashion, when, with all the callousness

of a Renaissance prince, he sends the two courtiers to the death that

had  been  planned  for  himself.  What  is  it,  then,  that  inhibits  him  in

fulfilling  the  task  set  him  by  his  father’s  ghost?  The  answer,  once

again, is that it is the peculiar nature of the task. Hamlet is able to do

anything - except take vengeance on the man who did away with his

father  and  took  that  father’s  place  with  his  mother,  the  man  who

shows him the repressed wishes of his own childhood realized. Thus

the loathing which should drive him on to revenge is replaced in him

by self-reproaches, by scruples of conscience, which remind him thathe himself is literally no better than the sinner whom he is to punish.

Here I have translated into conscious terms what was bound to remain

unconscious in Hamlet’s mind; and if any one is inclined to call him a

hysteric,  I  can  only  accept  the  fact  as  one  that  is  implied  by  my

interpretation. The distaste for sexuality expressed by Hamlet in his

conversation with Ophelia fits in very well with this: the same distaste

which was destined to take possession of the poet’s mind more and

more during the years that followed, and which reached its extreme

expression in Timon of Athens. For it can of course only be the poet’s

own  mind  which  confronts  us  in  Hamlet.  I  observe  in  a  book  on

Shakespeare by Georg Brandes (1896) a statement that Hamlet was

written immediately after the death of Shakespeare’s father (in 1601),

that is, under the immediate impact of his bereavement and, as we

may well assume, while his childhood feelings about his father had

been freshly revived. It is known, too, that Shakespeare’s own son

who died at an early age bore the name of ‘Hamnet’, which is identical

with ‘Hamlet’. Just as Hamlet deals with the relation of a son to his

parents,  so Macbeth  (written  at  approximately  the  same  period)  is

concerned with the subject of childlessness. But just as all neurotic

symptoms, and, for that matter, dreams, are capable of being ‘over-

interpreted’ and indeed need to be, if they are to be fully understood,

so all genuinely creative writings are the product of more than a single

motive and more than a single impulse in the poet’s mind, and are

open to more than a single interpretation. In what I have written I have

only attempted to interpret the deepest layer of impulses in the mind of

the creative writer.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1919:] The above indications of a psycho-analytic explanation of Hamlet

have since been amplified by Ernest Jones and defended against the alternative views put
forward in the literature of the subject. (See Jones, 1910a .) - [Added 1930:] Incidentally, I
have in the meantime ceased to believe that the author of Shakespeare’s works was the man
from Stratford. - [Added 1919:] Further attempts at an analysis of Macbeth will be found in a
paper of mine and in one by Jekels (1917).
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        744

 

    I cannot leave the subject of typical dreams of the death of loved

relatives,  without  adding  a  few  more  words  to  throw  light  on  their

significance for the theory of dreams in general. In these dreams we

find the highly unusual condition realized of a dream-thought formed

by a repressed wish entirely eluding censorship and passing into the

dream without modification. There must be special factors at work to

make this event possible, and I believe that the occurrence of these

dreams is facilitated by two such factors. Firstly, there is no wish that

seems more remote from us than this one: ‘we couldn’t even dream’ -

so we believe - of wishing such a thing. For this reason the dream-

censorship is not armed to meet such a monstrosity, just as Solon’s

penal code contained no punishment for parricide. Secondly, in this

case  the  repressed  and  unsuspected  wish  is  particularly  often  met

half-way by a residue from the previous day in the form of a worry

about the safety of the person concerned. This worry can only make

its way into the dream by availing itself of the corresponding wish;

while the wish can disguise itself behind the worry that has become

active during the day. We may feel inclined to think that things are

simpler than this and that one merely carries on during the night and

in dreams with what one has been turning over in one’s mind during

the day; but if so we shall be leaving dreams of the death of people of

whom  the  dreamer  is  fond  completely  in  the  air  and  without  any

connection with our explanation of dreams in general, and we shall

thus  be  clinging  quite  unnecessarily  to  a  riddle  which  is  perfectly

capable of solution.

      It  is  also  instructive  to  consider  the  relation  of  these  dreams  to

anxiety-dreams. In the dreams we have been discussing, a repressed

wish has found a means of evading censorship - and the distortion

which censorship involves. The invariable concomitant is that painful

feelings are experienced in the dream. In just the same way anxiety-

dreams  only  occur  if  the  censorship  has  been  wholly  or  partly

overpowered;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  overpowering  of  the

censorship is facilitated if anxiety has already been produced as an

immediate  sensation  arising  from  somatic  sources.  We  can  thus

plainly see the purpose for which the censorship exercises its office

and  brings  about  the  distortion  of  dreams:  it  does  so in  order  to

prevent the generation of anxiety or other forms of distressing affect. 

   I have spoken above of the egoism of children’s minds, and I may

now add, with a hint at a possible connection between the two facts,

that dreams have the same characteristic. All of them are completely

egoistic: the beloved ego appears in all of them, even though it may

be disguised. The wishes that are fulfilled in them are invariably the

ego’s wishes, and if a dream seems to have been provoked by an

altruistic interest, we are only being deceived by appearances. Here

are  a  few  analyses  of  instances  which  seem  to  contradict  this

assertion.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        745

 

                                            I

 

   A child of under four years old reported having dreamt that he had

seen a big dish with a big joint of roast meat and vegetables on it. All

at once the joint had been eaten up - whole and without being cut up.

He had not seen the person who ate it.¹

      Who  can  the  unknown  person  have  been  whose  sumptuous

banquet  of  meat  was  the  subject  of  the  little  boy’s  dream?  His

experiences during the dream-day must enlighten us on the subject.

By doctor’s orders he had been put on a milk diet for the past few

days. On the evening of the dream-day he had been naughty, and as

a punishment he had been sent to bed without his supper. He had

been through this hunger-cure once before and had been very brave

about it. He knew he would get nothing, but would not allow himself to

show by so much as a single word that he was hungry. Education had

already begun to have an effect on him: it found expression in this

dream, which exhibits the beginning of dream-distortion. There can be

no doubt that the person whose wishes were aimed at this lavish meal

-  a  meat  meal,  too  -  was  himself.  But  since  he  knew  he  was  not

allowed  it,  he  did  not  venture  to  sit  down  to  the  meal  himself,  as

hungry children do in dreams. (Cf. my little daughter Anna’s dream of

strawberries  on p.  628.)  The  person  who  ate  the  meal  remained

anonymous. 

                                            II

 

   I dreamt one night that I saw in the window of a book-shop a new

volume in one of the series of monographs for connoisseurs which I

am  in  the  habit  of  buying  -  monographs  on  great  artists,  on  world

history,  on  famous  cities,  etc. The  new  series  was  called  ‘Famous

Speakers’  or  ‘Speeches’  and  its  first  volume  bore  the  name  of  Dr.

Lecher.

   When I came to analyse this, it seemed to me improbable that I

should be concerned in my dreams with the fame of Dr. Lecher, the

non-stop  speaker  of  the  German  Nationalist  obstructionists  in

Parliament. The position was that a few days earlier I had taken on

some new patients for psychological treatment, and was now obliged

to talk for ten or eleven hours every day. So it was I myself who was a

non-stop speaker.

 

   ¹ The appearance in dreams of things of great size and in great quantities and amounts,

and of exaggeration generally, may be another childish characteristic. Children have no more
ardent wish than to be big and grown-up and to get as much of things as grown-up people do.
They are hard to satisfy, know no such word as `enough’ and insist insatiably on a repetition
of things which they have enjoyed or whose taste they liked. It is only the civilizing influence of
education that teaches them moderation and how to be content or resigned. Everyone knows
that neurotics are equally inclined to be extravagant and immoderate.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        746

 

                                            III

 

   Another time I had a dream that a man I knew on the staff of the

University said to me: ‘My son, the Myops.’ Then followed a dialogue

made up of short remarks and rejoinders. After this, however, there

was yet a third piece of dream in which I myself and my sons figured.

So far as the dream’s latent content was concerned, Professor M. and

his son were men of straw - a mere screen for me and my eldest son.

I shall have to return to this dream later, on account of another of its

features.

                                             IV

 

   The dream which follows is an instance of really low egoistic feelings

concealed behind affectionate worry.

   My  friend  Otto  was  looking  ill.  His  face  was  brown  and  he  had

protruding eyes.

   Otto is my family doctor, and I owe him more than I can ever hope to

repay: he has watched over my children’s health for many years, he

has  treated  them  successfully  when  they  have  been  ill,  and,  in

addition, whenever circumstances have given him an excuse, he has

given them presents. He had visited us on the dream-day, and my

wife had remarked that he looked tired and strained. That night I had

my dream, which showed him with some of the signs of Basedow’s

disease. Anyone who interprets this dream without regard for my rules

will conclude that I was worried about my friend’s health and that this

worry was realized in the dream. This would not only contradict my

assertion that dreams are wish-fulfilments, but my other assertion, too,

that they are accessible only to egoistic impulses. But I should be glad

if anyone interpreting the dream in this way would be good enough to

explain to me why my fears on Otto’s behalf should have lighted on

Basedow’s  disease  -  a  diagnosis  for  which  his  actual  appearance

gives not the slightest ground. My analysis, on the other hand, brought

up the following material from an occurrence six years earlier. A small

group  of  us,  which  included  Professor  R.,  were  driving  in  pitch

darkness through the forest of N., which lay some hours’ drive from

the  place  at  which  we  were  spending  our  summer  holidays.  The

coachman, who was not perfectly sober, spilt us, carriage and all, over

an embankment, and it was only by a piece of luck that we all escaped

injury. We were obliged, however, to spend the night in a neighbouring

inn, at which the news of our accident brought us a lot of sympathy. A

gentleman,  with  unmistakable  signs  of  Basedow’s  disease  -

incidentally, just as in the dream, only the brown discoloration of the

skin of the face and the protruding eyes, but no goitre - placed himself

entirely at our disposal and asked what he could do for us. Professor

R. replied in his decisive manner: ‘Nothing except to lend me a night-

shirt.’ To which the fine gentleman rejoined: ‘I’m sorry, but I can’t do

that’, and left the room.   As I continued my analysis, it occurred to me that Basedow was the

name not only of a physician but also of a famous educationalist. (In

my waking state I no longer felt quite so certain about this.) But my

friend  Otto  was  the  person  whom  I  had  asked  to  watch  over  my

children’s physical education, especially at the age of puberty (hence

the night-shirt), in case anything happened to me. By giving my friend

Otto in the dream the symptoms of our noble helper, I was evidently

saying that if anything happened to me he would do just as little for the

children as Baron L. had done on that occasion in spite of his kind

offers  of  assistance.  This  seems  to  be  sufficient  evidence  of  the

egoistic lining of the dream.¹

   But where was its wish-fulfilment to be found? Not in my avenging

myself on my friend Otto, whose fate it seems to be to be ill-treated in

my dreams; but in the following consideration. At the same time as I

represented Otto in the dream as Baron L., I had identified myself with

someone else, namely Professor R.; for just as in the anecdote R. had

made a request to Baron L., so I had made a request to Otto. And that

is the point. Professor R., with whom I should really not venture to

compare myself in the ordinary way, resembled me in having followed

an  independent  path  outside  the  academic  world  and  had  only

achieved his well-merited title late in life. So once again I was wanting

to be a Professor! Indeed the words ‘late in life’ were themselves a

wish-fulfilment; for they implied that I should live long enough to see

my boys through the age of puberty myself.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1911:] When Ernest Jones was giving a scientific lecture on the egoism

of  dreams  before  an  American  audience,  a  learned  lady  objected  to  this  unscientific
generalization, saying that the author of the present work could only judge of the dreams of
Austrians and had no business to speak of the dreams of Americans. So far as she was
concerned, she was certain that all her dreams were strictly altruistic.- [Added 1925:] By way
of excuse for this patriotic lady, I may remark that the statement that dreams are entirely
egoistic must not be misunderstood. Since anything whatever that occurs in preconscious
thought  can  pass  into  a  dream  (whether  into  its  actual  content  or  into  the  latent  dream-
thoughts)  that  possibility  is  equally  open  to  altruistic  impulses.  In  the  same  way,  an
affectionate or erotic impulse towards someone else, if it is present in the unconscious, can
appear in a dream. The truth in the assertion made in the text above is thus restricted to the
fact  that  among  the  unconscious  instigators  of  a  dream  we  very  frequently  find  egoistic
impulses which seem to have been overcome in waking life.
                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        747

 

 

   I have no experience of my own of other kinds of typical dreams, in

which  the  dreamer  finds  himself  flying  through  the  air  to  the

accompaniment  of  agreeable  feelings  or  falling  with  feelings  of

anxiety; and whatever I have to say on the subject is derived from

psycho-analyses. The information provided by the latter forces me to

conclude that these dreams, too, reproduce impressions of childhood;

they  relate,  that  is,  to  games  involving  movement,  which  are

extraordinarily attractive to children. There cannot be a single uncle

who has not shown a child how to fly by rushing across the room with

him in his outstretched arms, or who has not played at letting him fall

by riding him on his knee and then suddenly stretching out his leg, or

by holding him up high and then suddenly pretending to drop him.

Children are delighted by such experiences and never tire of asking to

have them repeated, especially if there is something about them that

causes  a  little  fright  or  giddiness.  In  after  years  they  repeat  these

experiences in dreams; but in the dreams they leave out the hands

which held them up, so that they float or fall unsupported. The delight

taken by young children in games of this kind (as well as in swings

and see-saws) is well known; and when they come to see acrobatic

feats in a circus their memory of such games is revived.¹ Hysterical

attacks in boys sometimes consist merely in reproductions of feats of

this kind, carried out with great skill. It not uncommonly happens that

these games of movement, though innocent in themselves, give rise

to  sexual  feelings.²  Childish  ‘romping’,  if  I  may  use  a  word  which

commonly describes all such activities, is what is being repeated in

dreams of flying, falling, giddiness and so on; while the pleasurable

feelings attached to these experiences are transformed into anxiety.

But often enough, as every mother knows, romping among children

actually ends in squabbling and tears.

      Thus  I  have  good  grounds  for  rejecting  the  theory  that  what

provokes dreams of flying and falling is the state of our tactile feelings

during sleep or sensations of the movement of our lungs, and so on.

In my view these sensations are themselves reproduced as part of thememory to which the dream goes back: that is to say, they are part of

the content of the dream and not its source.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1925:] Analytic research has shown us that in addition to pleasure

derived from the organs concerned, there is another factor which contributes to the delight
taken by children in acrobatic performances and to their repetition in hysterical attacks. This
other factor is a memory-image, often unconscious, of an observation of sexual intercourse,
whether between human beings or animals.

   ² A young medical colleague, who is quite free from any kind of nervous trouble, has given

me  the  following  information  on  this  point:  ‘I  know  from  my  own  experience  that  in  my
childhood I had a peculiar sensation in my genitals when I was on a swing and especially
when the downward motion reached its greatest momentum. And though I cannot say I really
enjoyed this sensation I must describe it as a pleasurable one.’ - Patients have often told me
that the first pleasurable erections that they can remember occurred in their boyhood while
they were climbing about. - Psycho-analysis makes it perfectly certain that the first sexual
impulses frequently have their roots in games involving romping and wrestling played during
childhood.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        748

 

   I cannot, however, disguise from myself that I am unable to produce

any complete explanation of this class of typical dreams. My material

has left me in the lurch precisely at this point. I must, however, insist

upon the general assertion that all the tactile and motor sensations

which occur in these typical dreams are called up immediately there is

any psychical reason for making use of them and that they can be

disregarded  when  no  such  need  for  them  arises.  I  am  also  of  the

opinion that the relation of these dreams to infantile experiences has

been established with certainty from the indications I have found in the

analyses  of  psychoneurotics.  I  am  not  able  to  say,  however,  what

other  meanings  may  become  attached  to  the  recollection  of  such

sensations in the course of later life - different meanings, perhaps, in

every individual case, in spite of the typical appearance of the dreams;

and I should be glad to be able to fill up the gap by a careful analysis

of  clear  instances.  If  anyone  feels  surprised  that,  in  spite  of  the

frequency precisely of dreams of flying, falling and pulling out teeth,

etc., I should be complaining of lack of material on this particular topic,

I must explain that I myself have not experienced any dreams of the

kind since I turned my attention to the subject of dream-interpretation.The dreams of neurotics, moreover, of which I might otherwise avail

myself, cannot always be interpreted not, at least, in many cases, so

as  to  reveal  the  whole  of  their  concealed  meaning;  a  particular

psychical force, which was concerned with the original constructing of

the neurosis and is brought into operation once again when attempts

are made at resolving it, prevents us from interpreting such dreams

down to their last secret.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        749

 

                              (g)  EXAMINATION DREAMS

 

   Everyone who has passed the matriculation examination at the end

of  his  school  studies  complains  of  the  obstinacy  with  which  he  is

pursued by anxiety-dreams of having failed, or of being obliged to take

the examination again, etc. In the case of those who have obtained a

University degree this typical dream is replaced by another one which

represents them as having failed in their University Finals; and it is in

vain that they object, even while they are still asleep, that for years

they have been practising medicine or working as University lecturers

or heads of offices. The ineradicable memories of the punishments

that we suffered for our evil deeds in childhood become active within

us once more and attach themselves to the two crucial points in our

studies  -  the  ‘dies  irae,  dies  illa’  of  our  stiffest  examinations.  The

‘examination  anxiety’  of  neurotics  owes  its  intensification  to  these

same childhood fears. After we have ceased to be school-children, our

punishments are no longer inflicted on us by our parents or by those

who  brought  us  up  or  later  by  our  schoolmasters.  The  relentless

causal chains of real life take charge of our further education, and now

we dream of Matriculation or Finals (and who has not trembled on

those occasions, even if he was well-prepared for the examination?)

whenever, having done something wrong or failed to do something

properly, we expect to be punished by the event - whenever, in short,

we feel the burden of responsibility.

   For a further explanation of examination dreams I have to thank an

experienced colleague, who once declared at a scientific meeting thatso far as he knew dreams of Matriculation only occur in people who

have successfully passed it and never in people who have failed in it.

It would seem, then, that anxious examination dreams (which, as has

been confirmed over and over again, appear when the dreamer has

some responsible activity ahead of him next day and is afraid there

may be a fiasco) search for some occasion in the past in which great

anxiety has turned out to be unjustified and has been contradicted by

the event. This, then, would be a very striking instance of the content

of  a  dream  being  misunderstood  by  the  waking  agency.  What  is

regarded as an indignant protest against the dream: ‘But I’m a doctor,

etc., already!’ would in reality be the consolation put forward by the

dream, and would accordingly run: ‘Don’t be afraid of tomorrow! Just

think how anxious you were before your Matriculation, and yet nothing

happened  to  you.  You’re  a  doctor,  etc.,  already.’  And  the  anxiety

which  is  attributed  to  the  dream  would  really  have  arisen  from  the

day’s residues.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        750

 

      Such  tests  as  I  have  been  able  to  make  of  this  explanation  on

myself and on other people, though they have not been sufficiently

numerous, have confirmed its validity. For instance, I myself failed in

Forensic Medicine in my Finals; but I have never had to cope with this

subject  in  dreams,  whereas  I  have  quite  often  been  examined  in

Botany, Zoology or Chemistry. I went in for the examination in these

subjects  with  well-founded  anxiety;  but,  whether  by  the  grace  of

destiny or of the examiners, I escaped punishment. In my dreams of

school examinations, I am invariably examined in History, in which I

did brilliantly - though only, it is true, because my kindly master (the

one-eyed  benefactor  of  another  dream,  see p. 531)  did  not  fail  to

notice that on the paper of questions which I handed him back I had

run  my  finger-nail  through  the  middle  one  of  the  three  questions

included, to warn him not to insist upon that particular one. One of my

patients, who decided not to sit for his Matriculation the first time but

passed it later, and who subsequently failed in his army examinationand never got a commission, has told me that he often dreams of the

former of these examinations but never of the latter.

   The interpretation of examination dreams is faced by the difficulty

which I have already referred to as characteristic of the majority of

typical dreams. It is but rarely that the material with which the dreamer

provides us in associations is sufficient to interpret the dream. It is

only by collecting a considerable number of examples of such dreams

that we can arrive at a better understanding of them. Not long ago I

came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  objection,  ‘You’re  a  doctor,  etc.,

already’, does not merely conceal a consolation but also signifies a

reproach.  This  would  have  run:  ‘You’re  quite  old  now,  quite  far

advanced in life, and yet you go on doing these stupid, childish things.’

This mixture of self-criticism and consolation would thus correspond to

the  latent  content  of  examination  dreams.  If  so,  it  would  not  be

surprising  if  the  self-reproaches  for  being  ‘stupid’  and  ‘childish’  in

these last examples referred to the repetition of reprehensible sexual

acts.

   Wilhelm Stekel, who put forward the first interpretation of dreams of

Matriculation [‘Matura’], was of the opinion that they regularly related

to  sexual  tests  and  sexual  maturity.  My  experience  has  often

confirmed his view.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        751

 

                                    CHAPTER VI

 

                                THE DREAM-WORK

 

Every attempt that has hitherto been made to solve the problem of

dreams has dealt directly with their manifest content as it is presented

in our memory. All such attempts have endeavoured to arrive at an

interpretation  of  dreams  from  their  manifest  content  or  (if  no

interpretation was attempted) to form a judgement as to their nature

on the basis of that same manifest content. We are alone in taking

something  else  into  account.  We  have  introduced  a  new  class  ofpsychical material between the manifest content of dreams and the

conclusions of our enquiry: namely, their latent content, or (as we say)

the ‘dream-thoughts’, arrived at by means of our procedure. It is from

these dream-thoughts and not from a dream’s manifest content that

we disentangle its meaning. We are thus presented with a new task

which had no previous existence: the task, that is, of investigating the

relations  between  the  manifest  content  of  dreams  and  the  latent

dream-thoughts, and of tracing out the processes by which the latter

have been changed into the former.

   The dream-thoughts and the dream-content are presented to us like

two versions of the same subject-matter in two different languages.

Or, more properly, the dream-content seems like a transcript of the

dream-thoughts into another mode of expression, whose characters

and  syntactic  laws  it  is  our  business  to  discover  by  comparing  the

original  and  the  translation.  The  dream-thoughts  are  immediately

comprehensible, as soon as we have learnt them. The dream-content,

on the other hand, is expressed as it were in a pictographic script, the

characters  of  which  have  to  be  transposed  individually  into  the

language  of  the  dream-thoughts.  If  we  attempted  to  read  these

characters  according  to  their  pictorial  value  instead  of  according  to

their symbolic relation, we should clearly be led into error. Suppose I

have a picture-puzzle, a rebus, in front of me. It depicts a house with a

boat on its roof, a single letter of the alphabet, the figure of a running

man whose head has been conjured away, and so on. Now I might be

misled into raising objections and declaring that the picture as a whole

and its component parts are nonsensical. A boat has no business to

be on the roof of a house, and a headless man cannot run. Moreover,

the man is bigger than the house; and if the whole picture is intended

to represent a landscape, letters of the alphabet are out of place in it

since such objects do not occur in nature. But obviously we can only

form a proper judgement of the rebus if we put aside criticisms such

as these of the whole composition and its parts and if, instead, we try

to replace each separate element by a syllable or word that can be

represented by that element in some way or other. The words which

are put together in this way are no longer nonsensical but may form a

poetical phrase of the greatest beauty and significance. A dream is a

picture puzzle of this sort and our predecessors in the field of dreaminterpretation  have  made  the  mistake  of  treating  the  rebus  as  a

pictorial composition: and as such it has seemed to them nonsensical

and worthless.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        752

 

                                          (A)

 

                            THE WORK OF CONDENSATION

 

   The first thing that becomes clear to anyone who compares the

dream-content with the dream-thoughts is that a work of condensation

on a large scale has been carried out. Dreams are brief, meagre and

laconic  in  comparison  with  the  range  and  wealth  of  the  dream-

thoughts. If a dream is written out it may perhaps fill half a page. The

analysis setting out the dream-thoughts underlying it may occupy six,

eight  or  a  dozen  times  as  much  space.  This  relation  varies  with

different dreams; but so far as my experience goes its direction never

varies. As a rule one underestimates the amount of compression that

has taken place, since one is inclined to regard the dream-thoughts

that have been brought to light as the complete material, whereas if

the  work  of  interpretation  is  carried  further  it  may  reveal  still  more

thoughts concealed behind the dream. I have already had occasion to

point out that it is in fact never possible to be sure that a dream has

been completely interpreted. Even if the solution seems satisfactory

and without gaps, the possibility always remains that the dream may

have yet another meaning. Strictly speaking, then, it is impossible to

determine the amount of condensation.

   There is an answer, which at first sight seems most plausible, to the

argument that the great lack of proportion between the dream-content

and  the  dream-thoughts  implies  that  the  psychical  material  has

undergone an extensive process of condensation in the course of the

formation of the dream. We very often have an impression that we

have  dreamt  a  great  deal  all  through  the  night  and  have  since

forgotten most of what we dreamt. On this view, the dream which we

remember when we wake up would only be a fragmentary remnant ofthe total dream-work; and this, if we could recollect it in its entirety,

might  well  be  as  extensive  as  the  dream-thoughts.  There  is

undoubtedly some truth in this: there can be no question that dreams

can be reproduced most accurately if we try to recall them as soon as

we wake up and that our memory of them becomes more and more

incomplete towards evening.But on the other hand it can be shown

that the impression that we have dreamt a great deal more than we

can reproduce is very often based on an illusion, the origin of which I

shall discuss later. Moreover the hypothesis that condensation occurs

during  the  dream-work  is  not  affected  by  the  possibility  of  dreams

being forgotten, since this hypothesis is proved to be correct by the

quantities of ideas which are related to each individual piece of the

dream which has been retained. Even supposing that a large piece of

the dream has escaped recollection, this may merely have prevented

our having access to another group of dream-thoughts. There is no

justification for supposing that the lost pieces of the dream would have

related to the same thoughts which we have already reached from the

pieces of the dream that have survived.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] The occurrence of condensation in dreams has been hinted at by

many writers. Du Prel (1885, 85) has a passage in which he says it is absolutely certain that
there has been a process of condensation of the groups of ideas in dreams.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        753

 

      In  view  of  the  very  great  number  of  associations  produced  in

analysis to each individual element of the content of a dream, some

readers may be led to doubt whether, as a matter of principle, we are

justified in regarding as part of the dream-thoughts all the associations

that  occur  to  us  during  the  subsequent  analysis  -  whether  we  are

justified,  that  is,  in  supposing  that  all  these  thoughts  were  already

active during the state of sleep and played a part in the formation of

the dream. Is it not more probable that new trains of thought have

arisen in the course of the analysis which had no share in forming the

dream? I can only give limited assent to this argument. It is no doubt

true  that  some  trains  of  thought  arise  for  the  first  time  during  theanalysis. But one can convince oneself in all such cases that these

new  connections  are  only  set  up  between  thoughts  which  were

already  linked  in  some  other  way  in  the  dream-thoughts.  The  new

connections are, as it were, loop-lines or short-circuits, made possible

by the existence of other and deeper-lying connecting paths. It must

be allowed that the great bulk of the thoughts which are revealed in

analysis were already active during the process of forming the dream;

for, after working through a string of thoughts which seem to have no

connection with the formation of a dream, one suddenly comes upon

one which is represented in its content and is indispensable for its

interpretation, but which could not have been reached except by this

particular  line  of  approach.  I  may  here  recall  the  dream  of  the

botanical  monograph,  which  strikes  one  as  the  product  of  an

astonishing amount of condensation, even though I have not reported

its analysis in full.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        754

 

   How, then, are we to picture psychical conditions during the period

of sleep which precedes dreams? Are all the dream-thoughts present

alongside one another? or do they occur in sequence? or do a number

of trains of thought start out simultaneously from different centres and

afterwards unite? There is no need for the present, in my opinion, to

form any plastic idea of psychical conditions during the formation of

dreams. It must not be forgotten, however, that we are dealing with an

unconscious process of thought, which may easily be different from

what  we  perceive  during  purposive  reflection  accompanied  by

consciousness.

   The unquestionable fact remains, however, that the formation of

dreams  is  based  on  a  process  of  condensation.  How  is  that

condensation brought about?

   When we reflect that only a small minority of all the dream-thoughts

revealed  are  represented  in  the  dream  by  one  of  their  ideational

elements, we might conclude that condensation is brought about by

omission: that is, that the dream is not a faithful translation or a point-for-point projection of the dream thoughts, but a highly incomplete and

fragmentary version of them. This view, as we shall soon discover, is

a most inadequate one. But we may take it as a provisional starting-

point and go on to a further question. If only a few elements from the

dream-thoughts find their way into the dream-content, what are the

conditions which determine their selection?

 

   In order to get some light on this question we must turn our attention

to  those  elements  of  the  dream-content  which  must  have  fulfilled

these  conditions.  And  the  most  favourable  material  for  such  an

investigation will be a dream to the construction of which a particularly

intense process of condensation has contributed. I shall accordingly

begin by choosing for the purpose the dream which I have already

recorded on p. 657 ff..

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        755

 

                                            I

 

                    THE DREAM OF THE BOTANICAL MONOGRAPH

 

     CONTENT  OF  THE  DREAM.  - I  had  written  a  monograph  on  an

(unspecified) genus of plants. The book lay before me and I was at the

moment turning over a folded coloured plate. Bound up in the copy

there was a dried specimen of the plant.

   The element in this dream which stood out most was the botanical

monograph. This arose from the impressions of the dream day: I had

in fact seen a monograph on the genus Cyclamen in the window of a

book-shop. There was no mention of this genus in the content of the

dream; all that was left in it was the monograph and its relation to

botany.  The  ‘botanical  monograph’  immediately  revealed  its

connection with the work upon cocaine which I had once written. From

‘cocaine’ the chains of thought led on the one hand to the Festschrift

and to certain events in a University laboratory, and on the other hand

to my friend Dr. Königstein, the eye surgeon, who had had a share in

the  introduction  of  cocaine.  The  figure  of  Dr.  Königstein  furtherreminded me of the interrupted conversation which I had had with him

the evening before and of my various reflections upon the payment for

medical services among colleagues. This conversation was the actual

currently  active  instigator  of  the  dream;  the  monograph  on  the

cyclamen  was  also  a  currently  active  impression,  but  one  of  an

indifferent  nature.  As  I  perceived,  the  ‘botanical  monograph’  in  the

dream turned out to be an ‘intermediate common entity’ between the

two experiences of the previous day: it was taken over unaltered from

the  indifferent  impression  and  was  linked  with  the  psychically

significant event by copious associative connections.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        756

 

   Not only the compound idea, ‘botanical monograph’, however, but

each of its components, ‘botanical’ and ‘monograph’ separately, led by

numerous  connecting  paths  deeper  and  deeper  into  the  tangle  of

dream-thoughts.  ‘Botanical’  was  related  to  the  figure  of  Professor

Gärtner [Gardener], the blooming looks of his wife, to my patient Flora

and to the lady of whom I had told the story of the forgotten flowers.

Gärtner  led  in  turn  to  the  laboratory  and  to  my  conversation  with

Königstein. My two patients had been mentioned in the course of this

conversation. A train of thought joined the lady with the flowers to my

wife’s favourite flowers and thence to the title of the monograph which

I  had  seen  for  a  moment  during  the  day.  In  addition  to  these,

‘botanical’  recalled  an  episode  at  my  secondary  school  and  an

examination while I was at the University. A fresh topic touched upon

in my conversation with Dr. Königstein - my favourite hobbies - was

joined,  through  the  intermediate  link  of  what  I  jokingly  called  my

favourite flower,  the  artichoke,  with  the  train  of  thought  proceeding

from the forgotten flowers. Behind ‘artichokes’ lay, on the one hand,

my  thoughts  about  Italy  and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  scene  from  my

childhood  which  was  the  opening  of  what  have  since  become  my

intimate  relations  with  books.  Thus  ‘botanical’  was  a  regular  nodal

point  in  the  dream.  Numerous  trains  of  thought  converged  upon  it,

which, as I can guarantee, had appropriately entered into the contextof the conversation with Dr. Königstein. Here we find ourselves in a

factory of thoughts where, as in the ‘weaver’s masterpiece’ -

 

                                                Ein Tritt tausend Fäden regt,
                                                Die Schifflein herüber hinüber schiessen,
                                                Die Fäden ungesehen fliessen,

                                                Ein Schlag tausend Verbindungen schlägt.¹

 

So,  too,  ‘monograph’  in  the  dream  touches  upon  two  subjects:  the

one-sidedness  of  my  studies  and  the  costliness  of  my  favourite

hobbies.

      This  first  investigation  leads  us  to  conclude  that  the  elements

‘botanical’  and  ‘monograph’  found  their  way  into  the  content  of  the

dream because they possessed copious contacts with the majority of

the dream-thoughts, because, that is to say, they constituted ‘nodal

points’ upon which a great number of the dream-thoughts converged,

and  because  they  had  several  meanings  in  connection  with  the

interpretation of the dream. The explanation of this fundamental fact

can also be put in another way: each of the elements of the dream’s

content  turns  out  to  have  been  ‘overdetermined’  -  to  have  been

represented in the dream-thoughts many times over.

 

   ¹ [. . . a thousand threads one treadle throws,

      Where fly the shuttles hither and thither,
      Unseen the threads are knit together,
      And an infinite combination grows.]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        757

 

   We discover still more when we come to examine the remaining

constituents of the dream in relation to their appearance in the dream-

thoughts.  The coloured  plate  which  I  was  unfolding  led  (see  the

analysis, p. 660 f.) to a new topic, my colleagues’ criticisms of my

activities, and to one which was already represented in the dream, my

favourite hobbies; and it led, in addition, to the childhood memory in

which I was pulling to pieces a book with coloured plates. The dried

specimen of the plant touched upon the episode of the herbarium atmy secondary school and specially stressed that memory.

      The  nature  of  the  relation  between  dream-content  and  dream

thoughts thus becomes visible. Not only are the elements of a dream

determined by the dream-thoughts many times over, but the individual

dream-thoughts are represented in the dream by several elements.

Associative  paths  lead  from  one  element  of  the  dream  to  several

dream-thoughts, and from one dream thought to several elements of

the dream. Thus a dream is not constructed by each individual dream-

thought,  or  group  of  dream-thoughts,  finding  (in  abbreviated  form)

separate representation in the content of the dream - in the kind of

way in which an electorate chooses parliamentary representatives; a

dream is constructed, rather, by the whole mass of dream-thoughts

being  submitted  to  a  sort  of  manipulative  process  in  which  those

elements  which  have  the  most  numerous  and  strongest  supports

acquire  the  right  of  entry  into  the  dream-content  -  in  a  manner

analogous to election by scrutin de liste. In the case of every dream

which I have submitted to an analysis of this kind I have invariably

found these same fundamental principles confirmed: the elements of

the dream are constructed out of the whole mass of dream-thoughts

and each one of those elements is shown to have been determined

many times over in relation to the dream-thoughts.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        758

 

 

      It  will  certainly  not  be  out  of  place  to  illustrate  the  connection

between  dream-content  and  dream-thoughts  by  a  further  example,

which is distinguished by the specially ingenious interweaving of their

reciprocal relations. It is a dream produced by one of my patients - a

man whom I was treating for claustrophobia. It will soon become clear

why I have chosen to give this exceptionally clever dream-production

the title of

 

                                            II

 

                                  ‘A LOVELY DREAM’ 

   He was driving with a large party to X Street, in which there was an

unpretentious inn. (This is not the case.) There was a play being acted

inside it. At one moment he was audience, at another actor. When it

was over, they had to change their clothes so as to get back to town.

Some of the company were shown into rooms on the ground floor and

others into rooms on the first floor. Then a dispute broke out. The

ones up above were angry because the ones down below were not

ready, and they could not come downstairs. His brother was up above

and he was down below and he was angry with his brother because

they were so much pressed. (This part was obscure.) Moreover it had

been decided and arranged even when they first arrived who was to

be up above and who was to be down below. Then he was walking by

himself  up  the  rise  made  by  X  Street  in  the  direction  of  town.  He

walked with such difficulty and so laboriously that he seemed glued to

the spot. An elderly gentleman came up to him and began abusing the

King of Italy. At the top of the rise he was able to walk much more

easily.

   His difficulty in walking up the rise was so distinct that after waking

up he was for some time in doubt whether it was a dream or reality.

   We should not think very highly of this dream, judging by its manifest

content. In defiance of the rules, I shall begin its interpretation with the

portion which the dreamer described as being the most distinct.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        759

 

   The difficulty which he dreamt of and probably actually experienced

during the dream - the laborious climbing up the rise accompanied by

dyspnoea - was one of the symptoms which the patient had in fact

exhibited  years  before  and  which  had  at  that  time  been  attributed,

along with certain other symptoms, to tuberculosis. (The probability is

that  this  was  hysterically  simulated.)  The  peculiar  sensation  of

inhibited movement that occurs in this dream is already familiar to us

from dreams of exhibiting and we see once more that it is material

available  at  any  time  for  any  other  representational  purpose.  Thepiece of the dream-content which described how the climb began by

being difficult and became easy at the end of the rise reminded me,

when  I  heard  it,  of  the  masterly  introduction  to  Alphonse  Daudet’s

Sappho.  That  well  known  passage  describes  how  a  young  man

carries his mistress upstairs in his arms; at first she is as light as a

feather, but the higher he climbs the heavier grows her weight. The

whole scene foreshadows the course of their love-affair, which was

intended  by  Daudet  as  a  warning  to  young  men  not  to  allow  their

affections  to  be  seriously  engaged  by  girls  of  humble  origin  and  a

dubious past.¹ Though I knew that my patient had been involved in a

love-affair which he had recently broken off with a lady on the stage, I

did not expect to find my guess at an interpretation justified. Moreover

the situation in Sappho was the reverse of what it had been in the

dream. In the dream the climbing had been difficult to begin with and

had  afterwards  become  easy;  whereas  the  symbolism  in  the  novel

only made sense if something that had been begun lightly ended by

becoming a heavy burden. But to my astonishment my patient replied

that my interpretation fitted in very well with a piece he had seen at the

theatre  the  evening  before.  It  was  called Rund  um  Wien  [Round

Vienna] and gave a picture of the career of a girl who began by being

respectable, who then became a demi-mondaine and had liaisons with

men in high positions and so ‘went up in the world’, but who ended by

‘coming down in the world.’ The piece had moreover reminded him of

another, which he had seen some years earlier, called Von Stufe zu

Stufe [Step  by  Step],  and  which  had  been  advertised  by  a  poster

showing a staircase with a flight of steps.

   To continue with the interpretation. The actress with whom he had

had this latest, eventful liaison had lived in X Street. There is nothing

in the nature of an inn in that street. But when he was spending part of

the summer in Vienna on the lady’s account he had put up at a small

hotel in the neighbourhood. When he left the hotel he had said to his

cab-driver: ‘Anyhow I’m lucky not to have picked up any vermin.’ (This,

incidentally,  was  another  of  his  phobias.)  To  this  the  driver  had

replied: ‘How could any one put up at such a place! It’s not a hotel, it’s

only an inn.’

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1911:] What I have written below in the section on symbolism about thesignificance of dreams of climbing throws light upon the imagery chosen by the novelist.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        760

 

   The idea of an inn at once recalled a quotation to his mind:

 

                                                Bei einem Wirte wundermild,

                                                Da war ich jüngst zu Gaste.¹

 

The host in Uhland’s poem was an apple tree; and a second quotation

now carried on his train of thought:

 

FAUST (mit der Jungend tanzend):

                                Einst hatt’ ich einen schönen Traum;
                                Da sah ich einen Apfelbaum,
                                Zwei schöne Äpfel glänzten dran,
                                Sie reizten mich, ich stieg hinan.

 

DIE SCHÖNE:
                                Der Äpfelchen begehrt ihr sehr,
                                Und schon vom Paradiese her.
                                Von Freuden fühl’ ich mich bewegt,

                                Dass auch mein Garten solche trägt.²

 

There cannot be the faintest doubt what the apple-tree and the apples

stood for. Moreover, lovely breasts had been among the charms which

had attracted the dreamer to his actress.

   The context of the analysis gave us every ground for supposing that

the dream went back to an impression in childhood. If so, it must have

referred  to  the  wet-nurse  of  the  dreamer,  who  was  by  now  a  man

almost thirty years old. For an infant the breasts of his wet-nurse are

nothing more nor less than an inn. The wet-nurse, as well as Daudet’s

Sappho,  seem  to  have  been  allusions  to  the  mistress  whom  the

patient had recently dropped.

   The patient’s (elder) brother also appeared in the content of the

dream,  the  brother  being up  above  and  the  patient  himself down

below. This was once again the reverse of the actual situation; for, as I

knew, the brother had lost his social position while the patient hadmaintained  his.  In  repeating  the  content  of  the  dream  to  me,  the

dreamer had avoided saying that his brother was up above and he

himself  ‘on  the  ground  floor’.  That  would  have  put  the  position  too

clearly, since here in Vienna if we say someone is ‘on the ground floor’

we mean that he has lost his money and his position - in other words,

that he has ‘come down in the world.’. Now there must have been a

reason for some of this part of the dream being represented by its

reverse. Further, the reversal must hold good of some other relation

between dream-thoughts and dream-content as well; and we have a

hint of where to look for this reversal. It must evidently be at the end of

the dream, where once again there was a reversal of the difficulty in

going upstairs as described in Sappho. We can then easily see what

reversal is intended. In Sappho the man carried a woman who was in

a  sexual  relation  to  him;  in  the  dream-thoughts  the  position  was

reversed, and a woman was carrying a man. And since this can only

happen in childhood, the reference was once more to the wet-nurse

bearing  the  weight  of  the  infant  in  her  arms.  Thus  the  end  of  the

dream  made  a  simultaneous  reference  to  Sappho  and  to  the  wet-

nurse.

 

   ¹ [Literally: ‘I was lately a guest at an inn with a most gentle host.’]

   ² [FAUST (dancing with the Young Witch):

                A lovely dream once came to me,
                And I beheld an apple-tree,
                On which two lovely apples shone;
                They charmed me so, I climbed thereon.
 

      THE LOVELY WITCH:

                Apples have been desired by you,
                Since first in Paradise they grew;
                And I am moved with joy to know
                That much within my garden grow.]

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        761

 

   Just as the author of the novel, in choosing the name ‘Sappho’, had

in  mind  an  allusion  to  Lesbian  practices,  so  too  the  pieces  of  the

dream that spoke of people ‘up above’ and ‘down below’ alluded tophantasies of a sexual nature which occupied the patient’s mind and,

as suppressed desires, were not without a bearing on his neurosis.

(The interpretation of the dream did not itself show us that what were

thus represented in the dream were phantasies and not recollections

of real events; an analysis only gives us the content of a thought and

leaves  it  to  us  to  determine  its  reality.  Real  and  imaginary  events

appear in dreams at first sight as of equal validity; and that is so not

only  in  dreams  but  in  the  production  of  more  important  psychical

structures.)

   A ‘large party’ meant, as we already know, a secret. His brother was

simply the representative (introduced into the childhood scene by a

‘retrospective phantasy’) of all his later rivals for a woman’s affection.

The episode of the gentleman who abused the King of Italy related

once  again, via  the  medium  of  a  recent  and  in  itself  indifferent

experience,  to  people  of  lower  rank  pushing  their  way  into  higher

society. It was just as though the child at the breast was being given a

warning parallel to the one which Daudet had given to young men.¹

 

   ¹ The imaginary nature of the situation relating to the dreamer’s wet-nurse was proved by

the objectively established fact that in his case the wet-nurse had been his mother. I may
recall in this connection the anecdote, which I repeated on p. 688, of the young man who
regretted that he had not made better use of his opportunities with his wet-nurse. A regret of
the same kind was no doubt the source of the present dream.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        762

 

      To  provide  a  third  opportunity  for  studying  condensation  in  the

formation of dreams, I will give part of the analysis of another dream,

which I owe to an elderly lady undergoing psycho-analytic treatment.

As was to be expected from the severe anxiety-states from which the

patient suffered, her dreams contained a very large number of sexual

thoughts, the first realization of which both surprised and alarmed her.

Since I shall not be able to pursue the interpretation of the dream to

the end, its material will appear to fall into several groups without any

visible connection.

 

                                            III 

                              ‘THE MAY-BEETLE DREAM’

 

   CONTENT OF THE DREAM. - She called to mind that she had two may-

beetles  in  a  box  and  that  she  must  set  them  free  or  they  would

suffocate.  She  opened  the  box  and  the  may-beetles  were  in  an

exhausted state. One of them flew out of the open window; but the

other  was  crushed  by  the  casement  while  she  was  shutting  it  at

someone’s request. (Signs of disgust.)

   ANALYSIS. - Her husband was temporarily away from home, and her

fourteen-year-old daughter was sleeping in the bed beside her. The

evening before, the girl had drawn her attention to a moth which had

fallen into her tumbler of water; but she had not taken it out and felt

sorry  for  the  poor  creature  next  morning.  The  book  she  had  been

reading during the evening had told how some boys had thrown a cat

into boiling water, and had described the animal’s convulsions. These

were  the  two  precipitating  causes  of  the  dream  -  in  themselves

indifferent. She then pursued the subject of cruelty to animals further.

Some  years  before,  while  they  were  spending  the  summer  at  a

particular place, her daughter had been very cruel to animals. She

was collecting butterflies and asked the patient for some arsenic to kill

them with. On one occasion a moth with a pin through its body had

gone  on  flying  about  the  room  for  a  long  time;  another  time  some

caterpillars  which  the  child  was  keeping  to  turn  into  chrysalises

starved to death. At a still more tender age the same child used to tear

the wings off beetles and butterflies. But to-day she would be horrified

at all these cruel actions she had grown so kind-hearted.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        763

 

      The  patient  reflected  over  this  contradiction.  It  reminded  her  of

another contradiction, between appearance and character, as George

Eliot displays it in Adam Bede: one girl who was pretty, but vain and

stupid, and another who was ugly, but of high character; a nobleman

who seduced the silly girl, and a working man who felt and acted with

true nobility. How impossible it was, she remarked, to recognize thatsort of thing in people! Who would have guessed, to look at her, that

she was tormented by sensual desires?

      In  the  same  year  in  which  the  little  girl  had  begun  collecting

butterflies, the district they were in had suffered from a serious plague

of may-beetles.  The  children  were  furious  with  the  beetles  and

crushed them unmercifully. At that time my patient had seen a man

who tore the wings off may-beetles and then ate their bodies. She

herself had been born in May and had been married in May. Three

days after her marriage she had written to her parents at home saying

how happy she was. But it had been far from true.

   The evening before the dream she had been rummaging among

some old letters and had read some of them - some serious and some

comic - aloud to her children. There had been a most amusing letter

from a piano-teacher who had courted her when she was a girl, and

another from an admirer of noble birth.¹

 

   ¹ This had been the true instigator of the dream.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        764

 

   She blamed herself because one of her daughters had got hold of a

‘bad’ book by Maupassant.¹ The arsenic that the girl had asked for

reminded her of the arsenic pills which restored the Duc de Mora’s

youthful strength in Le Nabab.

   ‘Set them free’ made her think of a passage in the Magic Flute:

 

                                                Zur Liebe kann ich dich nicht zwingen,

                                                Doch geb ich dir die Freiheit nicht.²

 

   ‘May-beetles’ also made her think of Kätchen’s words:

 

                                                Verliebt ja wie ein Käfer bist du mir.³

 

   And in the middle of all this came a quotation from Tannhäuser:

 

                                                              4
                                                Weil du von böser Lust beseelt . . . 

   She was living in a perpetual worry about her absent husband. Her

fear  that  something  might  happen  to  him  on  his  journey  was

expressed in numerous waking phantasies. A short time before, in the

course  of  her  analysis,  she  had  lighted  among  her  unconscious

thoughts upon a complaint about her husband ‘growing senile’. The

wishful thought concealed by her present dream will perhaps best be

conjectured if I mention that, some days before she dreamt it, she was

horrified,  in  the  middle  of  her  daily  affairs,  by  a  phrase  in  the

imperative  mood  which  came  into  her  head  and  was  aimed  at  her

husband: ‘Go and hang yourself!’ It turned out that a few hours earlier

she had read somewhere or other that when a man is hanged he gets

a powerful erection. The wish for an erection was what had emerged

from repression in this horrifying disguise. ‘Go and hang yourself!’ was

equivalent  to:  ‘Get  yourself  an  erection  at  any  price!’  Dr.  Jenkins’s

arsenic pills in Le Nabab fitted in here. But my patient was also aware

that the most powerful aphrodisiac, cantharides (commonly known as

‘Spanish flies’), was prepared from crushed beetles. This was the drift

of the principal part of the dream’s content.

   The opening and shutting of windows was one of the main subjects

of dispute between her and her husband. She herself was aerophilic in

her sleeping habits; her husband was aerophobic. Exhaustion was the

chief symptom which she complained of at the time of the dream.

 

   ¹ An interpolation is required at this point: ‘books of that kind are poison to a girl.’ The

patient herself had dipped into forbidden books a great deal when she was young.
   ² [Fear not, to love I’II ne’er compel thee;
      Yet `tis too soon to set thee free.]
   ³ [‘You are madly in love with me.’ Literally: `You are in love with me like a beetle.’ ] - A
further train of thought led to the same poet’s Penthesilia, and to the idea of cruelty to a lover.
4
    [Literally: ‘Because thou wast inspired by such evil pleasure.’]

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        765

 

 

      In  all  three  of  the  dreams  which  I  have  just  recorded,  I  have

indicated  by  italics  the  points  at  which  one  of  the  elements  of  thedream-content reappears in the dream-thoughts, so as to show clearly

the multiplicity of connections arising from the former. Since, however,

the analysis of none of these dreams has been traced to its end, it will

perhaps be worth while to consider a dream whose analysis has been

recorded  exhaustively,  so  as  to  show  how  its  content  is  over-

determined. For this purpose I will take the dream of Irma’s injection. It

will be easy to see from that example that the work of condensation

makes use of more than one method in the construction of dreams.

   The principal figure in the dream-content was my patient Irma. She

appeared with the features which were hers in real life, and thus, in

the  first  instance,  represented  herself.  But  the  position  in  which  I

examined her by the window was derived from someone else, the lady

for whom, as the dream-thoughts showed, I wanted to exchange my

patient. In so far as Irma appeared to have a diphtheritic membrane,

which recalled my anxiety about my eldest daughter, she stood for

that child and, behind her, through her possession of the same name

as my daughter, was hidden the figure of my patient who succumbed

to  poisoning.  In  the  further  course  of  the  dream  the  figure  of  Irma

acquired still other meanings, without any alteration occurring in the

visual picture of her in the dream. She turned into one of the children

whom  we  had  examined  in  the  neurological  department  of  the

children’s  hospital,  where  my  two  friends  revealed  their  contrasting

characters. The figure of my own child was evidently the stepping-

stone  towards  this  transition.  The  same  ‘Irma’s’  recalcitrance  over

opening her mouth brought an allusion to another lady whom I had

once  examined,  and,  through  the  same  connection,  to  my  wife.

Moreover, the pathological changes which I discovered in her throat

involved allusions to a whole series of other figures.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        766

 

   None of these figures whom I lighted upon by following up  ‘Irma’

appeared in the dream in bodily shape. They were concealed behind

the  dream  figure  of  ‘Irma’,  which  was  thus  turned  into  a  collective

image  with,  it  must  be  admitted,  a  number  of  contradictorycharacteristics.  Irma  became  the  representative  of  all  these  other

figures which had been sacrificed to the work of condensation, since I

passed over to her, point by point, everything that reminded me of

them.

   There is another way in which a ‘collective figure’ can be produced

for  purposes  of  dream-condensation,  namely  by  uniting  the  actual

features of two or more people into a single dream-image. It was in

this way that the Dr. M. of my dream was constructed. He bore the

name  of  Dr.  M.,  he  spoke  and  acted  like  him;  but  his  physical

characteristics and his malady belonged to someone else, namely to

my  eldest  brother.  One  single  feature,  his  pale  appearance,  was

doubly determined, since it was common to both of them in real life.

   Dr. R. in my dream about my uncle with the yellow beard was a

similar  composite  figure.  But  in  his  case  the  dream-image  was

constructed in yet another way. I did not combine the features of one

person  with  those  of  another  and  in  the  process  omit  from  the

memory-picture certain features of each of them. What I did was to

adopt the procedure by means of which Galton produced family by

portraits: namely by projecting two images on to a single plate, so that

certain features common to both are emphasized, while those which

fail to fit in with one another cancel one another out and are indistinct

in the picture. In my dream about my uncle the fair beard emerged

prominently from a face which belonged to two people and which was

consequently  blurred;  incidentally,  the  beard  further  involved  an

allusion  to  my  father  and  myself  through  the  intermediate  idea  of

growing grey.

   The construction of collective and composite figures is one of the

chief  methods  by  which  condensation  operates  in  dreams.  I  shall

presently have occasion to deal with them in another context.

   The occurrence of the idea of ‘dysentery’ in the dream of Irma’s

injection also had a multiple determination: first owing to its phonetic

similarity to ‘diphtheria’, and secondly owing to its connection with the

patient  whom  I  had  sent  to  the  East  and  whose  hysteria  was  not

recognized.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams                                                                                        767

 

   Another interesting example of condensation in this dream was the

mention in it of ‘propyls’ . What was contained in the dream-thoughts

was  not  ‘propyls’  but  ‘amyls.’  It  might  be  supposed  that  a  single

displacement had taken place at this point in the construction of the

dream. This was indeed the case. But the displacement served the

purposes of condensation, as is proved by the following addition to the

analysis  of  the  dream.  When  I  allowed  my  attention  to  dwell  for  a

moment longer on the word ‘propyls’, it occurred to me that it sounded

like  ‘Propylaea’.  But  there  are  Propylaea  not  only  in  Athens  but  in

Munich. A year before the dream I had gone to Munich to visit a friend

who  was  seriously  ill  at  the  time  -  the  same  friend  who  was

unmistakably  alluded  to  in  the  dream  by  the  word  ‘trimethylamin’

which occurred immediately after ‘propyls.’

   I shall pass over the striking way in which here, as elsewhere in

dream-analyses, associations of the most various inherent importance

are used for laying down thought-connections as though they were of

equal weight, and shall yield to the temptation to give, as it were, a

plastic  picture  of  the  process  by  which  the  amyls  in  the  dream-

thoughts were replaced by propyls in the dream-content.

   On the one hand we see the group of ideas attached to my friend

Otto, who did not understand me, who sided against me, and who

made me a present of liqueur with an aroma of amyl. On the other

hand we see - linked to the former group by its very contrast - the

group of ideas attached to my friend in Berlin, who did understand me,

who  would  take  my  side,  and  to  whom  I  owed  so  much  valuable

information, dealing, amongst other things, with the chemistry of the

sexual processes.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        768

 

   The recent exciting causes - the actual instigators of the dream -

determined what was to attract my attention in the ‘Otto’ group; the

amyl was among these selected elements, which were predestined to

form  part  of  the  dream-content.  The  copious  ‘  Wilhelm’  group  wasstirred  up  precisely  through  being  in  contrast  to  ‘Otto’,  and  those

elements  in  it  were  emphasized  which  echoed  those  which  were

already stirred up in ‘Otto’. All though the dream, indeed, I kept on

turning from someone who annoyed me to someone else who could

be agreeably contrasted with him; point by point, I called up a friend

against  an  opponent.  Thus  the  amyl  in  the  ‘Otto’  group  produced

memories from the field of chemistry in the other group; in this manner

the trimethylamin, which was supported from several directions, found

its way into the dream-content. ‘Amyls’ itself might have entered the

dream-content  unmodified;  but  it  came  under  the  influence  of  the

‘Wilhelm’  group.  For  the  whole  range  of  memories  covered  by  that

name  was  searched  through  in  order  to  find  some  element  which

could  provide  a  two-sided  determination  for  ‘amyls.’  ‘Propyls’    was

closely associated with ‘amyls’, and Munich from the ‘Wilhelm’ group

with its ‘propylaea’ came half-way to meet it. The two groups of ideas

converged  in  ‘propyls-propylaea’;  and,  as  though  by  an  act  of

compromise, this intermediate element was what found its way into

the  dream-content.  Here  an  intermediate  common  entity  had  been

constructed  which  admitted  of  multiple  determination.  It  is  obvious,

therefore,  that  multiple  determination  must  make  it  easier  for  an

element to force its way into the dream-content. In order to construct

an  intermediate  link  of  this  kind,  attention  is  without  hesitation

displaced  from  what  is  actually  intended  on  to  some  neighbouring

association.

 

   Our study of the dream of Irma’s injection has already enabled us to

gain  some  insight  into  the  processes  of  condensation  during  the

formation of dreams. We have been able to observe certain of their

details,  such  as  how  preference  is  given  to  elements  that  occur

several times over in the dream-thoughts, how new unities are formed

(in the shape of collective figures and composite structures), and how

intermediate common entities are constructed. The further questions

of  the purpose  of  condensation  and  of  the  factors  which  tend  to

produce  it  will  not  be  raised  till  we  come  to  consider  the  whole

question  of  the  psychical  processes  at  work  in  the  formation  of

dreams. We will be content for the present with recognizing the fact

that  dream-condensation  is  a  notable  characteristic  of  the  relationbetween dream-thoughts and dream-content.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        769

 

 

   The work of condensation in dreams is seen at its clearest when it

handles  words  and  names.  It  is  true  in  general  that  words  are

frequently treated in dreams as though they were things, and for that

reason  they  are  apt  to  be  combined  in  just  the  same  way  as  are

presentations of things. Dreams of this sort offer the most amusing

and curious neologisms.

 

                                            I

 

   On one occasion a medical colleague had sent me a paper he had

written, in which the importance of a recent physiological discovery

was, in my opinion, overestimated, and in which, above all, the subject

was  treated  in  too  emotional  a  manner.  The  next  night  I  dreamt  a

sentence which clearly referred to this paper: ‘Its written in a positively

norekdal style.’ The analysis of the word caused me some difficulty at

first. There could be no doubt that it was a parody of the superlatives

‘kolossal’ and ‘pyramidal’; but its origin was not so easy to guess. At

last I saw that the monstrosity was composed of the two names ‘Nora’

and ‘Ekdal’ - characters in two well-known plays of Ibsen’s. Some time

before, I had read a newspaper article on Ibsen by the same author

whose latest work I was criticizing in the dream.

 

                                            II

 

   One of my women patients told me a short dream which ended in a

meaningless verbal compound. She dreamt she was with her husband

at  a  peasant  festivity  and  said:  ‘This  will  end  in  a  general

"Maistollmütz."' In the dream she had a vague feeling that it was some

kind of pudding made with maize - a sort of polenta. Analysis divided

the word into ‘Mais’ [‘maize’], ‘toll’ [‘mad’], ‘mannstoll’ [‘nymphomaniac’

- literally ‘mad for men’] and Olmütz [a town in Moravia]. All thesefragments were found to be remnants of a conversation she had had

at table with her relatives. The following words lay behind ‘Mais’ (in

addition  to  a  reference  to  the  recently  opened  Jubilee  Exhibition):

‘Meissen’ (a Meissen porcelain figure representing a bird); ‘Miss’ (her

relatives’ English governess had just gone to Olmütz); and ‘mies’ (a

Jewish slang term, used jokingly to mean ‘disgusting’). A long chain of

thoughts  and  associations  led  off  from  each  syllable  of  this  verbal

hotch potch.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        770

 

                                            III

 

   A young man, whose door-bell had been rung late one night by an

acquaintance  who  wanted  to  leave  a  visiting-card  on  him,  had  a

dream that night: A man had been working till late in the evening to

put his house-telephone in order. After he had gone, it kept on ringing

- not continuously, but with detached rings. His servant fetched the

man back, and the latter remarked: ‘It’s a funny thing that even people

who are "tutelrein" as a rule are quite unable to deal with a thing like

this.’

   It will be seen that the indifferent exciting cause of the dream only

covers one element of it. That episode only obtained any importance

from the fact that the dreamer put it in the same series as an earlier

experience  which,  though  equally  indifferent  in  itself,  was  given  a

substitutive meaning by his imagination. When he was a boy, living

with his father, he had upset a glass of water over the floor while he

was half-asleep. The flex of the house-telephone had been soaked

through and its continuous ringing had disturbed his father’s sleep.

Since  the  continuous  ringing  corresponded  to  getting  wet,  the

‘detached  rings’  were  used  to  represent  drops  falling.  The  word

‘tutelrein’ could be analysed in three directions, and led in that way to

three of the subjects represented in the dream-thoughts. ‘Tutel’ is a

legal term for ‘guardianship’ [‘tutelage’]. ‘Tutel’ (or possibly ‘Tuttel’) is

also a vulgar term for a woman’s breast. The remaining portion of the

word, ‘rein’ [‘clean’], combined with the first part of ‘Zimmertelegraph’[‘house-telephone’],  forms  ‘zimmerrein’  [‘house-trained’]  -  which  is

closely connected with making the floor wet, and, in addition, sounded

very much like the name of a member of the dreamer’s family.¹

 

   ¹ In waking life this same kind of analysis and synthesis of syllables - a syllabic chemistry,

in fact - plays a part in a great number of jokes: ‘What is the cheapest way of obtaining silver?
You  go  down  an  avenue  of  silver  poplars  [Pappeln,  which  means  both  "poplars"  and
"babbling"] and call for silence. The babbling then ceases and the silver is released.’ The first
reader and critic of this book - and his successors are likely to follow his example - protested
that ‘the dreamer seems to be too ingenious and amusing.’ This is quite true so long as it
refers only to the dreamer; it would only be an objection if it were to be extended to the
dream-interpreter. In waking reality I have little claim to be regarded as a wit. If my dreams
seem  amusing,  that  is  not  on  my  account,  but  on  account  of  the  peculiar  psychological
conditions under which dreams are constructed; and the fact is intimately connected with the
theory of jokes and the comic. Dreams become ingenious and amusing because the direct
and easiest pathway to the expression of their thoughts is barred: they are forced into being
so. The reader can convince himself that my patients’ dreams seem at least as full of jokes
and puns as my own, or even fuller. - [Added 1909:] Nevertheless this objection led me to
compare the technique of jokes with the dream-work; and the results are to be found in the
book which I published on Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious (1905c).
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        771

 

                                            IV

 

   In a confused dream of my own of some length, whose central point

seemed to be a sea voyage, it appeared that the next stopping place

was called ‘Hearsing’ and the next after that ‘Fliess.’ This last word

was the name of my friend, who has often been the goal of my travels.

‘Hearsing’  was  a  compound.  One  part  of  it  was  derived  from  the

names of places on the suburban railway near Vienna, which so often

end in ‘ing’: Hietzing, Liesing, Mödling (Medelitz, ‘meae deliciae’, was

its old name - that is ‘meine Freud’ [‘my delight’]). The other part was

derived from the English word ‘hearsay.’ This suggested slander and

established the dream’s connection with its indifferent instigator of the

previous  day:  a  poem  in  the  periodical Fliegende  Blätter  about  a

slanderous dwarf called ‘Sagter Hatergesagt’ [‘He-says Says-he’]. If

the syllable ‘ing’ were to be added to the name ‘Fliess’ we should get

‘Vlissingen’, which was in fact the stopping-place on the sea voyage

made by my brother whenever he visited us from England. But theEnglish  name  for  Vlissingen  is  ‘Flushing’,  which  in  English  means

‘blushing’  and  reminded  me  of  the  patients  I  have  treated  for

ereutophobia,  and  also  of  a  recent  paper  on  that  neurosis  by

Bechterew which had caused me some annoyance.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        772

 

                                            V

 

   On another occasion I had a dream which consisted of two separate

pieces. The first piece was the word ‘Autodidasker’, which I recalled

vividly. The second piece was an exact reproduction of a short and

harmless  phantasy  which  I  had  produced  some  days  before.  This

phantasy was to the effect that when I next saw Professor N. I must

say  to  him:  ‘The  patient  about  whose  condition  I  consulted  you

recently  is  in  fact  only  suffering  from  a  neurosis,  just  as  you

suspected.’  Thus  the  neologism  ‘Autodidasker’  must  satisfy  two

conditions: firstly, it must bear or represent a composite meaning; and

secondly, that meaning must be solidly related to the intention I had

reproduced from waking life of making amends to Professor N.

      The  word  ‘Autodidasker’  could  easily  be  analysed  into  ‘Autor’

[author],  ‘Autodidakt’  [self-taught]  and  ‘Lasker’,  with  which  I  also

associated the name of Lassalle. The first of these words led to the

precipitating cause of the dream - this time a significant one. I had

given  my  wife  several  volumes  by  a  well-known  writer  who  was  a

friend of my brother’s, and who, as I have learnt, was a native of my

own birthplace: J. J. David. One evening she had told me of the deep

impression that had been made on her by the tragic story in one of

David’s  books  of  how  a  man  of  talent  went  to  the  bad;  and  our

conversation had turned to a discussion of the gifts of which we saw

signs in our own children. Under the impact of what she had been

reading,  my  wife  expressed  concern  about  the  children,  and  I

consoled her with the remark that those were the very dangers which

could be kept at bay by a good upbringing. My train of thought was

carried further during the night; I took up my wife’s concern and wove

all kinds of other things into it. A remark made by the author to mybrother  on  the  subject  of  marriage  showed  my  thoughts  a  by-path

along which they might come to be represented in the dream. This

path led to Breslau, where a lady with whom we were very friendly had

gone  to  be  married  and  settle  down.  The  concern  I  felt  over  the

danger of coming to grief over a woman - for that was the kernel of my

dream-thoughts - found an example in Breslau in the cases of Lasker

and Lassalle which made it possible to give a simultaneous picture of

the two ways in which this fatal influence can be exercised. ‘Cherchez

la femme’, the phrase in which these thoughts could be summarized,

led me, taken in another sense, to my still unmarried brother, whose

name is Alexander. I now perceived that ‘Alex’, the shortened form of

the name by which we call him, has almost the same sound as an

anagram of ‘Lasker’, and that this factor must have had a share in

leading my thoughts along the by-path by way of Breslau.

 

   ¹ Lasker died of tabes, that is, as a result of an infection (syphilis) contracted from a

woman; Lassalle, as everyone knows, fell in a duel on account of a woman.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        773

 

   The play which I was making here upon names and syllables had a

still further sense, however. It expressed a wish that my brother might

have a happy domestic life, and it did so in this way. In Zola’s novel of

an artist’s life, L’oevre, the subject of which must have been close to

my dream-thoughts, its author, as is well known, introduced himself

and his own domestic happiness as an episode. He appears under the

name  of  ‘Sandoz.’  The  transformation  was  probably  arrived  at  as

follows. If ‘Zola’ is written backwards (the sort of thing children are so

fond  of  doing),  we  arrive  at  ‘Aloz.’  No  doubt  this  seemed  too

undisguised. He therefore replaced ‘Al’, which is the first syllable of

‘Alexander’ by ‘Sand’, which is the third syllable of the same name;

and  in  this  way  ‘Sandoz’  came  into  being.  My  own  ‘Autodidasker’

arose in much the same fashion.

   I must now explain how my phantasy of telling Professor N. that the

patient  we  had  both  examined  was  only  suffering  from  a  neurosis

made its way into the dream. Shortly before the end of my workingyear, I began the treatment of a new patient who quite baffled my

powers  of  diagnosis.  The  presence  of  a  grave  organic  disease  -

perhaps some degeneration of the spinal cord - strongly suggested

itself  but  could  not  be  established.  It  would  have  been  tempting  to

diagnose a neurosis (which would have solved every difficulty), if only

the patient had not repudiated with so much energy the sexual history

without which I refuse to recognize the presence of a neurosis. In my

embarrassment I sought help from the physician whom I, like many

other  people,  respect  more  than  any  as  a  man  and  before  whose

authority I am readiest to bow. He listened to my doubts, told me they

were  justified,  and  then  gave  his  opinion:  ‘Keep  the  man  under

observation; it must be a neurosis.’ Since I knew he did not share my

views on the aetiology of the neuroses, I did not produce my counter-

argument, but I made no concealment of my scepticism. A few days

later  I  informed  the  patient  that  I  could  do  nothing  for  him  and

recommended him to seek other advice. Whereupon, to my intense

astonishment, he started apologizing for having lied to me. He had

been too much ashamed of himself, he said, and went on to reveal

precisely the piece of sexual aetiology which I had been expecting and

without which I had been unable to accept his illness as a neurosis. I

was relieved but at the same time humiliated. I had to admit that my

consultant, not being led astray by considering the anamnesis, had

seen  more  clearly  than  I  had.  And  I  proposed  to  tell  him  as  much

when I next met him - to tell him that he had been right and I wrong.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        774

 

   This was precisely what I did in the dream. But what sort of a wish-

fulfilment can there have been in confessing that I was wrong?. To be

wrong was, however, just what I did wish. I wanted to be wrong in my

fears, or, more precisely, I wanted my wife, whose fears I had adopted

in  the  dream-thoughts,  to  be  wrong.  The  subject  round  which  the

question of right or wrong revolved in the dream was not far removed

from what the dream-thoughts were really concerned with. There was

the same alternative between organic and functional damage causedby  a  woman,  or,  more  properly,  by  sexuality:  tabetic  paralysis  or

neurosis? (The manner of Lassalle’s death could be loosely classed in

the latter category.)

      In  this  closely  knit  and,  when  it  was  carefully  interpreted,  very

transparent dream, Professor N. played a part not only on account of

this  analogy  and  of  my  wish  to  be  wrong,  and  on  account  of  his

incidental connections with Breslau and with the family of our friend

who had settled there after her marriage but also on account of the

following episode which occurred at the end of our consultation. When

he had given his opinion and so concluded our medical discussion, he

turned to more personal subjects: ‘How many children have you got

now?’ - ‘Six.’ - He made a gesture of admiration and concern. - ‘Girls

or boys?’ - ‘Three and three: they are my pride and my treasure.’ -

‘Well, now, be on your guard! Girls are safe enough, but bringing up

boys leads to difficulties later on.’ - I protested that mine had been

very  well  behaved  so  far.  Evidently  this  second  diagnosis,  on  the

future of my boys, pleased me no more than the earlier one, according

to which my patient was suffering from a neurosis. Thus these two

impressions were bound up together by their contiguity, by the fact of

their having been experienced both at once; and in taking the story of

the neurosis into my dream, I was substituting it for the conversation

about  upbringing,  which  had  more  connection  with  the  dream-

thoughts, since it touched so closely upon the worries later expressed

by my wife. So even my fear that N. might be right in what he said

about the difficulty of bringing up boys had found a place in the dream,

for it lay concealed behind the representation of my wish that I myself

might be wrong in harbouring such fears. The same phantasy served

unaltered to represent both of the opposing alternatives.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        775

 

                                            VI

 

   ‘Early this morning,¹ between dreaming and waking, I experienced a

very nice example of verbal condensation. In the course of a mass of

dream-fragments that I could scarcely remember, I was brought up