way, what is more. But that is something that has been noticed long,

long ago."

   ‘"Dear me! Now I remember a whole set of events that I took to be

accidents. Once I was given a pair of pince-nez by my grandmother,

at a time we were good friends. They were made of polished rock-

crystal and were excellent for making post-mortems - a real miracle of

which I took the greatest care. One day I broke with the old lady and

she was angry with me. And during the next post-mortem the lenses

happened to fall out for no reason. I thought they were simply broken

and sent them to be repaired. But no, they went on refusing to help

me; they were put in a drawer and got lost."

   ‘"Dear me! Strange that things that concern the eyes should be the

most sensitive. I was once given some opera glasses by a friend; they

suited my eyes so well that it was a pleasure to use them. This friend

and I fell out. You know how it happens without visible cause; it seems

as though one were not allowed to be in harmony. The next time I

wanted to use the opera glasses I could not see clearly. The cross-

piece was too short and I saw two images. I don’t need to tell you that

the cross-piece had not grown shorter and my eyes had not grown

further apart! It was a miracle that happens every day - one that bad

observers do not notice. How can we explain it? The psychical power

of hatred must be greater than we suppose. - What is more, the ring

that I had from you has lost its stone and will not let itself be repaired;

no, it will not. Do you want to part from me, then? . . ."’ (The Gothic

Rooms, German trans., p. 258 f.)

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1289

 

   In the field of symptomatic acts, too, psycho-analytic observation

must concede priority to imaginative writers. It can only repeat what

they have said long ago. Wilhelm Stross has drawn my attention to the

following passage in Laurence Sterne’s celebrated humorous novel,

Tristram Shandy (Volume VI, Chapter V):

   ‘. . . And I am not at all surprised that Gregory of Nazianzum, upon

observing the hasty and untoward gestures of Julian, should foretellhe would one day become an apostate; - or that St. Ambrose should

turn his Amanuensis out of doors, because of an indecent motion of

his head, which went backwards and forwards like a flail; - or that

Democritus should conceive Protagoras to be a scholar, from seeing

him  bind  up  a  faggot,  and  thrusting,  as  he  did  it,  the  small  twigs

inwards. - There are a thousand unnoticed openings, continued my

father, which let a penetrating eye at once into a man’s soul; and I

maintain it, added he, that a man of sense does not lay down his hat

in coming into a room, - or take it up in going out of it, but something

escapes, which discovers him.’

 

   I add here a brief and varied collection of symptomatic acts found in

healthy and neurotic people:

   An elderly colleague who was not a good loser at cards had one

evening paid up a largish sum of money that he had lost. He did this

without  complaining  but  in  a  peculiarly  restrained  mood.  After  his

departure it was discovered that he had left behind at his seat more or

less  everything  he  had  on  him:  spectacles,  cigar-case  and

handkerchief. This no doubt calls for the translation: ‘You robbers! You

have well and truly plundered me!’

   A man suffering from occasional sexual impotence, which originated

from the intimacy of his relations with his mother in childhood, related

that he was in the habit of decorating pamphlets and notes with the

letter S, his mother’s initial. He cannot bear letters from home coming

in  contact  with  other  profane  correspondence  on  his  desk,  and  is

therefore forced to put the former away separately.

   A young lady suddenly flung open the door of the consulting room

though the woman who preceded her had not yet left it. In apologizing

she  blamed  her  ‘thoughtlessness’;  it  soon  turned  out  that  she  had

been demonstrating the curiosity that in the past had caused her to

make her way into her parents’ bedroom.

   Girls who are proud of having beautiful hair are able to manage their

combs and hairpins in such a way that their hair comes down in the

middle of a conversation.

   Some men scatter small change out of their trouser pockets while

they are lying down during treatment and in that way pay whatever fee

they think appropriate for the session.   People who forget to take away articles they have brought to the

physician’s house, such as pince-nez, gloves and purses, are showing

by this that they cannot tear themselves away and would like to come

back soon. Ernest Jones says: ‘One can almost measure the success

with which a physician is practising psychotherapy, for instance, by

the size of the collection of umbrellas, handkerchiefs, purses, and so

on, that he could make in a month.’

   The slightest actions of a habitual nature which are performed with a

minimum of attention, such as winding up one’s watch before going to

sleep, switching off the light before leaving a room, etc., are subject

from time to time to disturbances that unmistakably demonstrate the

influence of unconscious complexes upon what would seem to be the

most fixed habits. Maeder, writing in the periodical Coenobium, tells of

a house-physician who decided to go into town one evening for an

important  engagement,  although  he  was  on  duty  and  was  not

supposed to leave the hospital. When he returned he was surprised to

find the light on in his room. He had forgotten to turn it off when he

went out, which was something that he had never failed to do before.

But  he  soon  grasped  the  motive  for  his  forgetfulness.  The  chief

resident medical officer in the hospital would naturally have concluded

from the light in the house-physician’s room that he was at home.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1290

 

      A  man  overburdened  with  worries  and  subject  to  occasional

depressions assured me that he regularly found in the morning that

his watch had run down whenever the evening before life had seemed

to be altogether too harsh and unfriendly. By omitting to wind up his

watch  he  was  giving  symbolic  expression  to  his  indifference  about

living till the next day.

   Another man, whom I do not know personally, writes: ‘After fate had

dealt  me  a  hard  blow,  life  seemed  so  harsh  and  unfriendly  that  I

imagined I had not sufficient strength to live through the next day. I

then  noticed  that  almost  every  day  I  forgot  to  wind  up  my  watch.

Previously I had never failed to do so; it was something I did regularlybefore going to bed, as an almost mechanical and unconscious act.

But now I only very rarely remembered to do it, and that was when I

had something important or specially interesting ahead of me. Should

this too be considered a symptomatic act? I could not explain it to

myself at all.’

   If anyone takes the trouble, as Jung (1907) and Maeder (1909) have

done, to note the tunes that he finds himself humming, unintentionally

and often without noticing he is doing so, he will pretty regularly be

able to discover the connection between the words of the song and a

subject that is occupying his mind.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1291

 

   The subtler determinants, too, of the expression of one’s thoughts in

speaking  or  writing  deserve  careful  attention.  We  believe  that  in

general we are free to choose what words we shall use for clothing

our thoughts or what images for disguising them. Closer observation

shows  that  other  considerations  determine  this  choice,  and  that

behind the form in which the thought is expressed a glimpse may be

had of a deeper meaning - often one that is not intended. The images

and turns of phrase to which a person is particularly given are rarely

without  significance  when  one  is  forming  a  judgement  of  him;  and

others often turn out to be allusions to a theme which is being kept in

the  background  at  the  time,  but  which  has  powerfully  affected  the

speaker.  In  the  course  of  some  theoretical  discussions  I  heard

someone  at  a  particular  time  repeatedly  using  the  expression:  ‘If

something suddenly shoots through one’s head’. I happened to know

that he had recently received news that a Russian bullet had passed

right through the cap hat his son was wearing on his head.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1292

 

                                      CHAPTER X

                                         ERRORS

 

Errors of memory are distinguished from forgetting accompanied by

paramnesia  by  the  single  feature  that  in  the  former  the  error  (the

paramnesia) is not recognized as such but finds credence. The use of

the term ‘error’, however, seems to depend on yet another condition.

we have remembered it wrongly We speak of ‘being in error’ rather

than  of  ‘remembering  wrongly’  where  we  wish  to  emphasize  the

characteristic of objective reality in the psychical material which we

are trying to reproduce - that is to say, where what we are trying to

remember is something different from a fact of our own psychical life:

something,  rather,  that  is  open  to  confirmation  or  refutation  by  the

memory of other people. The antithesis to an error of memory in this

sense is ignorance.

      In  my Interpretation of Dreams (1900a)  I  was  responsible  for  a

number of falsifications which I was astonished to discover after the

book was published. They concerned historical points and, in general,

points of fact. After closer examination I found that they did not owe

their origin to my ignorance, but are traceable to errors of memory

which analysis is able to explain.

   (1) On page 979 I refer to the town of Marburg - a name also found

in Styria - as Schiller’s birthplace. The error occurs in the analysis of a

dream which I had during a journey by night and from which I was

woken by the guard calling out the name of Marburg station. In the

content  of  the  dream  someone  asked  a  question  about  a  book  by

Schiller. In fact Schiller was not born at the university town of Marburg

[in Hesse] but at Marbach in Swabia. Moreover I can assert that I have

always known this.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1293

 

   (2) On page 681 Hannibal’s father is called Hasrubal. This error

annoyed  me  especially,  but  it  furnished  me  with  the  strongest

corroboration of my view of such errors. There must be few readers of

my book who are better acquainted with the history of the house ofBarca than its author, who penned this error and who overlooked it in

three  sets  of  proofs.  The  name  of  Hannibal’s father  was Hamilcar

Barca - Hasrubal was the name of Hannibal’s brother, as well as of his

brother-in-law and predecessor in command.

   (3) On pages 735 and 1043 I state that Zeus emasculated his father

Kronos and dethroned him. I was, however, erroneously carrying this

atrocity  a  generation  forward;  according  to  Greek  mythology  it  was

Kronos who committed it on his father Uranus.¹

   How is it to be explained that my memory provided me at these

points with what was incorrect, while otherwise - as the reader of the

book can see for himself - it put at my disposal the most out-of-the-

way and unusual material? And how, too, did I pass over these errors

while I carefully went through three sets of proofs - as if I had been

struck blind?

   Goethe said of Lichtenberg: ‘Where he makes a jest a problem lies

concealed.’ Similarly it can be said of the passages in my book that I

have quoted here: where an error makes its appearance a repression

lies behind it - or more correctly, an insincerity, a distortion, which is

ultimately  rooted  in  repressed  material.  In  analysing  the  dreams

reported there I was compelled, by the very nature of the themes to

which the dream-thoughts related, on the one hand to break off the

analysis at some point before it had been rounded off, and on the

other  hand  to  take  the  edge  off  some  indiscreet  detail  by  mild

distortion. I could not do otherwise, and I had in fact no other choice if

I wished to bring forward examples and evidence at all. My awkward

position was a necessary result of the peculiar character of dreams,

which consists in giving expression to repressed material - in other

words, to material that is inadmissible to consciousness. (In spite of

this it would seem that enough was still left to give offence to some

sensitive souls.) I did not succeed, however, in carrying through the

distortion  or  concealment  of  the  thoughts,  whose  continuation  was

known  to  me,  without  leaving  some  trace  of  them  behind.  What  I

wanted to suppress often succeeded against my will in gaining access

to what I had chosen to relate and appeared in it in the form of an

error that I failed to notice. Moreover, the same theme is at the bottom

of all the three examples I have given: the errors are derivatives of

repressed thoughts connected with my dead father. 

   ¹ This was not a complete error. The Orphic version of the myth makes Zeus repeat the

process of emasculation on his father Kronos. (See Roscher’s Lexicon of Mythology.)
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1294

 

   (1) Anyone who reads through the dream-analysed on p. 744 will in

part find undisguisedly, and will in part be able to guess from hints,

that  I  have  broken  off  at  thoughts  which  would  have  contained  an

unfriendly  criticism  of  my  father.  In  the  continuation  of  this  train  of

thoughts and memories there in fact lies an annoying story in which

books play a part, and a business friend of my father’s who bears the

name of Marburg - the same name that woke me when it was called

out  at  Marburg  station  on  the Südbahn.  In  the  analysis  I  tried  to

suppress this Herr Marburg from myself and from my readers; he took

his revenge by intruding where he did not belong and changing the

name of Schiller’s birthplace from Marbach to Marburg.

   (2) The error of putting Hasrubal instead of Hamilcar, the brother’s

name  instead  of  the  father’s,  occurred  precisely  in  a  context  that

concerned  the  Hannibal-phantasies  of  my  school  years  and  my

dissatisfaction with my father’s behaviour towards the `enemies of our

people’.  I  could  have  gone  on  to  tell  how  my  relationship  with  my

father was changed by a visit to England, which resulted in my getting

to know my half-brother, the child of my father’s first marriage, who

lived there. My brother’s eldest son is the same age as I am. Thus the

relations between our ages were no hindrance to my phantasies of

how different things would have been if I had been born the son not of

my father but of my brother. These suppressed phantasies falsified

the text of my book at the place where I broke off the analysis, by

forcing me to put the brother’s name for the father’s.

   (3) It is to the influence of the memory of this same brother that I

attribute  my  error  in  advancing  by  a  generation  the  mythological

atrocities  of  the  Greek  pantheon.  One  of  my  brother’s  admonitions

lingered long in my memory. `One thing,’ he had said to me, `that you

must not forget is that as far as the conduct of your life is concerned

you  really  belong  not  to  the  second  but  to  the  third  generation  inrelation to your father.’ Our father had married again in later life and

was therefore much older than his children by his second marriage. I

made the error already described at the exact point in the book at

which I was discussing filial piety.

   It has also occasionally happened that friends and patients, whose

dreams I have reported, or have alluded to in the course of my dream-

analyses, have drawn my attention to the fact that the details of the

events experienced by us together have been inaccurately related by

me. These again could be classified as historical errors. After being

put  right  I  have  examined  the  various  cases  and  here  too  I  have

convinced  myself  that  my  memory  of  the  facts  was  incorrect  only

where  I  had  purposely  distorted  or  concealed  something  in  the

analysis.  Here  once  again  we  find an  unobserved  error  taking  the

place of an intentional concealment or repression.

      These  errors  that  derive  from  repression  are  to  be  sharply

distinguished  from  others  which  are  based  on  genuine  ignorance.

Thus, for example, it was ignorance which made me think during an

excursion to the Wachau that I had come to the home of Fischhof, the

revolutionary  leader.  The  two  places  merely  have  the  same  name:

Fischhof’s Emmersdorf is in Carinthia. I, however, knew no better.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1295

 

      (4)  Here  is  another  instructive  error  that  put  me  to  shame,  an

example  of  what  might  be  called  temporary  ignorance.  One  day  a

patient reminded me to give him the two books on Venice that I had

promised him, as he needed them in preparing for a journey at Easter.

‘I have them ready,’ I replied, and went to the library to fetch them.

The truth, however, was that I had forgotten to look them out, for I did

not  entirely  approve  of  my  patient’s  journey,  which  I  saw  as  an

unnecessary interruption of the treatment and a material loss to the

physician. I therefore took a hasty look round the library for two books

I had had my eye on. One was ‘Venice, City of Art’; but besides this I

thought I must own a historical work in a similar series. Quite right,

there it was: ‘The Medici’. I took it and brought it to my waiting patient,only ashamedly to acknowledge the error. In reality I of course knew

that the Medici have nothing to do with Venice, but for a short time it

did not strike me as in any way incorrect. I now had to be fair; as I had

so frequently confronted my patient with his own symptomatic acts I

could  only  vindicate  my  authority  in  his  eyes  by  being  honest  and

showing him the motives (which I had kept secret) for my disapproval

of his journey.

   It may, in general, seem astonishing that the urge to tell the truth is

so much stronger than is usually supposed. Perhaps, however, my

being  scarcely  able  to  tell  lies  any  more  is  a  consequence  of  my

occupation with psycho-analysis. As often as I try to distort something

I  succumb  to  an  error  or  some  other  parapraxis  that  betrays  my

insincerity, as can be seen in this last example and in the previous

ones.

   Of all parapraxes errors seem to have the least rigid mechanism.

That is to say, the occurrence of an error is a quite general indication

that  the  mental  activity  in  question  has  had  to  struggle  with  a

disturbing influence of some sort or other; but the particular form that

the  error  takes  is  not  determined  by  the  quality  of  the  concealed

disturbing idea. We may add here retrospectively that the same thing

can  be  assumed  to  be  true  of  many  simple  cases  of  slips  of  the

tongue and pen. Every time we make a slip in talking or writing we

may infer that there has been a disturbance due to mental processes

lying outside our intention; but it must be admitted that slips of the

tongue  and  of  the  pen  often  obey  the  laws  of  resemblance,  of

indolence or of the tendency to haste, without the disturbing element

succeeding in imposing any part of its own character on the resulting

mistake  in  speech  or  writing.  It  is  the  compliance  of  the  linguistic

material which alone makes the determining of the mistakes possible,

and at the same time sets the limits up to which the determining can

go.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1296

 

   To avoid confining myself entirely to my own errors, I shall report afew  examples  that  might  indeed  have  been  included  just  as  well

among slips of the tongue and bungled actions; this is, however, a

matter  of  indifference,  since  all  these  forms  of  parapraxis  are

equivalent to one another.

   (5) I forbade a patient to telephone to the girl he was in love with -

but with whom he himself wanted to break off relations - since each

conversation served only to renew the struggle about giving her up.

He was to write his final decision to her though there were difficulties

about delivering letters to her. He called on me at one o’clock to tell

me  he  had  found  a  way  of  getting  round  these  difficulties,  and

amongst  other  things  asked  if  he  might  quote  my  authority  as  a

physician. At two o’clock he was occupied in composing the letter that

was to end the relationship, when he suddenly broke off and said to

his mother who was with him: ‘Oh! I’ve forgotten to ask the professor if

I may mention his name in the letter.’ He rushed to the telephone, put

through  his  call  and  said  into  the  instrument:  ‘May  I  speak  to  the

professor,  please,  if  he’s  finished  dinner?’  In  answer  he  got  an

astonished: ‘Adolf, have you gone mad?’ It was the same voice which

by my orders he should not have heard again. He had simply ‘made

an  error’,  and  instead  of  the  physician’s  number  he  had  given  the

girl’s.

   (6) A young lady was to pay a visit in the Habsburgergasse to a

friend, a lady who had recently been married. She spoke about it while

the family were at table, but said in error that she had to go to the

Babenbergergasse. Some of those at the table laughingly drew her

attention to her error - or slip of the tongue (according to choice) -

which she had not noticed. In fact two days before this the republic

had been proclaimed in Vienna; the black and yellow had vanished

and been replaced by the colours of the old Ostmark - red, white and

red - and the Hapsburgs had been deposed. Our speaker introduced

the change of dynasty into her friend’s address. In Vienna there is

indeed a very well known Babenbergerstrasse, but no Viennese would

speak of it as a ‘Gasse’.¹

 

   ¹ [In Vienna two terms are used for ‘street’: ‘Strasse’ for the more important streets and

‘Gasse’ for the minor ones.]
                     The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1297

 

   (7) The local school-teacher at a summer resort, a quite poor but

handsome young man, persisted in his courtship of the daughter of

the proprietor of a villa, who came from the capital, until the girl fell

passionately in love with him and even persuaded her family to give

their approval to the marriage in spite of the differences in their social

position and race. One day the teacher wrote a letter to his brother in

which he said: ‘The girl is certainly no beauty; but she is very sweet,

and it would be all right as far as that goes. But whether I shall be able

to make up my mind to marry a Jewess I cannot yet tell you.’ This

letter  was  received  by  his  fiancée  and  it  put  an  end  to  the

engagement, while at the same time his brother was wondering at the

protestations of love addressed to him. My informant assured me that

this was an error and not a cunning device. I know of another case in

which a lady who was dissatisfied with her old doctor but unwilling

openly to get rid of him achieved her purpose by mixing up two letters.

Here  at  least  I  can  guarantee  that  it  was  error  and  not  conscious

cunning that made use of this motif which is such a familiar one in

comedy.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1298

 

      (8)  Brill  tells  of  a  lady  who  asked  him  for  news  of  a  common

acquaintance and in doing so called her in error by her maiden name.

When her attention was drawn to the mistake she was forced to admit

that  she  disliked  the  lady’s  husband  and  had  been  very  unhappy

about her marriage.

   (9) Here is an error which can also be described as a slip of the

tongue. A young father presented himself before the registrar of births

to give notice of the birth of his second daughter. When asked what

the child’s name was to be he answered: ‘Hanna’, and had to be told

by  the  official  that  he  already  had  a  child  of  that  name.  We  may

conclude that the second daughter was not quite so welcome as the

first had been.      (10)  I  will  add  some  other  observations  of  confusion  between

names; they might of course have been equally well included in other

chapters of this book.

   A lady is the mother of three daughters two of whom have long been

married; the youngest is still awaiting her destiny. At both weddings a

lady who is a friend of the family gave the same present, an expensive

silver tea-service. Every time the conversation turns to this tea-service

the mother makes the error of saying that the third daughter owns it. It

is clear that this error expresses the mother’s wish to see her last

daughter married too - on the assumption that she would be given the

same wedding present.

   The frequent cases in which a mother confuses the names of her

daughters, sons or sons-in-law are just as easy to interpret.

   (11) Here is a good example of an obstinate interchange of names; I

borrow  it  from  a  Herr  J.  G.  who  made  the  observation  on  himself

during a stay in a sanatorium:

   ‘At dinner one day (at the sanatorium) I was having a conversation,

which did not interest me much and was entirely conventional in tone,

with the lady who was next to me at table, when in the course of it I

used  a  phrase  of  special  affability.  The  somewhat  elderly  spinster

could not help commenting that it was not usually my habit to behave

to her with such affability and gallantry - a rejoinder which contained

not only a certain regret but also an obvious dig at a young lady we

both knew to whom I was in the way of being somewhat attentive.

Naturally  I  understood  at  once.  In  the  course  of  our  further

conversation  I  had  to  have  it  repeatedly  pointed  out  to  me  by  my

neighbour, to my great embarrassment, that I had addressed her by

the name of the young lady whom she regarded with some justice as

her more fortunate rival.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1299

 

      (12)  I  will  also  report  as  an  ‘error’  an  incident  with  a  serious

background,  which  was  told  me  by  a  witness  who  was  closely

involved. A lady spent an evening out of doors with her husband andtwo strangers. One of these two ‘strangers’ was an intimate friend of

hers; but the others knew nothing of this and were meant to know

nothing. The friends accompanied the married couple to the door of

their house and while they were waiting for the door to be opened they

took their leave of one another. The lady bowed to the stranger, gave

him her hand and said a few polite words. Then she took the arm of

her secret lover, turned to her husband and began to bid him good-

bye in the same way. Her husband entered into the situation, raised

his hat and said with exaggerated politeness: ‘Good-bye, dear lady!’

The horrified wife dropped her lover’s arm and before the concierge

appeared  had  time  to  exclaim:  ‘Goodness!  What  a  stupid  thing  to

happen!’ The husband was one of those married men who want to put

an act of infidelity on their wife’s part beyond the bounds of possibility.

He had repeatedly sworn that in such a case more than one life would

be in jeopardy. He therefore had inner impediments of the strongest

kind to prevent his noticing the challenge contained in this error.

   (13) Here is an error of one of my patients: the fact that it was

repeated in order to express a contrary meaning makes it particularly

instructive. After protracted internal struggles this over-cautious young

man brought himself to the point of proposing marriage to the girl who

had long been in love with him, as he was with her. He escorted his

fiancée home, said good-bye to her, and, in a mood of the greatest

happiness, got on to a tram and asked the conductress for two tickets.

About six months later he had got married but could not yet adjust

himself to his conjugal bliss. He wondered whether he had done the

right thing in marrying, missed his former relations with his friends,

and had every sort of fault to find with his parents-in-law. One evening

he fetched his young wife from her parents’ house, got on to a tram

with her and contented himself with asking for one ticket only.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1300

 

      (14)    How  a  wish  that  has  been  reluctantly  suppressed  can  be

satisfied by means of an ‘error’ is described in a good example of

Maeder’s (1908). A colleague who had a day free from duties wantedto enjoy it without any interruptions; but he was due to pay a visit in

Lucerne to which he did not look forward. After long deliberation he

decided to go there all the same. He passed the time on the journey

from Zurich to Arth-Goldau in reading the daily papers. At the latter

station he changed trains and continued reading. He travelled on till

the ticket-inspector informed him that he was in the wrong train - the

one travelling back from Goldau to Zurich, though he had a ticket for

Lucerne.

   (15) An analogous, though not entirely successful, attempt to help a

suppressed wish to find expression by means of the same mechanism

of  an  error  is  described  by  Dr.  V.  Tausk  (1917)  under  the  title  of

‘Travelling in the Wrong Direction’:

   ‘I had come to Vienna on leave from the front. An old patient had

heard I was in town and invited me to visit him as he was ill in bed. I

complied with his request and spent two hours with him. When I was

leaving, the sick man asked how much he owed me. "I am here on

leave and am not practising now," I replied. "Please regard my visit as

a friendly turn." The patient hesitated, as he no doubt felt he had no

right  to  claim  my  professional  services  in  the  form  of  an

unremunerated act of friendship. But he finally accepted my answer by

expressing the respectful opinion, which was dictated by his pleasure

at saving money, that as a psycho-analyst I would no doubt do the

right thing. A few moments later I myself had misgivings about the

sincerity of my generosity, and with my mind full of doubts - which

could hardly be explained in more than one way - I got on a tram of

route X. After a short journey I had to change on to route Y. While

waiting at the point where I was to change I forgot the business of the

fee  and  was  occupied  with  the  symptoms  of  my  patient’s  illness.

Meanwhile the tram I was waiting for came and I got on it. But at the

next stop I had to get off again. I had in fact inadvertently and without

noticing got on to an X tram instead of a Y tram, and had travelled

back again in the direction I had just come from - in the direction of my

patient  from  whom  I  did  not  wish  to  accept  any  fee. But  my

unconscious wanted to collect it.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life                                                                                      1301

 

   (16) A trick very similar to the one in Example 14 was once brought

off  by  me  myself.  I  had  promised  my  strict  eldest  brother  that  that

summer I would make my long due visit to him at an English seaside

resort,  and  had  undertaken,  as  time  was  limited,  to  travel  by  the

shortest  route,  without  breaking  my  journey  anywhere.  I  asked  if  I

might stop for a day in Holland, but he thought I might postpone that

till  my  journey  back.  So  I  travelled  from  Munich viâ  Cologne  to

Rotterdam  and  the  Hook  of  Holland  from  where  the  boat  starts  at

midnight for Harwich. I had to change at Cologne; I left my train to

change into the Rotterdam express, but it was nowhere to be found. I

asked various railway officials, was sent from one platform to another,

fell into a mood of exaggerated despair and soon realized that during

this fruitless search I must have missed my connection. After this was

confirmed I considered whether I should spend the night in Cologne.

Among  other  considerations  in  favour  of  that  plan  was  one  of  filial

piety, since according to an old family tradition my ancestors had once

fled from that city during a persecution of the Jews. However I decided

against it, travelled by a later train to Rotterdam, which I reached late

in the night, and was then obliged to spend a day in Holland. That day

brought me the fulfilment of a long cherished wish; I was able to see

Rembrandt’s  magnificent  paintings  at  the  Hague  and  in  the

Rijksmuseum at Amsterdam. It was only the next morning, when I was

travelling  in  the  train  across  England  and  could  collect  my

impressions, that a clear memory emerged of my having seen a large

notice in the station at Cologne - a few steps from the place where I

had  got  off  the  train  and  on  the  same  platform  -  which  read

‘Rotterdam-Hook of Holland’. There, waiting for me, had been the train

in which I ought to have continued my journey. My action in hurrying

away in spite of this clear direction, and my search for the train in

another place, would have to be described as an incomprehensible

‘blindness’ unless one is prepared to assume that - contrary to my

brother’s instructions - I had really resolved to admire the Rembrandts

on  the  journey  out.  Everything  else  -  my  well-acted  perplexity,  the

emergence of the ‘pious’ intention to spend the night in Cologne - was

merely a contrivance to keep my resolution hidden from myself till ithad been completely carried out.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1302

 

   (17) From his own personal experience J. Stärcke (1916) tells of a

similar device produced by ‘forgetfulness’ for the purpose of fulfilling

an ostensibly renounced wish.

   ‘I once had to give a lecture with lantern slides at a village; but the

lecture was postponed for a week. I had answered the letter about the

postponement and had entered the new date in my notebook. I should

have been glad to go to this village in the afternoon, for then I should

have had time to pay a visit to a writer I knew who lived there. To my

regret, however, I had at the time no afternoon that I could keep free.

Somewhat reluctantly, I gave up the idea of the visit.

   ‘When the evening of the lecture arrived I set out for the station in

the greatest hurry with a case of lantern slides. I had to take a taxi to

catch the train. (It happens frequently with me that I put things off so

long  that  I  have  to  take  a  taxi  if  I  am  to  catch  my  train.)  When  I

reached my destination I was a little surprised that there was no one

at the station to meet me (as is the usual practice with lectures in

smallish places). It suddenly occurred to me that the lecture had been

postponed for a week and that I had made a fruitless journey on the

date  that  had  originally  been  fixed.  After  I  had  roundly  cursed  my

forgetfulness,  I  debated  whether  I  should  return  home  by  the  next

train. However, upon closer consideration I reflected that I now had a

fine opportunity of paying the visit I had wanted to, and I thereupon did

so.  It  was  only  when  I  was  on  my  way  that  it  struck  me  that  my

unfulfilled wish to have sufficient time for this visit had neatly hatched

the plot. Being weighed down by the heavy case of lantern slides and

hurrying  to  catch  the  train  could  serve  excellently  to  hide  the

unconscious intention all the more effectively.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1303

    It may perhaps be thought that the class of errors whose explanation

I have given here is not very numerous or particularly significant. But I

leave  it  open  for  question  whether  there  is  not  some  ground  for

extending  the  same  line  of  approach  to  our  assessment  of  the  far

more important errors of judgement made by human beings in their

lives and in scientific work. Only for the rarest and best adjusted mind

does it seem possible to preserve the picture of external reality, as it is

perceived, against the distortion to which it is normally subjected in its

passage though the psychical individuality of the percipient.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1304

 

                                    CHAPTER XI

 

                            COMBINED PARAPRAXES

 

Two of the last-mentioned examples - my own error which transferred

the Medici to Venice, and that of the young man who succeeded in

getting a conversation with his fiancée on the telephone in defiance of

my prohibition - have not in fact been described entirely accurately.

Careful consideration reveals that they are a combination of an act of

forgetting  and  an  error.  I  can  illustrate  this  combination  still  more

clearly from some other examples.

   (1) A friend tells me of the following experience. ‘Some years ago I

allowed  myself  to  be  elected  to  the  committee  of  a  certain  literary

society, as I thought that the organization might one day be able to

help me to have my play produced; and I took a regular part, though

without being much interested, in the meetings, which were held every

Friday.  Then,  a  few  months  ago,  I  was  given  the  promise  of  a

production  at  the  theatre  at  F.;  and  since  then  I  have  regularly

forgotten the meetings of the society. When I read your book on the

subject I felt ashamed of my forgetfulness. I reproached myself with

the thought that it was shabby behaviour on my part to stay away now

that I no longer needed these people, and resolved on no account to

forget the next Friday. I kept on reminding myself of this resolutionuntil I carried it into effect and stood at the door of the room where the

meetings were held. To my astonishment it was locked; the meeting

was  over.  I  had  in  fact  made  a  mistake  over  the  day;  it  was  now

Saturday!’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1305

 

   (2) The next example combines a symptomatic act with a case of

mislaying. It reached me in a somewhat roundabout way, but comes

from a reliable source.

   A lady travelled to Rome with her brother-in-law, who is a famous

artist.  The  visitor  was  received  with  great  honour  by  the  German

community  in  Rome,  and  among  other  presents  he  was  given  an

antique gold medal. The lady was vexed that her brother-in-law did not

appreciate the lovely object sufficiently. When she returned home (her

place in Rome having been taken by her sister) she discovered while

unpacking that she had brought the medal with her - how, she did not

know. She at once sent a letter with the news to her brother-in-law,

and announced that she would send the article she had walked off

with back to Rome next day. But next day the medal had been so

cleverly mislaid that it could not be found and sent off; and it was at

this point that the meaning of her ‘absent mindedness’ dawned on the

lady: she wanted to keep the object for herself.

      (3)  There  are  some  cases  in  which  the  parapraxis  obstinately

repeats itself, at the same time changing the method that it employs:

   For reasons unknown to him, Ernest Jones (1911b, 483) once left a

letter lying on his desk for several days without posting it. At last he

decided to send it off, but he had it returned to him from the ‘Dead

Letter  Office’  since  he  had  forgotten  to  address  it.  After  he  had

addressed it he again took it to the post, but this time it had no stamp.

He was then no longer able to over look his reluctance to sending the

letter off at all.

   (4) The vain attempts to carry out an action in opposition to an

internal  resistance  are  most  impressively  depicted  in  a  short

communication by Dr. Karl Weiss (1912) of Vienna:   ‘The following episode will show how persistently the unconscious

can make itself felt if it has a motive for preventing an intention from

being carried out, and how hard it is to guard against that persistence.

An acquaintance asked me to lend him a book and to bring it to him

the next day. I immediately promised I would, but was aware of a lively

feeling  of  unpleasure  which  I  could  not  at  first  explain.  Later  on  it

became clear to me: the person in question had for years owed me a

sum of money which he apparently had no idea of repaying. I thought

no more of the matter, but I remembered it the next morning with the

same  feeling  of  unpleasure  and  at  once  said  to  myself  "Your

unconscious will arrange for you to forget the book; but you don’t want

to be disobliging, so you will take all possible steps not to forget it." I

came home, wrapped up the book and put it beside me on the desk

where I write my letters. After some time I went out; I took a few steps

and remembered I had left the letters I wanted to post on my desk.

(One of them, by the way, was a letter in which I was obliged to write

something disagreeable to someone from whom I was hoping to get

support  over  a  certain  matter.)  I  turned  back,  took  the  letters  and

again set off. In the tram it occurred to me that I had promised my wife

to buy something for her, and I was very pleased with the thought that

it  would  only  make  a  small  parcel.  At  that  point  the  association

"parcel"-"book" suddenly occurred to me, and I now noticed that I was

not carrying the book. So I had not only forgotten it the first time I went

out, but had also persisted in overlooking it when I took the letters that

it lay beside.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1306

 

   (5) The same situation is found in an instance which Otto Rank

(1912) analysed exhaustively:

   ‘A scrupulously orderly and pedantically precise man reported the

following experience, which was quite unusual for him. One afternoon

he was in the street and wanted to know the time; and he found he

had left his watch at home - a thing he did not remember ever having

done before. As he had an evening engagement for which he had tobe punctual, and as he had not enough time to fetch his own watch

before it, he took advantage of a visit to a lady, a friend of his, to

borrow her watch for the evening. This was all the more feasible since

he already had an engagement to visit the lady next morning, and he

promised to return the watch on that occasion. Next day, however,

when he wanted to hand over the watch he had borrowed to its owner,

he found to his astonishment that now he had left it at home. This time

he had his own watch on him. He then firmly resolved to return the

ladies’  watch  the  same  afternoon  and  actually  carried  out  his

resolution. But when he wanted to see the time upon leaving her, he

found to his immense annoyance and astonishment that he had again

forgotten his own watch.

   ‘The repetition of this parapraxis seemed so pathological to a man

with his love of orderliness that he would have been glad to learn of its

psychological  motivation;  and  this  was  promptly  revealed  by  the

psycho-analytic  enquiry  as  to  whether  anything  disagreeable  had

happened to him on the crucial day when he was forgetful for the first

time, and in what connection it had occurred. He immediately related

how after lunch - shortly before he went out forgetting his watch - he

had  had  a  conversation  with  his  mother,  who  told  him  that  an

irresponsible relative, who had already caused him much worry and

expense, had pawned his [the relative’s] watch, but, as it was needed

in the house, was asking him [the narrator] to provide the money to

redeem it. He was very much upset by what was a more or less forced

loan, and it recalled to his mind all the annoyances that the relative

had  caused  him  over  many  years.  His  symptomatic  act  therefore

proves to have had more than one determinant. In the first place it

gave expression to a train of thought that ran somewhat as follows: "I

won’t allow money to be extorted from me in this way, and if a watch is

needed I shall leave my own at home." But since he needed it in the

evening for keeping an appointment, this intention could only come

into effect by an unconscious path, in the form of a symptomatic act.

In the second place, what the act of forgetting signified came to this:

"The perpetual sacrifice of money on this good-for-nothing will be the

utter ruin of me, so that I shall have to give up everything." Although,

according  to  him,  his  indignation  at  this  piece  of  news  was  only

momentary, the repetition of the same symptomatic act neverthelessshows  that  it  continued  to  operate  intensively  in  the  unconscious,

somewhat as though his consciousness were saying: "I can’t get this

story out of my head."¹ In view of this attitude of the unconscious, it

will  come  as  no  surprise  to  us  that  the  same  thing  should  have

happened to the borrowed ladies’ watch. But perhaps there were also

special motives that favoured this transference on to the "innocent"

ladies’ watch. Probably the most obvious motive is that he would no

doubt have liked to keep it to take the place of the watch of his own

which he had sacrificed, and that he therefore forgot to return it the

next day. He would also perhaps have been glad to have the watch as

a souvenir of the lady. Furthermore, forgetting the ladies’ watch gave

him the opportunity of paying the lady he admired a second visit. He

was in any case obliged to call on her in the morning in connection

with another matter, and by forgetting the watch he seems, as it were,

to  indicate  that  it  was  a  shame  to  use  this  visit,  which  had  been

arranged some time before, for the incidental purpose of returning the

watch. Moreover, having twice forgotten his own watch, and in that

way  being  able  to  return  the  other  watch,  goes  to  show  that

unconsciously he was trying to avoid carrying both watches at once.

He  was  obviously  seeking  to  avoid  giving  this  appearance  of

superfluity, which would have been in striking contrast to his relative’s

want. But on the other hand he contrived by these means to counter

his apparent intentions of marrying the lady, by warning himself that

he  had  indissoluble  obligations  to  his  family  (his  mother).  Finally,

another reason for forgetting a ladies’ watch may be sought in the fact

that the evening before he had, as a bachelor, felt embarrassment in

front of his friends about looking at the ladies’ watch, and only did so

surreptitiously; and to avoid a repetition of this awkward situation he

did not like to carry it any longer. But as he had on the other hand to

return  it,  the  result  here  too  was  an  unconsciously  performed

symptomatic  act,  which  proved  to  be  a  compromise-formation

between conflicting emotional impulses, and a dearly-bought victory

by the unconscious agency.’

 

   ¹ ‘The continued operation of an idea in the unconscious manifests itself sometimes in the

form of a dream following the parapraxis, and sometimes in a repetition of the parapraxis or in
a failure to correct it.’
                     The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1307

 

   Here are three cases observed by J. Stärcke (1916, 108-9):

   (6) Mislaying, breaking and forgetting as an expression of a counter-

will  that  has  been  pushed  back.  ‘I  had  got  together  a  number  of

illustrations for a scientific work, when one day my brother asked me

to  lend  him  some  which  he  wanted  to  use  as  lantern  slides  in  a

lecture. Though I was momentarily aware of thinking I would prefer it if

the reproductions I had collected at much pains were not exhibited or

published in any way before I could do so myself, I promised him I

would  look  out  the  negatives  of  the  pictures  he  wanted  and  make

lantern slides from them. These negatives however I was unable to

find.  I  looked  through  the  whole  pile  of  boxes  full  of  the  relevant

negatives,  and  a  good  two  hundred  negatives  passed  through  my

hands, one after the other; but the negatives I was looking for were

not  there.  I  had  a  suspicion  that  in  fact  I  seemed  not  to  want  my

brother to have the pictures. After I had made this unfriendly thought

conscious and had combated it, I noticed I had put the top box of the

pile on one side, and had not looked through it; and this box contained

the negatives I was looking for. On the lid of this box there was a brief

note of the contents, and it is likely that I had given it a hasty glance

before I put the box aside. The unfriendly thought, however, seemed

not yet to have been totally subdued, for there were a variety of further

happenings before the slides were dispatched. I pressed too hard on

one of the slides and broke it, while I was holding it in my hand and

was  wiping  the  glass  clean.  (In  the  ordinary  way  I  never  break  a

lantern slide like that.) When I had made a new copy of this slide it fell

from  my  hand,  and  was  only  saved  from  being  smashed  by  my

stretching  out  my  foot  and  breaking  its  fall.  When  I  mounted  the

lantern slides the whole pile fell to the ground once more, fortunately

without any being broken. And finally, several days passed before I

actually packed them and sent them off; for though I intended to do so

afresh every day, each time I forgot my intention once again.’

   (7) Repeated forgetfulness - eventual performance bungled. ‘One

day  I  had  to  send  a  postcard  to  an  acquaintance;  but  I  kept  on

postponing doing so for several days. I strongly suspected that thiswas due to the following causes: he had informed me by letter that a

certain person would come to see me in the course of the week from

whom I was not particularly anxious to have a visit. When the week

had passed and the prospect of the unwanted visit had become very

slender I finally wrote the post card, in which I informed him when I

should be free. When writing the postcard I thought at first of adding

that I had been prevented from writing earlier by druk werk ("laborious,

exacting or burdensome work"); but in the end I did not do so as no

reasonable  human  being  believes  this  stock  excuse  any  longer.

Whether  this  little  untruth  was  nevertheless  bound  to  makes  its

appearance I do not know; but when I pushed the postcard into the

letter  box  I  accidentally  put  it  into  the  lower  opening: Drukwerk

("printed matter").’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1308

 

   (8) Forgetting and error. ‘One morning, in very fine weather, a girl

went to the Rijksmuseum to draw some plaster-casts there. Though

she would have preferred to go for a walk, as the weather was so fine,

she nevertheless made up her mind to be industrious for once and to

do some drawing. First she had to buy some drawing paper. She went

to the shop (about ten minutes’ walk from the museum), and bought

some pencils and other materials for sketching, but quite forgot to buy

the drawing paper. Then she went to the museum, and as she was

sitting on her stool ready to begin, she found she had no paper and

had to go back to the shop. After fetching some paper she began to

draw in earnest, made good progress and, after some time, heard the

clock in the museum tower strike a large number of times. "That will

be twelve o’clock", she thought, and continued working until the clock

in the tower struck the quarter ("that", she thought, "will be a quarter

past twelve"), packed up her drawing materials and decided to walk

through the Vondelpark to her sister’s house and have coffee there

(which, in Holland, is equivalent to luncheon). At the Suasso Museum

she saw to her astonishment that it was only twelve o’clock, not half

past!  The  temptingly  fine  weather  had  got  the  better  of  herindustriousness, and in consequence she had not recalled, when the

clock struck twelve times at half past eleven, that belfry clocks strike

the hour at the half hour as well.’

      (9)  As  some  of  the  above  instances  have  already  shown,  the

unconsciously  disturbing  purpose  can  also  achieve  its  aim  by

obstinately  repeating  the  same  kind  of  parapraxis.  I  borrow  an

amusing example of this from a small volume, Frank Wedekind und

das Theater, which has been published in Munich by the Drei Masken

Verlag; but I must leave the responsibility for the anecdote, which is

told in Mark Twain’s manner, to the author of the book.

      ‘In  Wedekind’s  one  act  play Die Zensur  [The  Censorship]  there

occurs at its most solemn moment the pronouncement: "The fear of

death is an intellectual error [‘Denkfehler’]." The author, who set much

store by the passage, asked the performer at rehearsal to make a

slight  pause  before  the  word  "Denkfehler".  On  the  night,  the  actor

entered wholeheartedly into his part, and was careful to observe the

pause; but he involuntarily said in the most solemn tones: "The fear of

death is a Druckfehler [a misprint]." In reply to the actor’s enquiries at

the end of the performance, the author assured him that he had not

the smallest criticism to make; only the passage in question did not

say that the fear of death is a misprint but that it is an intellectual error.

- When Die Zensur was repeated on the following night, the actor, on

reaching the same passage, declared, and once again in the most

solemn tones: "The fear of death is a Denkzettel [a memorandum]."

Wedekind  once  more  showered  unstinted  praise  on  the  actor,  only

remarking incidentally that what the text said was not that the fear of

death was a memorandum but that it was an intellectual error. - Next

night Die  Zensur  was  given  again,  and  the  actor,  with  whom  the

author  had  meanwhile  struck  up  a  friendship  and  had  exchanged

views on artistic questions, declared when he came to the passage,

with  the  most  solemn  face  in  the  world:  "The  fear  of  death  is  a

Druckzettel  [a  printed  label]."  The  actor  received  the  author’s

unqualified  appreciation,  and  the  play  was  given  many  more

performances; but the author had made up his mind that the notion of

an "intellectual error" was a lost cause for good and all.’

                     The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1309

 

      Rank  (1912  and  1915b)  has  also  given  attention  to  the  very

interesting  relations  between  ‘Parapraxes  and  Dreams’,  but  they

cannot be followed without a thorough analysis of the dream which is

linked to the parapraxis. I once dreamt, as part of a longish dream,

that I had lost my purse. In the morning while I was dressing I found

that it was really missing. While undressing the night before I had the

dream, I had forgotten to take it out of my trouser pocket and put it in

its usual place. I was therefore not ignorant of my forgetfulness and it

was  probably  meant  to  give  expression  to  an  unconscious  thought

which was prepared for making its appearance in the content of the

dream.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] It is not so rare an event for a parapraxis like losing or mislaying

something to be undone by means of a dream  - by one’s learning in the dream where the
missing object is to be found; but this has nothing about it in the nature of the occult, so long
as dreamer and loser are the same person. A young lady writes: ‘About four months ago at
the bank I lost a very beautiful ring. I hunted in every nook and cranny of my room without
finding it. A week ago I dreamt it was lying beside the cupboard by the radiator. Naturally the
dream gave me no rest, and next morning I did in fact really find it in that very spot.’ She is
surprised at this incident, and maintains that it often happens that her thoughts and wishes
are fulfilled in this way, but omits to ask herself what change had occurred in her life between
the loss and the recovery of the ring.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1310

 

   I do not mean to assert that cases of combined parapraxes like

these can teach us anything new that could not already be observed

in the simple cases. And yet this situation, of there being a change in

the form taken by the parapraxis while the outcome remains the same,

gives  a  vivid  impression  of  a  will  striving  for  a  definite  aim,  and

contradicts in a far more energetic way the notion that a parapraxis is

a  matter  of  chance  and  needs  no  interpretation.  We  may  also  be

struck by the fact that a conscious intention should in these examples

fail so completely to prevent the success of the parapraxis. My friend

failed in spite of everything to attend the meeting of the society, andthe  lady  found  it  impossible  to  part  from  the  medal.  The  unknown

factor that opposed these intentions found another outlet after the first

path had been barred to it. For what was required to overcome the

unconscious motive was something other than a conscious counter-

intention; it called for a piece of psychical work, which could make

what was unknown known to consciousness.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1311

 

                                    CHAPTER XII

 

DETERMINISM, BELIEF IN CHANCE AND SUPERSTITION - SOME

                                POINTS OF VIEW

 

The  general  conclusion  that  emerges  from  the  previous  individual

discussions  may  be  stated  in  the  following  terms. Certain

shortcomings  in  our  psychical  functioning  -  whose  common

characteristics will in a moment be defined more closely - and certain

seemingly  unintentional  performances  prove,  if  psycho-analytic

methods of investigation are applied to them, to have valid motives

and to be determined by motives unknown to consciousness.

   In order to be included in the class of phenomena explicable in this

way, a psychical parapraxis must fulfil the following conditions:

   (a) It must not exceed certain dimensions fixed by our judgement,

which  we  characterize  by  the  expression  ‘within  the  limits  of  the

normal’.

      (b)  It  must  be  in  the  nature  of  a  momentary  and  temporary

disturbance.  The  same  function  must  have  been  performed  by  us

more  correctly  before,  or  we  must  at  all  times  believe  ourselves

capable  of  carrying  it  out  more  correctly.  If  we  are  corrected  by

someone  else,  we  must  at  once  recognize  the  rightness  of  the

correction and the wrongness of our own psychical process.

   (c) If we perceive the parapraxis at all, we must not be aware in

ourselves of any motive for it. We must rather be tempted to explain it

by ‘inattentiveness’, or to put it down to ‘chance’.   There thus remain in this group the cases of forgetting [‘Vergessen’],

the  errors  in  spite  of  better  knowledge,  the  slips  of  the  tongue

[‘Versprechen’],  misreadings  [‘Verlesen’],  slips  of  the  pen

[‘Verschreiben’],  bungled  actions  [‘Vergreifen’]  and  the  so-called

‘chance actions’. Language points to the internal similarity between

most of these phenomena: they are compounded alike [in German]

with the prefix ‘ver-'.¹

   The explanation of the psychical processes which are defined in this

way leads on to a series of observations which should in part excite a

wider interest.

 

   ¹ [The prefix ‘ver-' in German corresponds closely to the English prefix ‘mis-' in such words

as ‘mis-hear’, ‘mis-lay’ and ‘mis-read’.]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1312

 

 

   (A) If we give way to the view that a part of our psychical functioning

cannot be explained by purposive ideas, we are failing to appreciate

the  extent  of  determination  in  mental  life.  Both  here  and  in  other

spheres this is more far-reaching than we suspect. In an article in Die

Zeit  by  R.  M.  Meyer,  the  literary  historian,  which  I  came  across  in

1900, the view was put forward and illustrated by examples that it is

impossible  intentionally  and  arbitrarily  to  make  up  a  piece  of

nonsense.  I  have  known  for  some  time  that  one  cannot  make  a

number occur to one at one’s own free choice any more than a name.

Investigation of a number made up in an apparently arbitrary manner -

one, let us say, of several digits uttered by someone as a joke or in a

moment of high spirits - reveals that it is strictly determined in a way

that would really never have been thought possible. I will begin by

briefly discussing an instance of an arbitrarily chosen first name, and

then  analyse  in  some  detail  an  analogous  example  of  a  number

‘thrown out without thinking’.

   (1) With a view to preparing the case history of one of my women

patients for publication I considered what first name I should give her

in  my  account.  There  appeared  to  be  a  very  wide  choice;  somenames, it is true, were ruled out from the start - the real name in the

first place, then the names of members of my own family, to which I

should  object,  and  perhaps  some  other  women’s  names  with  an

especially peculiar sound. But otherwise there was no need for me to

be at a loss for a name. It might have been expected - and I myself

expected  -  that  a  whole  host  of  women’s  names  would  be  at  my

disposal. Instead, one name and only one occurred to me - the name

‘Dora’.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1313

 

   I asked myself how it was determined. Who else was there called

Dora? I should have liked to dismiss with incredulity the next thought

to occur to me - that it was the name of my sister’s nursemaid; but I

have so much self-discipline or so much practice in analysing that I

held firmly to the idea and let my thoughts run on from it. At once there

came to my mind a trivial incident from the previous evening which

provided the determinant I was looking for. I had seen a letter on my

sister’s dining-room table addressed to ‘Fräulein Rosa W.’. I asked in

surprise who there was of that name, and was told that the girl I knew

as Dora was really called Rosa, but had had to give up her real name

when she took up employment in the house, since my sister could

take the name ‘Rosa’ as applying to herself as well. ‘Poor people,’ I

remarked in pity, ‘they cannot even keep their own names!’ After that,

I now recall, I fell silent for a moment and began to think of a variety of

serious  matters  which  drifted  into  obscurity,  but  which  I  was  now

easily able to make conscious. When next day I was looking for a

name for someone who could not keep her own, ‘Dora’ was the only

one to occur to me. The complete absence of alternatives was here

based on a solid association connected with the subject-matter that I

was  dealing  with:  for  it  was  a  person  employed  in  someone  else’s

house,  a  governess,  who  exercised  a  decisive  influence  on  my

patient’s story, and on the course of the treatment as well.

   Years later this little incident had an unexpected sequel. Once, when

I was discussing in a lecture the long since published case history ofthe girl now called Dora, it occurred to me that one of the two ladies in

my audience had the same name Dora that I should have to utter so

often  in  a  whole  variety  of  connections.  I  turned  to  my  young

colleague, whom I also knew personally, with the excuse that I had not

in fact remembered that that was her name too, and added that I was

very willing to replace it in my lecture by another name. I was now

faced with the task of rapidly choosing another one, and I reflected

that I must at all costs avoid selecting the first name of the other lady

in the audience and so setting a bad example to my other colleagues,

who were already well grounded in psycho-analysis. I was therefore

very  much  pleased  when  the  name  ‘Erna’  occurred  to  me  as  a

substitute  for  Dora,  and  I  used  it  in  the  lecture.  After  the  lecture  I

asked myself where the name Erna could possibly have come from,

and I could not help laughing when I noticed that the possibility I had

been  afraid  of  when  I  was  choosing  the  substitute  name  had

nevertheless come about, at least to some extent. The other lady’s

family name was Lucerna, of which Erna is a part.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1314

 

   (2) In a letter to a friend I informed him I had just then finished

correcting  the  proofs  of The  Interpretation  of  Dreams  and  did  not

intend to make any more changes in the work, ‘even if it contains 2467

mistakes’. I at once tried to explain this number to myself and added

the little analysis as a postscript to my letter. The best plan will be to

quote it as I wrote it down at the time, just after I had caught myself in

the act:

      ‘Let  me  hastily  add  a  contribution  to  the  psychopathology  of

everyday life. You will find that in the letter I put down the number

2467 as a bold arbitrary estimate of the number of mistakes which will

be found in the dream book. What I meant was some very big number;

but  that  particular  one  emerged.  However,  nothing  in  the  mind  is

arbitrary  or  undetermined.  You  will  therefore  rightly  expect  that  the

unconscious had hastened to determine the number which was left

open by consciousness. Now, immediately before, I had read in thenewspaper that a General E. M. had retired from the post of Master of

Ordnance. I should explain that I am interested in this man. While I

was serving as a medical officer-cadet he came to the sick quarters

one day (he was then a colonel) and said to the medical officer: ‘You

must make me well in a week, because I have some work to do for

which the Emperor is waiting.’ After that episode I decided to follow his

career, and lo and behold! now he has reached the end of it, having

become Master of Ordnance, and is already (1899) on the retired list. I

wanted to work out how long he had taken over this. Assuming that it

was in 1882 that I saw him in hospital, it must have been seventeen

years. I told my wife this and she remarked: "Oughtn’t you to be on the

retired  list  too,  then?"  "Heaven  forbid!"  I  exclaimed.  After  this

conversation I sat down to write to you. But the earlier train of thought

went on in my mind, and with good reason. I had miscalculated; I have

a fixed point in my memory to prove it. I celebrated my majority, i. e.

my twenty-fourth birthday, under military arrest (having been absent

without leave). So that was in 1880, or nineteen years ago. That gives

you the "24" in  2467. Now take my present age - 43 - add 24, and you

have 67. In other words, in answer to the question whether I meant to

retire too, my wish gave me another twenty-four years’ work. I was

obviously annoyed at having failed to get very far myself during the

period in which I have followed Colonel M.’s career; and yet I was

celebrating a kind of triumph over his career being at an end, while I

still have everything in front of me. So one can say with justice that not

even the number 2467 which I threw out unthinkingly was without its

determinants from the unconscious.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1315

 

   (3) Since this first example in which an apparently arbitrarily chosen

number was explained I have often repeated the same experiment,

and with the same result; but the content of the majority of cases is so

intimate that they cannot be reported.

   For that very reason, however, I will take the opportunity of adding

here a very interesting analysis of a ‘numerical association’, which Dr.Adler (1905) of Vienna obtained from a ‘perfectly healthy’ informant.

‘Yesterday  evening’,  this  informant  reports,  ‘I  got  down  to The

Psychopathology of Everyday Life, and would have read the whole of

the book straight away if I had not been prevented by a remarkable

incident. For what happened was that, when I read that every number

which  we  summon  seemingly  arbitrarily  into  consciousness  has  a

definite meaning, I decided to make an experiment. There came to my

mind the number 1734. The following ideas then rapidly occurred to

me: 1734÷17=102; 102÷17=6. I then divided the number into 17 and

34. I am 34 years old. I believe, as I think I once told you, that 34 is

the last year of youth, and for that reason I felt very miserable on my

last birthday. The end of my 17th year saw the beginning of a very

pleasant and interesting period in my development. I divide my life into

portions of 17 years. What do the divisions mean? In thinking of the

number 102 it occurred to me that No. 102 in the Reclam Universal

Library is Kotzebue’s play Menschenhass und Reue.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1316

 

   ‘My present psychical state is one of misanthropy and remorse. No.

6  in  the  U.L.  (I  know  a  whole  quantity  of  its  numbers  by  heart)  is

Müllner’s Die Schuld [Guilt]. The thought plagues me constantly that

the guilt is mine for my failure to become what I could have been with

my abilities. It further occurred to me that No. 34 in the U.L. contains a

tale by the same Müllner entitled Der Kaliber [The Calibre]. I divided

the word into "Ka" and "Liber"; it further occurred to me that it contains

the words "Ali" and "Kali" ["potassium"]. This reminded me of my once

making up rhymes with my (six-year old) son Ali. I asked him to find a

rhyme to Ali. He could not think of any, and as he wanted me to give

him one I said: "Ali reinigt den Mund mit hypermangansaurem Kali."

["Ali cleans his mouth with potassium permanganate."] We laughed a

lot and Ali was very lieb [sweet]. During the last few days I have been

obliged to notice with regret that he is "ka (kein) lieber Ali" ["not the

sweet Ali" ("ka lieber" pronounced as "Kaliber")].

   ‘I then asked myself: what is No. 17 in the U.L.? but I could not bringit to mind. But I quite certainly knew it earlier, so I assumed I wanted

to forget that number. All reflection was in vain. I wanted to go on

reading, but I only read mechanically, without understanding a word,

as the 17 was tormenting me. I put out the light and continued my

search. Finally I came to the conclusion that No. 17 must be a play of

Shakespeare’s.  But  which  one?  I  thought  of Hero  and  Leander  -

clearly a stupid attempt on the part of my will to lead me astray. Finally

I got up and looked in the catalogue of the U.L.- No. 17 is Macbeth. To

my bewilderment I was forced to realize that I knew almost nothing at

all of the play, although I had given it as much attention as other plays

of Shakespeare’s. I only thought of: murderer, Lady Macbeth, witches,

"fair  is  foul"  and  that  at  one  time  I  had  found  Schiller’s  version  of

Macbeth very fine. There is no doubt then that I wished to forget the

play. The further thought occurred to me that 17 and 34 divided by 17

gives the result 1 and 2. Numbers 1 and 2 in the U.L. are Goethe’s

Faust. Formerly I found very much of Faust in myself.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1317

 

   We must regret that the physician’s discretion did not allow us any

insight  into  the  significance  of  this  series  of  associations.  Adler

observes that the man did not succeed in synthesizing his remarks.

They would seem to us scarcely worth reporting if something had not

emerged  during  their  continuation  which  gave  us  the  key  to

understanding the number 1734 and the whole series of associations.

   ‘This morning indeed I had an experience that strongly supports the

correctness  of  the  Freudian  view.  My  wife,  whom  I  had  woken  up

when I got out of bed the night before, asked me why I had wanted the

U.L. catalogue. I told her the story. She found it was all hair-splitting,

only - a very interesting point - she accepted Macbeth, which I had

resisted so forcibly. She said that nothing whatever came to her mind

when she thought of a number. I answered: "Let us test it." She gave

the number 117. I immediately replied: "17 is a reference to what I

have told you. Moreover I said to you yesterday that when a wife is in

her  82nd  year  and  her  husband  in  his  35th  year  there  is  grossincompatibility." For the last few days I have been teasing my wife by

saying she is a little old woman of 82. 82 + 35 = 117.’

   Thus the man, who was not able to find determinants for his own

number, found the solution at once when his wife gave him a number

purporting to be arbitrarily chosen. In reality the wife understood very

well  what  complex  her  husband’s  number  was  derived  from,  and

chose her own number from the same complex - which was certainly

common to both of them, for in his case it concerned their relative

ages.  It  is  therefore  easy  for  us  to  translate  the  number  that  had

occurred  to  the  husband.  It  expresses,  as  Adler  suggests,  a

suppressed wish of his which, fully developed, would run: ‘Only a wife

of 17 is suitable for a man of 34 like me.’

   In case anyone should think too lightly of such ‘trifles’, I may add

that I recently learned from Dr. Adler that a year after the publication

of this analysis the man was divorced from his wife.¹

   Adler gives similar explanations of the origin of obsessive numbers.

 

   ¹ In explanation of Macbeth, No. 17 in the U. L., Adler informs me that in his seventeenth

year this man joined a society of anarchists with regicide as its aim. This was no doubt why
the content of Macbeth was forgotten. At that time, too, he had invented a code in which
letters were replaced by numbers.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1318

 

      (4)  Moreover  the  choice  of  what  have  been  called    ‘favourite

numbers’ is not unrelated to the life of the person concerned and is

not  without  a  certain  psychological  interest.  A  man  who  admitted

having a special preference for the numbers 17 and 19 was able to

specify after a little reflection that at the age of 17 he had gone to the

university and so attained the academic freedom he had long desired,

and that at 19 he had taken his first long journey and soon after had

made his first scientific discovery. But the fixation of this preference

occurred  a  decade  later,  when  the  same  numbers  took  on  a

significance in his erotic life. - Indeed, even those numbers which a

person  uses  especially  often  in  a  particular  connection,  in  an

apparently arbitrary way, can be traced by analysis to an unexpectedmeaning. Thus it struck a patient of mine one day that when annoyed

he was especially fond of saying: ‘I’ve told you that already from 17 to

36 times’, and he asked himself whether there was any motive for it. It

at once occurred to him that he was born on the 27th day of the month

whereas his younger brother was born on the 26th, and that he had

reason to complain that fate so often robbed him of the good things in

life  in  order  to  bestow  them  on  this  younger  brother.  He  therefore

represented this partiality on the part of fate by deducting ten from the

date of his own birthday and adding it to his brother’s. ‘I am the elder

and yet I am cut short like this.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1319

 

   (5) I shall dwell longer on analyses of numerical associations, since I

know of no other separate observations that would prove so forcefully

the  existence  of  highly  composite  thought-processes  which  are  yet

quite unknown to consciousness. At the same time I know of no better

example of analyses in which the part contributed by the physician

(suggestion) - so often held responsible - is so definitely ruled out. I

shall therefore give a report here (with his consent) of the analysis of a

number which occurred to a patient of mine. I need only add that he is

the youngest child in a large family and at an early age lost his greatly

admired  father.  While  he  was  in  a  particularly  cheerful  mood  the

number 426718 came to his mind, and he asked himself: ‘What ideas

occur to me in that connection? First of all, a joke I have heard: "When

a doctor treats a cold it lasts for 42 days; when it is not treated, it lasts

6 weeks."' This corresponds to the first figures in the number (42 = 6 x

7). In the stoppage that followed this first solution I drew his attention

to the fact that the six-figure number he had chosen contained all the

first  digits  except  for  3  and  5.  He  then  immediately  found  the

continuation  of  the  interpretation.  ‘There  are  7  of  us  brothers  and

sisters, and I am the youngest. In the order of our age, 3 corresponds

to my sister A., and 5 to my brother L.; they were my two enemies. As

a child I used to pray to God every night for him to remove these two

tormenting spirits from life. It seems to me now that in this choice ofnumbers I was myself fulfilling this wish; 3 and 5, the wicked brother

and the hated sister, are passed over.’ - If the number represents the

order of your brothers and sisters, what does the 18 at the end mean?

There were only 7 of you after all, - ‘I have often thought that if my

father had lived longer I should not have remained the youngest child.

If there had been 1 more we should have been 8 and I should have

had a younger child after me to whom I should have played the elder

brother.’

   With this the number was explained, but we had still to establish the

connection between the first part of the interpretation and the second

one. This followed very easily from the necessary precondition of the

last figures: ‘if my father had lived longer’. ‘42 = 6 x 7' signified derision

at the doctors who had not been able to help his father, and, in this

form, therefore, it expressed his wish for his father to go on living. The

whole number in fact corresponded to the fulfilment of his two infantile

wishes about his family circle - that his bad brother and sister should

die and that a baby should be born after him, or, expressed in the

shortest  form:  ‘If  only  those  two  had  died  instead  of  my  beloved

father!’¹

 

   ¹ In the interests of simplicity I have omitted some of the patient’s intermediate associations

which were equally to the point.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1320

 

   (6) Here is a brief example from a correspondent. The manager of a

telegraph office in L. writes that his eighteen and-a-half-year-old son,

who  wants  to  study  medicine,  is  already  taken  up  with  the

psychopathology of everyday life, and is trying to convince his parents

of  the  correctness  of  my  assertions.  I  reproduce  one  of  the

experiments  he  undertook,  without  expressing  an  opinion  on  the

discussion attached to it.

   ‘My son was talking to my wife about what we call "chance" and was

demonstrating to her that she could not name any song or any number

that  really  occurred  to  her  simply  "by  chance".  The  following

conversation ensued. Son: "Give me any number you like." - Mother:"79." - Son: "What occurs to you in that connection?" - Mother: "I think

of the lovely hat I was looking at yesterday." - Son: "What did it cost?"

- Mother: "158 marks." - Son: "That explains it: 158 ÷ 2 = 79. The hat

was too dear for you and no doubt you thought: ‘If it were half the

price, I would buy it.’"

   ‘To these assertions of my son’s I first raised the objection that

women are not in general particularly good at figures and that anyway

his  mother  had  certainly  not  worked  out  that  79  was  half  158.  His

theory was therefore based on the sufficiently improbable fact that the

subconscious is better at arithmetic than normal consciousness. "Not

at all", was the answer I received; "it may well be that my mother did

not  work  out  the  sum  158  ÷  2  =  79,  she  may  perfectly  well  have

happened to see this equation - indeed she may have thought about

the hat while dreaming and then realized what it would cost if it were

only half the price."'

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1321

 

   (7) I take another numerical analysis from Jones (1911b, 478). A

gentleman of his acquaintance let the number 986 occur to him and

then defied Jones to connect it with anything he thought of. ‘Using the

free-association  method  he  first  recalled  a  memory,  which  had  not

previously been present in his mind, to the following effect: Six years

ago, on the hottest day he could remember, he had seen a joke in an

evening newspaper, which stated that the thermometer had stood at

986° F., evidently an exaggeration of 98. 6° F. We were at the time

seated in front of a very hot fire from which he had just drawn back,

and he remarked, probably quite correctly, that the heat had aroused

this  dormant  memory.  However,  I  was  curious  to  know  why  this

memory had persisted with such vividness as to be so readily brought

out, for with most people it surely would have been forgotten beyond

recall,  unless  it  had  become  associated  with  some  other  mental

experience of more significance. He told me that in reading the joke

he had laughed uproariously, and that on many subsequent occasions

he had recalled it with great relish. As the joke was obviously a verytenuous one, this strengthened my expectation that more lay behind.

His next thought was the general reflection that the conception of heat

had always greatly impressed him; that heat was the most important

thing in the universe, the source of all life, and so on. This remarkable

attitude  of  a  quite  prosaic  young  man  certainly  needed  some

explanation, so I asked him to continue his free associations. The next

thought was of a factory-stack which he could see from his bedroom

window. He often stood of an evening watching the flame and smoke

issuing  out  of  it,  and  reflecting  on  the  deplorable  waste  of  energy.

Heat, fire, the source of life, the waste of vital energy issuing from an

upright, hollow tube - it was not hard to divine from such associations

that the ideas of heat and fire were unconsciously linked in his mind

with the idea of love, as is so frequent in symbolic thinking, and that

there was a strong masturbation complex present, a conclusion which

he presently confirmed.’

   Those who wish to get a good impression of the way in which the

material of numbers is worked over in unconscious thinking may be

referred to the papers by Jung (1911) and Jones (1912).

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1322

 

   In analyses of this kind which I conduct on myself I find two things

particularly striking: firstly, the positively somnambulistic certainty with

which I set off for my unknown goal and plunge into an arithmetical

train of thought which arrives all at once at the desired number, and

the speed with which the entire subsequent work is completed; and

secondly, the fact that the numbers are so freely at the disposal of my

unconscious  thinking,  whereas  I  am  a  bad  reckoner  and  have  the

greatest difficulties in consciously noting dates, house numbers and

such things. Moreover in these unconscious thought-operations with

numbers I find I have a tendency to superstition, whose origin for long

remained unknown to me.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1920:] Herr Rudolf Schneider (1920) of Munich has raised an interesting

objection to the conclusiveness of such analyses of numbers. He experimented with numbers
that were presented to him - for example, with the number that first caught his eye when heopened a history book - or he presented someone else with a number he had chosen; and he
then  noticed  whether  associations  emerged  to  the  imposed  number  which  had  the
appearance of having determined it. This was in fact what did happen. In one instance which
he relates that concerned himself, the associations provided determinants just as abundant
and full of meaning as in our analyses of numbers that have arisen spontaneously, whereas
the number in Schneider’s experiments, having been presented from outside, called for no
determinant.  In  a  second  experiment  carried  out  on  someone  else,  he  clearly  made  the
problem too easy, for the number he set him was 2, and everybody has some material which
would enable him to find a determinant for that number. - From his experiments Schneider
then draws two conclusions: first, that ‘the mind possesses the same potentialities for finding
associations to numbers as to concepts’; and secondly, that the emergence of determining
associations to numbers that occur to the mind spontaneously does not in any way prove that
these numbers originated from the thoughts discovered in the ‘analysis’ of them. The former
conclusion is undoubtedly correct. It is just as easy to find an appropriate association to a
number which is presented as it is to a word which is called out - indeed it is perhaps easier,
since the ability of the few digits to form connections is particularly great. The situation in
which one finds oneself is then simply that of what are called ‘association experiments’, which
have been studied from the greatest variety of angles by the school of Bleuler and Jung. In
this situation the association (reaction) is determined by the word presented (stimulus-word).
This  reaction  could  however  still  be  of  very  diverse  kinds,  and  Jung’s  experiments  have
shown  that  even  these  further  distinctions  are  not  left  to  ‘chance’,  but  that  unconscious
‘complexes’ participate in the determination if they have been touched on by the stimulus-
word. - Schneider’s second conclusion goes too far. The fact that appropriate associations
arise to numbers (or words) which are presented tells us nothing more about the origin of
numbers  (or  words)  which  emerge spontaneously  than  could  already  be  taken  into
consideration before that fact was known. These spontaneous ideas (words or numbers) may
be  undetermined,  or  may  have  been  determined  by  the  thoughts  that  come  out  in  the
analysis, or by other thoughts not disclosed in the analysis - in which last case the analysis
will have led us astray. The important thing is to get rid of the impression that this problem is
different  for  numbers  from  what  it  is  for  verbal  associations.  A  critical  examination  of  the
problem and with it a justification of the psycho-analytic technique of association lie outside
the scope of this book. In analytic practice we proceed on the presupposition that the second
of the possibilities mentioned above meets the facts and that in the majority of instances use
can be made of it. The investigations of an experimental psychologist (Poppelreuter [1914])
have demonstrated that it is by far the most probable one. See further in this connection the
valuable findings in Section 9 of Bleuler’s book on autistic thinking (1919).
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1323

 

   It will not surprise us to find that not only numbers but also verbal

associations of another kind regularly prove on analytic investigation

to be fully determined.

   (8) A good example of the derivation of an obsessive word - a word

that cannot be got rid of - is to be found in Jung (1906). ‘A lady told me

that for some days the word "Taganrog" had been constantly on herlips without her having any idea where it came from. I asked the lady

for  information  about  the  affectively  stressed  events  and  repressed

wishes of the very recent past. After some hesitation she told me that

she would very much like a morning gown, but her husband did not

take the interest in it that she had hoped. "Morgenrock", "Tag-an-rock"

- their partial similarity in sound and meaning is obvious. The Russian

form was determined by the fact that at about the same time the lady

had come to know someone from Taganrog.’

   (9) I am indebted to Dr. E. Hitschmann for the elucidation of another

case, in which in a particular locality a line of poetry repeatedly forced

its way up as an association, without its origin and connections having

been apparent.

   ‘E., a doctor of law, relates: Six years ago I travelled from Biarritz to

San Sebastian. The railway line crosses the River Bidassoa, which at

this  point  forms  the  frontier  between  France  and  Spain.  From  the

bridge there is a fine view - on one side, of a broad valley and the

Pyrenees,  and  on  the  other,  of  the  distant  sea.  It  was  a  beautiful,

bright summer’s day; everything was filled with sun and light, I was on

my holiday travels and was happy to be coming to Spain. At that point

the following lines occurred to me:

 

                                                                Aber frei ist schon die Seele,

                                                                Schwebet in dem Meer von Licht.¹

 

   ‘I recall that at the time I pondered on where the lines came from

and could not recollect the place. To judge by the rhythm the words

must have come from a poem, which, however, had entirely escaped

my  memory.  I  believe  that  later,  when  the  lines  came  to  my  mind

repeatedly, I asked a number of people about them without being able

to learn anything.

   ‘Last year, when I was returning from Spain I passed over the same

stretch of railway. It was a pitch-dark night and it was raining. I looked

out of the window to see whether we were already coming into the

frontier  station,  and  noticed  that  we  were  on  the  Bidassoa  bridge.

Immediately the lines given above returned to my memory, and again I

could not recall their origin.

   ‘Several months later when I was at home, I came across a copy ofUhland’s poems. I opened the volume and my glance fell on the lines:

"Aber frei ist schon die Seele, schwebet in dem Meer von Licht", which

form the conclusion of a poem called "Der Waller". I read the poem

and had a very dim recollection of having once known it many years

ago. The scene of action is in Spain and this seemed to me to form

the only connection between the quoted lines and the place on the

railway  line  described  by  me.  I  was  only  half  satisfied  with  my

discovery and went on mechanically turning the pages of the book.

The lines "Aber frei ist schon . . ." etc. are printed at the bottom of a

page. On turning over the page I found a poem on the other side with

the title "Bidassoa Bridge".

   ‘I may add that the contents of this poem seemed almost more

unfamiliar than those of its predecessor, and that its first lines run:

 

                                ‘Auf der Bidassoabrücke steht ein Heiliger altersgrau,

                                Segnet rechts die span’schen Berge, segnet links den fränk’schen Gau.’²

 

   ¹ [‘But the soul is already free, it floats in the sea of light.’]

   ² [‘On the Bidassoa bridge there stands a saint grey with age: on the right he blesses the

Spanish mountains, on the left he blesses the Frankish land.’]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1324

 

.

      (B)  Perhaps  the  insight  we  have  gained  into  the  determining  of

names and numbers that are chosen with apparent arbitrariness may

help to solve another problem. Many people, as is well known, contest

the assumption of complete psychical determinism by appealing to a

special feeling of conviction that there is a free will. This feeling of

conviction  exists;  and  it  does  not  give  way  before  a  belief  in

determinism.  Like  every  normal  feeling  it  must  have  something  to

warrant it. But so far as I can observe, it does not manifest itself in the

great  and  important  decisions  of  the  will:  on  these  occasions  the

feeling that we have is rather one of psychical compulsion, and we are

glad to invoke it on our behalf. (‘Here I stand: I can do no other.’) On

the  other  hand,  it  is  precisely  with  regard  to  the  unimportant,indifferent decisions that we would like to claim that we could just as

well  have  acted  otherwise:  that  we  have  acted  of  our  free  -  and

unmotivated - will. According to our analyses it is not necessary to

dispute the right to the feeling of conviction of having a free will. If the

distinction  between  conscious  and  unconscious  motivation  is  taken

into  account,  our  feeling  of  conviction  informs  us  that  conscious

motivation does not extend to all our motor decisions. De minimus non

curat  lex.  But  what  is  thus  left  free  by  the  one  side  receives  its

motivation from the other side, from the unconscious; and in this way

determination in the psychical sphere is still carried out without any

gap.¹

 

    ¹ [Footnote added  1907:]  These  conceptions  of  the  strict  determination  of  apparently

arbitrary psychical acts have already borne rich fruit in psychology, and perhaps also in the
juridical field. By applying them, Bleuler and Jung have made intelligible the reactions in what
is known as the ‘association experiment’, in which the subject of the test, when he hears a
word called out (the stimulus-word), answers it with one that comes to his mind in connection
with it (the reaction), the intervening time being measured (the reaction-time). In his Studies in
Word Association  (1906),  Jung  has  shown  what  a  subtle  reagent  for  psychical  states  we
possess in the association experiment as thus interpreted. Wertheimer and Klein, both pupils
of  Hans  Gross,  the  Professor  of  Criminal  Law  in  Prague,  have  developed  out  of  these
experiments a technique for the establishment of the facts in criminal proceedings which is at
present being examined by psychologists and jurists.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1325

 

 

      (C)  Although  the  motivation  of  the  parapraxes  described  in  the

preceding chapters is something of which from the very nature of the

case conscious thought must lack knowledge, it would nevertheless

be desirable to discover a psychological proof of the existence of that

motivation;  indeed,  for  reasons  which  a  closer  knowledge  of  the

unconscious reveals, it is probable that such proofs are somewhere

discoverable. There are in fact two spheres in which it is possible to

demonstrate  phenomena  that  appear  to  correspond  to  an

unconscious, and therefore displaced, knowledge of that motivation.

   (a) A striking and generally observed feature of the behaviour of

paranoics  is  that  they  attach  the  greatest  significance  to  the  minordetails  of  other  people’s  behaviour  which  we  ordinarily  neglect,

interpret them and make them the basis of far-reaching conclusions.

For example, the last paranoic seen by me concluded that there was a

general understanding in his environment, because when his train was

moving out of the station the people had made a particular movement

with one hand. Another noted the way people walked in the street,

how they flourished their walking sticks, and so on.¹

   The category of what is accidental and requires no motivation, in

which  the  normal  person  includes  a  part  of  his  own  psychical

performances and parapraxes, is thus rejected by the paranoic as far

as  the  psychical  manifestations  of  other  people  are  concerned.

Everything  he  observes  in  other  people  is  full  of  significance,

everything  can  be  interpreted.  How  does  he  reach  this  position?

Probably  here  as  in  so  many  similar  cases  he  projects  on  to  the

mental life of other people what is unconsciously present in his own. In

paranoia  many  sorts  of  things  force  their  way  through  to

consciousness  whose  presence  in  the  unconscious  of  normal  and

neurotic people we can demonstrate only through psycho-analysis.² In

a  certain  sense,  therefore,  the  paranoic  is  justified  in  this,  for  he

recognizes something that escapes the normal person: he sees more

clearly  than  someone  of  normal  intellectual  capacity,  but  the

displacement  on  to  other  people  of  the  state  of  affairs  which  he

recognizes renders his knowledge worthless. I hope I shall not now be

expected to justify the various paranoic interpretations. But the partial

justification  which  we  concede  to  paranoia  in  respect  of  this  view

taken  by  it  of  chance  actions  will  help  us  towards  a  psychological

understanding of the sense of conviction that the paranoic attaches to

all these interpretations. There is in fact some truth in them; those,

too,  of  our  errors  of  judgement  which  are  not  to  be  counted  as

pathological acquire their sense of conviction in just the same way.

This  feeling  is  justified  for  a  certain  part  of  the  erroneous  train  of

thought, or for its source of origin; and it is then extended by us to the

rest of the context.

 

   ¹ From other points of view this interpretation of immaterial and accidental indications given

by other people has been classed as a ‘delusion of reference’.

   ² For  example,  the  phantasies  of  hysterics  concerning  sexual  and  cruel  maltreatment

correspond, at times even down to details, with the complaints of persecuted paranoics. It iscurious, but not unintelligible, that we meet the identical content in the form of reality in the
contrivances of perverts for the satisfaction of their desires.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1326

 

   (b) Another indication that we possess unconscious and displaced

knowledge of the motivation in chance actions and parapraxes is to be

found  in  the  phenomenon  of  superstition.  I  will  make  my  meaning

clear by a discussion of the small experience that started me on these

reflections.

   On my return from my holidays my thoughts immediately turned to

the patients who were to claim my attention in the year’s work that

was just beginning. My first visit was to a very old lady for whom I had

for many years performed the same professional services twice every

day  (p.  1245).  Owing  to  the  uniformity  of  the  circumstances,

unconscious  thoughts  have  very  often  managed  to  find  expression

while I was on my way to the patient and while I was treating her. She

is over ninety years old; it is therefore natural to ask oneself at the

beginning of each year’s treatment how much longer she is likely to

live. On the day I am speaking about I was in a hurry and called a cab

to take me to her house. Every cabman on the rank in front of my

house knew the old lady’s address, as they had all often taken me

there. But on this day it happened that the cabman did not draw up in

front of her house but in front of a house with the same number in a

nearby  street  which  ran  parallel  and  was  in  fact  of  a  similar

appearance. I noticed the error and reproached the cabman with it,

and he apologized. Now is it of any significance that I was driven to a

house where the old lady was not to be found? Certainly not to me,

but if I were superstitious I should see an omen in the incident, the

finger of fate announcing that this year would be the old lady’s last.

Very  many  omens  recorded  by  history  have  been  based  on  a

symbolism no better than this. I of course explain the occurrence as

an accident without any further meaning.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life                                                                                      1327

 

   The case would have been quite different if I had made the journey

on foot, and while ‘deep in thought’, or through ‘absent-mindedness’

had come to the house in the parallel street instead of the right one.

This I should not explain as an accident but as an action that had an

unconscious  aim  and  required  interpretation.  My  interpretation  of

‘going astray’ like thus would probably have had to be that I did not

expect to see the old lady for much longer.

   I am therefore different from a superstitious person in the following

way:

   I do not believe that an event in whose occurrence my mental life

plays no part can teach me any hidden thing about the future shape of

reality;  but  I  believe  that  an  unintentional  manifestation  of  my  own

mental activity does  on  the  other  hand  disclose  something  hidden,

though  again  it  is  something  that  belongs  only  to  my  mental  life.  I

believe  in  external  (real)  chance,  it  is  true,  but  not  in  internal

(psychical) accidental events. With the superstitious person it is the

other way round. He knows nothing of the motivation of his chance

actions and parapraxes, and believes in psychical accidental events;

and,  on  the  other  hand,  he  has  a  tendency  to  ascribe  to  external

chance  happenings  a  meaning  which  will  become  manifest  in  real

events,  and  to  regard  such  chance  happenings  as  a  means  of

expressing something that is hidden from him in the external world.

The differences between myself and the superstitious person are two:

first,  he  projects  outwards  a  motivation  which  I  look  for  within;

secondly, he interprets chance as due to an event, while I trace it back

to  a  thought.  But  what  is  hidden  from  him  corresponds  to  what  is

unconscious for me, and the compulsion not to let chance count as

chance but to interpret it is common to both of us.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] At this point I may quote a neat example which Ossipow (1922)

has  used  for  discussing  the  difference  between  the  superstitious,  psycho-analytic  and
mystical  point  of  view.  He  had  been  married  in  a  small  Russian  provincial  town  and
immediately afterwards started for Moscow with his young wife. At a station two hours before
his destination he had a wish to go to the station exit and take a look at the town. The train
was due to halt there long enough, as he thought, but when he returned a few minutes later it
had already left with his young wife. When he told his old nurse at home of this accident she
shook her head and declared: ‘No good will come of this marriage.’ At the time Ossipowlaughed at this prophecy. But when, five months later, he was separated from his wife, he
could not avoid in retrospect viewing his action in leaving the train as an ‘unconscious protest’
against his marriage. Years later, the town where this parapraxis happened took on a great
importance for him, as a person lived there with whom fate later linked him closely. This
person, and even the fact of this person’s existence, had been completely unknown to him at
the time. But the mystical explanation of his behaviour would be that he had left the Moscow
train and his wife at that town because the future that was in store for him in relation to this
other person was seeking to declare itself.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1328

 

   I assume that this conscious ignorance and unconscious knowledge

of the motivation of accidental psychical events is one of the psychical

roots of superstition. Because the superstitious person knows nothing

of the motivation of his own chance actions, and because the fact of

this motivation presses for a place in his field of recognition, he is

forced to allocate it, by displacement, to the external world. If such a

connection exists, it can hardly be limited to this single application. In

point of fact I believe that a large part of the mythological view of the

world, which extends a long way into the most modern religions, is

nothing but psychology projected into the external world. The obscure

recognition¹  (the  endopsychic  perception,  as  it  were)  of  psychical

factors and relations in the unconscious is mirrored - it is difficult to

express it in other terms, and here the analogy with paranoia must

come to our aid - in the construction of a supernatural reality, which is

destined  to  be  changed  back  once  more  by  science  into  the

psychology of the unconscious. One could venture to explain in this

way the myths of paradise and the fall of man, of God, of good and

evil,  of  immortality,  and  so  on,  and  to  transform metaphysics  into

metapsychology. The gap between the paranoic’s displacement and

that of the superstitious person is less wide than it appears at first

sight.  When  human  beings  began  to  think,  they  were,  as  is  well

known,  forced  to  explain  the  external  world  anthropomorphically  by

means  of  a  multitude  of  personalities  in  their  own  image;  chance

events, which they interpreted superstitiously, were thus actions and

manifestations  of  persons.  They  behaved,  therefore,  just  like

paranoics, who draw conclusions from insignificant signs given them

by other people, and just like all normal people, who quite rightly basetheir  estimate  of  their  neighbours’  characters  on  their  chance  and

unintentional actions. It is only in our modern, scientific but as yet by

no means perfected Weltanschauung that superstition seems so very

much out of place; in the Weltanschauung of pre-scientific times and

peoples it was justified and consistent.

 

   ¹ A recognition which, of course, has nothing of the character of a [true] recognition.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1329

 

   The Roman who gave up an important undertaking if he saw an ill-

omened flight of birds was therefore in a relative sense justified; his

behaviour was consistent with his premisses. But if he withdrew from

the undertaking because he had stumbled on the threshold of his door

(‘un Romain retournerait’) he was also in an absolute sense superior

to us unbelievers; he was a better psychologist than we are striving to

be. For his stumbling must have revealed to him the existence of a

doubt, a counter-current at work within him, whose force might at the

moment of execution subtract from the force of his intention. For we

are only sure of complete success if all our mental forces are united in

striving  towards  the  desired  goal.  How  did  Schiller’s  Tell,  who

hesitated so long to shoot the apple on his son’s head, answer the

Governor’s  question  why  he  had  provided  himself  with  a  second

arrow?

 

                                                Mit diesem zweiten Pfeil durchschoss ich - Euch,
                                                Wenn ich mein liebes Kind getroffen hätte,

                                                Und Euer - wahrlich, hätt’ ich nicht gefehlt.¹

 

   ¹ [‘With this second arrow I would have transfixed - you, if I had struck my dear child; and

you, truly, I should not have missed.’]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1330

 

    (D) Anyone who has had the opportunity of studying the hidden

mental impulses of human beings by means of psycho-analysis can

also say something new about the quality of the unconscious motives

that find expression in superstition. It can be recognized most clearly

in neurotics suffering from obsessional thinking or obsessional states -

people who are often of high intelligence - that superstition derives

from suppressed hostile and cruel impulses. Superstition is in large

part  the  expectation  of  trouble;  and  a  person  who  has  harboured

frequent evil wishes against others, but has been brought up to be

good and has therefore repressed such wishes into the unconscious,

will  be  especially  ready  to  expect  punishment  for  his  unconscious

wickedness in the form of trouble threatening him from without.

   Though we admit that these remarks of ours in no way exhaust the

psychology  of  superstition,  we  shall  at  least  have  to  touch  on  the

question of whether we are to deny entirely that superstition has any

real  roots:  whether  there  are  definitely  no  such  things  as  true

presentiments,  prophetic  dreams,  telepathic  experiences,

manifestations  of  supernatural  forces  and  the  like.  I  am  far  from

meaning to pass so sweeping a condemnation of these phenomena,

of which so many detailed observations have been made even by men

of outstanding intellect, and which it would be best to make the subject

of  further  investigations.  We  may  even  hope  that  some  portion  of

these observations will then be explained by our growing recognition

of  unconscious  mental  processes,  without  necessitating  radical

alterations in the views we hold to-day. If the existence of still other

phenomena - those, for example, claimed by spiritualists - were to be

established, we should merely set about modifying our ‘laws’ in the

way  demanded  by  the  new  discovery,  without  being  shaken  in  our

belief in the coherence of things in the world.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1331

 

   In the compass of these discussions the only answer I can give to

the  questions  raised  here  is  a  subjective  one  -  that  is,  one  in

accordance with my personal experience. To my regret I must confessthat  I  am  one  of  those  unworthy  people  in  whose  presence  spirits

suspend their activity and the supernatural vanishes away, so that I

have never been in a position to experience anything myself which

might arouse a belief in the miraculous. Like every human being, I

have had presentiments and experienced trouble, but the two failed to

coincide with one another, so that nothing followed the presentiments,

and the trouble came upon me unannounced. During the days when I

was living alone in a foreign city - I was a young man at the time - I

quite often heard my name suddenly called by an unmistakable and

beloved  voice;  I  then  noted  down  the  exact  moment  of  the

hallucination  and  made  anxious  enquiries  of  those  at  home  about

what had happened at that time. Nothing had happened. To balance

this,  there  was  a  later  occasion  when  I  went  on  working  with  my

patients  without  any  disturbance  or  foreboding  while  one  of  my

children was in danger of bleeding to death. Nor have I ever been able

to  regard  any  of  the  presentiments  reported  to  me  by  patients  as

veridical. - I must however confess that in the last few years I have

had  a  few  remarkable  experiences  which  might  easily  have  been

explained on the hypothesis of telepathic thought-transference.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1332

 

   Belief in prophetic dreams can claim many adherents, because it

can take support from the fact that a number of things do in reality turn

out in the future in the way in which the wish had previously arranged

them in the dream.¹ But there is little that is surprising in that, and as a

rule, too, there are extensive differences between the dream and its

fulfilment,  which  the  dreamer’s  credulity  prefers  to  neglect.  A  good

example of a dream which may justly be called prophetic was once

brought  to  me  for  detailed  analysis  by  an  intelligent  and  truthful

woman patient. Her story was that she had once dreamt she met a

former friend of hers and family doctor in front of a certain shop in a

certain street; and that when next morning she went into the Inner

Town she in fact met him at the very spot named in the dream. I may

observe  that  no  subsequent  event  proved  the  importance  of  thismiraculous coincidence,² which could not therefore be accounted for

by what lay in the future.

   Careful questioning established that there was no evidence of her

having had any recollection of the dream on the morning after she

dreamt  it  -  that  is,  until  after  her  walk  and  the  meeting.  She  could

produce no objection to an account of what happened which robbed

the episode of anything miraculous and left nothing but an interesting

psychological problem. She was walking along the street in question

one morning and met her old family doctor in front of a particular shop,

and thereupon, on seeing him, she felt convinced that she had dreamt

the night before of having this meeting at that precise spot. Analysis

was then able to show with great probability how she arrived at this

sense of conviction, which, according to general rules, cannot fairly be

denied  a  certain  right  to  be  considered  authentic.  A  meeting  at  a

particular  place,  which  has  been  expected  beforehand,  amounts  in

fact to a rendezvous. The old family doctor awakened her memory of

former days, when meetings with a third person, also a friend of the

doctor, had played a very important part in her life. Since then she had

continued her relations with that gentleman and had waited for him in

vain on the day before the dream was supposed to have taken place.

If I were able to report the circumstances of the case in greater detail it

would be easy for me to show that her illusion, when she saw her

friend of former days, of having had a prophetic dream was equivalent

to some such remark as this; ‘Ah! doctor - you remind me now of past

times  when  I  never  had  to  wait  in  vain  for  N.  if  we’d  arranged  a

meeting.’

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] See my paper on ‘Dreams and Telepathy’ (1922a).

   ² [The German ‘Zusammentreffen’ means both ‘coincidence’ and meeting’.]

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1333

 

   The ‘remarkable coincidence’ of meeting a person we were at that

very  moment  thinking  about  is  a  familiar  one.  I  have  observed  a

simple and easily explained example of it in myself, which is probably

a good model for similar occurrences. A few days after I had beenawarded the title of professor - which carries considerable authority

with it in countries under monarchical rule - my thoughts, while I was

walking  through  the  Inner  Town,  suddenly  turned  to  a  childish

phantasy  of  revenge  directed  against  a  particular  married  couple.

Some months earlier they had called me in to see their little daughter,

who  had  developed  an  interesting  obsessional  symptom  following

upon a dream. I took a great interest in the case, whose genesis I

thought I understood. My offer of treatment was however declined by

her  parents  and  I  was  given  to  understand  that  they  thought  of

changing over to a foreign authority who effected cures by hypnotism.

My present phantasy was that after the total failure of that attempt the

parents begged me to start my treatment, saying that now they had

complete  confidence  in  me,  and  so  on.  I  however  answered:  ‘Yes,

now  you  have  confidence  in  me  -  now  that  I  too  have  become  a

professor.  The  title  has  done  nothing  to  alter  my  capacities;  if  you

could not make use of me as a university lecturer you can do without

me as a professor as well.’ - At this point my phantasy was interrupted

by  a  loud  ‘Good  day  to  you,  Professor!’  and  I  looked  up  and  saw

walking past me the very married couple on whom I had just taken my

revenge  by  rejecting  their  offer.  Immediate  reflection  destroyed  the

impression of something miraculous. I had been walking towards the

couple along a wide, straight and almost deserted street; when I was

about twenty paces from them I had glanced up for a moment and

caught a glimpse of their impressive figures and recognized them, but

had  set  the  perception  aside  -  on  the  pattern  of  a  negative

hallucination - for the emotional reasons which then took effect in the

phantasy that arose with apparent spontaneity.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1334

 

   Here is another ‘resolution of an apparent presentiment’, this time

from Otto Rank (1912):

   ‘Some time ago I myself experienced an unusual variation of the

"remarkable coincidence" of meeting someone one was at the very

moment thinking about. Shortly before Christmas I was on my way tothe Austro-Hungarian Bank to get some change in the form of ten new

silver kronen for giving as presents. While I was absorbed in ambitious

phantasies which had to do with the contrast between my small assets

and the piles of money stored in the bank building, I turned into a

narrow street in which the bank stood. I saw a car standing at the door

and  many  people  going  in  and  out.  I  said  to  myself:  No  doubt  the

cashiers will have time even for my few kronen. In any case I shall be

quick about it. I shall put down the banknote I want changed and say

"Let me have gold please". I immediately noticed my error - I should,

of course, have asked for silver - and awoke from my phantasies. I

was now only a few steps from the entrance and saw a young man

coming towards me whom I thought I recognized, but as I am short-

sighted I was not yet able to identify him for certain. As he drew nearer

I recognized him as a school-friend of my brother’s called Gold. Gold’s

brother  was  a  well-known  writer  from  whom  I  had  expected

considerable help at the beginning of my literary career. This help,

however, had not been forthcoming and in consequence I failed to win

the material success I had hoped for, which had been the subject of

my phantasy on the way to the bank. While I was absorbed in my

phantasies  therefore,  I  must  have  unconsciously  perceived  the

approach of Herr Gold; and this was represented in my consciousness

(which  was  dreaming  of  material  success)  in  such  a  form  that  I

decided to ask for gold at the counter, instead of the less valuable

silver.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  the  paradoxical  fact  that  my

unconscious  is  able  to  perceive  an  object  which  my  eyes  can

recognize  only  later  seems  partly  to  be  explained  by  what  Bleuler

terms  "complexive  preparedness".  This  was,  as  we  have  seen,

directed to material matters and had from the beginning, contrary to

my better knowledge, directed my steps to the building where only

gold and paper money is changed.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1335

 

   We must also include in the category of the miraculous and the

‘uncanny’  the  peculiar  feeling  we  have,  in  certain  moments  andsituations, of having had exactly the same experience once before or

of  having  once  before  been  in  the  same  place,  though  our  efforts

never  succeed  in  clearly  remembering  the  previous  occasion  that

announces itself in this way. I am aware that I am merely following

loose  linguistic  usage  when  I  call  what  arises  in  a  person  at  such

moments a ‘feeling’. What is no doubt in question is a judgement, and,

more  precisely,  a  perceptual  judgement;  but  these  cases  have

nevertheless a character quite of their own, and we must not leave out

of account the fact that what is looked for is never remembered. I do

not  know  whether  this  phenomenon  of  ‘déjà  vu’  has  ever  been

seriously  offered  in  proof  of  an  individual’s  previous  psychical

existence; but psychologists have certainly turned their attention to it

and  have  endeavoured  to  solve  the  problem  in  a  whole  variety  of

speculative  ways.  None  of  the  attempted  explanations  which  they

have brought forward seems to me to be correct, because none of

them  takes  into  consideration  anything  other  than  the  concomitant

manifestations  and  the  conditions  which  favour  the  phenomenon.

Those psychical processes which according to my observations are

alone  responsible  for  the  explanation  of  ‘déjà  vu’  -  namely,

unconscious  phantasies  -  are  still  generally  neglected  by

psychologists even to-day.

      It  is  in  my  view  wrong  to  call  the  feeling  of  having  experienced

something  before  an  illusion.  It  is  rather  that  at  such  moments

something is really touched on which we have already experienced

once before, only we cannot consciously remember it because it has

never  been  conscious.  To  put  it  briefly,  the  feeling  of  ‘déjà  vu’

corresponds  to  the  recollection  of  an  unconscious  phantasy.  There

exist  unconscious  phantasies  (or  day-dreams)  just  as  there  exist

conscious creations of the same kind which everybody knows from his

own experience.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1336

 

   I know that the subject would merit the most exhaustive treatment;

but I shall here do no more than give the analysis of a single case of‘déjà vu’ where the feeling was characterized by especial intensity and

persistence. A lady who is now thirty-seven claimed to have a most

distinct memory of having at the age of twelve and a half paid her first

visit  to  some  school  friends  in  the  country.  When  she  entered  the

garden, she had an immediate feeling of having been there before.

This feeling was repeated when she went into the reception rooms, so

that she felt she knew in advance what room would be the next one,

what view there would be from it, and so on. But the possibility that

this feeling of familiarity could have owed its origin to an earlier visit to

the  house  and  garden,  perhaps  one  in  her  earliest  childhood,  was

absolutely ruled out and was disproved as a result of her questioning

her  parents.  The  lady  who  reported  this  was  not  in  search  of  any

psychological explanation, but saw the occurrence of this feeling as a

prophetic  indication  of  the  significance  for  her  emotional  life  which

these same school friends later acquired. However, a consideration of

the circumstances in which the phenomenon occurred in her shows us

the way to another view of the matter. At the time when she paid the

visit she knew that these girls had an only brother, who was seriously

ill. During the visit she actually set eyes on him, though he looked very

ill and she said to herself that he would die soon. Now, her own only

brother had been dangerously ill with diphtheria a few months earlier;

during his illness she had spent several weeks away from her parents’

house, staying with a relative. She believed that her brother had been

with her on this visit to the country; she even thought it had been his

first  considerable  journey  after  his  illness;  but  her  memory  was

remarkably uncertain on these points while of all the other details, and

in particular of the dress she was wearing that day, she had an ultra-

clear  picture.  Anyone  who  is  well-informed  will  find  no  difficulty  in

concluding from these hints that the expectation that her brother would

die had at that time played an important part in the girl’s thoughts and

either  had  never  become  conscious  or,  after  the  favourable

termination of the illness, had succumbed to energetic repression. If

things  had  turned  out  otherwise,  she  would  have  had  to  wear  a

different dress - mourning. She found an analogous situation in the

home of her friends, whose only brother was in danger of dying soon,

as  in  fact  he  did  shortly  after.  She  ought  to  have  remembered

consciously  that  she  herself  had  lived  through  this  situation  a  fewmonths before: instead of remembering it - which was prevented by

repression - she transferred her feeling of remembering something to

her surroundings, the garden and the house, and fell a victim to the

‘fausse reconnaissance’ of having seen all this exactly the same once

before. From the fact that repression occurred we may conclude that

her  former  expectation  of  her  brother’s  death  had  not  been  far

removed from a wishful phantasy. She would then have been the only

child. In her later neurosis she suffered most severely from a fear of

losing her parents, behind which, as usual, analysis was able to reveal

the unconscious wish with the same content.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1337

 

      I  have  been  able  in  a  similar  way  to  derive  my  own  fleeting

experiences  of  ‘déjà  vu’  from  the  emotional  constellation  of  the

moment.  ‘This  would  once  more  be  an  occasion  for  wakening  the

(unconscious and unknown) phantasy which was formed in me at this

or that time as a wish to improve the situation.’ - This explanation of

‘déjà  vu’  has  so  far  been  taken  into  consideration  by  only  one

observer.  Dr.  Ferenczi,  to  whom  the  third  edition  of  this  book  is

indebted  for  so  many  valuable  contributions,  writes  to  me  on  this

subject as follows: "From my own case, as well as that of others, I

have convinced myself that the unaccountable feeling of familiarity is

to be traced to unconscious phantasies of which one is unconsciously

reminded in a situation of the present time. With one of my patients

what  happened  was  apparently  something  different,  but  in  reality  it

was quite analogous. This feeling returned to him very often, but it

regularly  proved  to  have  originated  from  a forgotten  (repressed)

portion of a dream of the preceding night. It seems therefore that "déjà

vu" can derive not only from day-dreams but from night-dreams as

well.’

   I have later learnt that Grasset (1904) has given an explanation of

the phenomenon which comes very close to my own.

                     The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1338

 

   In 1913 I wrote a short paper describing another phenomenon that is

very similar to ‘déjà vu’. This is ‘déjà raconté', the illusion of having

already reported something of special interest when it comes up in the

course of psycho-analytic treatment. On these occasions the patient

maintains with every sign of subjective certainty that he has already

recounted  a  particular  memory  a  long  time  ago.  The  physician  is

however sure of the contrary and is as a rule able to convince the

patient of his error. The explanation of this interesting parapraxis is

probably  that  the  patient  has  felt  are  urge  to  communicate  this

information and intended to do so, but has failed to carry it into effect,

and that he now takes the memory of the former as a substitute for the

latter, the carrying out of his intention.

   A similar state of affairs, and probably also the same mechanism, is

to be seen in what Ferenczi (1915) has called ‘supposed’ parapraxes.

We believe there is something - some object - that we have forgotten

or mislaid or lost; but we are able to convince ourselves we have done

nothing of the kind and that everything is as it should be. For example,

a woman patient returns to the doctor’s room, giving as a reason that

she wants to collect the umbrella she has left behind there; but the

doctor  sees  that  she  is  in  fact  holding  it  in  her  hand.  There  was

therefore  an  impulse  towards  this  parapraxis,  and  the  impulse  was

sufficient to serve as a substitute for its actual execution. Except for

this difference, the supposed parapraxis is equivalent to the real one.

It is, however, what one might call cheaper.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1339

 

 

   (E)  When I recently had occasion to report some examples of the

forgetting  of  names,  with  their  analyses,  to  a  colleague  with  a

philosophical education, he hastened to reply: ‘That’s all very well; but

in my case the forgetting of names happens differently.’ The matter

can obviously not be dealt with as easily as this; I do not suppose thatmy colleague had ever before thought of analysing the forgetting of a

name, nor could he say how it happened differently in his case. But

his comment nevertheless touches on a problem which many people

will be inclined to put in the foreground. Does the elucidation given

here of parapraxes and chance actions apply quite generally or only in

certain cases? and if the latter, what are the conditions under which it

can  be  called  in  to  explain  phenomena  that  might  also  have  been

brought  about  in  another  way?  In  answering  this  question  my

experiences leave me in the lurch. I can but utter a warning against

supposing  that  a  connection  of  the  kind  here  demonstrated  is  only

rarely found; for every time I have made the test on myself or on my

patients, a connection has been clearly shown to exist just as in the

examples  reported,  or  there  have  at  least  been  good  grounds  for

supposing that it did. It is not surprising if success in finding the hidden

meaning  of  a  symptomatic  act  is  not  achieved  every  time,  for  the

magnitude of the internal resistances opposing the solution comes into

account as a deciding factor. Equally, it is not possible to interpret

every single dream of one’s own or of one’s patients; to prove that the

theory holds good in general it is enough if one can penetrate a part of

the way into the hidden connection. It often happens that a dream

which proves refractory during an attempt to solve it the next day will

allow its secret to be wrested from it a week or a month later, after a

real change has come about in the meantime and has reduced the

contending  psychical  values.  The  same  applies  to  the  solving  of

parapraxes  and  symptomatic  acts.  The  example  of  misreading  on

page 1194  (‘Across  Europe  in  a  Tub’)  gave  me  the  opportunity  of

showing how a symptom that is at first insoluble becomes accessible

to  analysis  when  the real  interest  in  the  repressed  thoughts  has

passed  away.¹  As  long  as  the  possibility  existed  of  my  brother

obtaining  the  envied  title  before  me,  this  misreading  resisted  every

one of my repeated efforts to analyse it; after it had turned out to be

unlikely that he would be preferred to me in this way, the path that led

to its solution was suddenly cleared. It would therefore be incorrect to

maintain  that  all  the  cases  which  resist  analysis  are  due  to  a

mechanism other than the psychical mechanism disclosed here. Such

an  assumption  would  need  more  than  negative  evidence.

Furthermore,  the  readiness  to  believe  in  a  different  explanation  ofparapraxes and symptomatic acts, which is probably to be found in all

healthy people, is quite devoid of evidential value; it is obviously a

manifestation of the same mental forces which produced the secret

and which therefore also devote themselves to preserving it and resist

its elucidation.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] At this point very interesting problems of an economic nature

come  in,  questions  taking  into  consideration  the  fact  that  the  psychical  processes  aim  at
gaining pleasure and removing unpleasure. There is already an economic problem in how it
becomes possible by way of substitutive associations to recapture a name that has been
forgotten  through  motives  of  unpleasure.  An  excellent  paper  by  Tausk  (1913)  gives  good
examples  of  how  the  forgotten  name  becomes  accessible  once  more  if  one  succeeds  in
connecting it with a pleasurably-toned association, which can counterbalance the unpleasure
to be expected from the reproduction of the name.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1340

 

   On the other hand we must not overlook the fact that repressed

thoughts  and  impulses  certainly  do  not  achieve  expression  in

symptomatic acts and parapraxes by their own unaided efforts. The

technical  possibility  for  such  side-slipping  on  the  part  of  the

innervations must be presented independently; this will then be readily

exploited  by  the  intention  of  the  repressed  to  make  itself  felt

consciously. In the case of verbal parapraxes, detailed investigations

by philosophers and philologists have endeavoured to determine what

are the structural and functional relations that put themselves at the

service of such an intention. If we distinguish, among the determinants

of parapraxes and symptomatic acts, between the unconscious motive

on the one hand and the physiological and psycho-physical relations

that come to meet it on the other, it remains an open question whether

there are, within the range of normality, yet other factors that can - like

the unconscious motive, and in place of it - create parapraxes and

symptomatic acts along the lines of these relations. It is not my task to

answer this question.

   Nor is it my purpose to exaggerate the differences, sufficiently large

as  they  are,  between  the  psycho-analytic  and  the  popular  view  of

parapraxes.  I  would  rather  call  attention  to  cases  in  which  thesedifferences lose much of their sharpness. As regards the simplest and

most inconspicuous examples of slips made by the tongue or the pen

- in which, perhaps, words are merely contracted, or words and letters

left out - the more complicated interpretations come to nothing. From

the  point  of  view  of  psycho-analysis  we  must  maintain  that some

disturbance of intention has revealed its existence in these cases, but

we cannot say from what the disturbance derived and what its aim

was.  In  fact  it  has  achieved  nothing  apart  from  demonstrating  its

existence.  In  such  cases  we  can  also  see  how  a  parapraxis  is

encouraged  by  phonetic  resemblances  and  close  psychological

associations: this is a fact that we have never disputed. It is, however,

a reasonable scientific demand that such rudimentary cases of slips of

the tongue or slips of the pen should be judged on the basis of the

more  clearly  marked  cases,  whose  investigation  yields  such

unambiguous  conclusions  as  to  the  way  in  which  parapraxes  are

caused.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1341

 

 

   (F) Since our discussion of slips of the tongue we have been content

with demonstrating that parapraxes have a hidden motivation, and by

the help of psycho-analysis we have traced our way to a knowledge of

this motivation. We have so far left almost without consideration the

general nature and the peculiarities of the psychical factors that find

expression in parapraxes; at any rate we have not yet attempted to

define them more closely and to test whether they conform to laws.

Nor shall we attempt now to deal with the matter in a radical way,

since the subject can better be explored from another angle, as our

first steps will show us in a moment.¹ Here several questions can be

raised which I will at least bring forward and describe in outline. (1)

What is the content and origin of the thoughts and impulses which are

indicated  in  erroneous  and  chance  actions?  (2)  What  are  the

determinants which compel a thought or an impulse to make use of

such actions as a means of expression and which put it in a position todo  so?  (3)  Is  it  possible  to  establish  constant  and  unambiguous

relations between the kind of parapraxis and the qualities of what is

expressed by means of it?

   I will begin by bringing together some material for answering the last

question. In discussing the examples of slips of the tongue we found it

necessary to go beyond the content of what was intended to be said,

and were obliged to look for the cause of the speech-disturbance in

something  outside  the  intention.  What  this  was  was  obvious  in  a

number of cases, and was known to the speaker’s consciousness. In

the  examples  that  seemed  simplest  and  most  transparent  it  was

another version of the same thought - one which sounded as if it had

an  equal  right,  and  which  disturbed  the  expression  of  the  thought

without  its  being  possible  to  explain  why  the  one  version  had

succumbed and the other had won the day. (These are Meringer and

Mayer’s ‘contaminations’.) In a second group of cases the motive for

the defeat of one version was a consideration which, however, did not

prove  strong  enough  to  withhold  it  completely  (‘zum  Vorschwein

gekommen’). The version which was withheld was perfectly conscious

too. Only of the third group can it be asserted unreservedly that the

disturbing  thought  differed  from  the  one  intended,  and  only  in  their

case can a distinction which is apparently essential be established.

The disturbing thought is either connected with the disturbed thought

by  thought  associations  (disturbance  as  a  result  of  internal

contradiction), or it is unrelated to it in its nature and the disturbed

word happens to be connected with the disturbing thought - which is

often  unconscious  -  by  an  unexpected external  association.  In  the

examples I have given from my psycho-analyses the entire speech is

under the influence of thoughts which have become active but have at

the  same  time  remained  entirely  unconscious;  either  these  are

betrayed by the disturbance itself (‘Klapperschlange’ - ‘Kleopatra’) or

they  exercise  an  indirect  influence  by  making  it  possible  for  the

different  parts  of  the  consciously  intended  speech  to  disturb  each

other (‘Ase natmen’, where  ‘Hasenauer Street’ and reminiscences of

a Frenchwoman are in the background). The withheld or unconscious

thoughts from which the disturbance in speech derives are of the most

varied origin. This survey therefore does not enable us to generalize in

any direction. 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] This book is of an entirely popular character; it merely aims, by an

accumulation of examples, at paving the way for the necessary assumption of unconscious
yet operative mental processes, and it avoids all theoretical considerations on the nature of
this unconscious.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1342

 

   A comparative examination of my examples of misreading and slips

of the pen leads to the same conclusions. As with slips of the tongue,

certain cases appear to owe their origin to a work of condensation

which has no further motivation (e.g. the ‘Apfe’ ). It would however be

satisfactory to learn whether special conditions may not have to be

fulfilled if such a condensation, which is normal in dream-work but a

fault in our waking thought, is to take place. No information on this

problem  can  be  obtained  from  the  examples  themselves.  I  should

however  refuse  to  conclude  from  this  that  there  are  in  fact  no

conditions other than, for instance, a relaxation of conscious attention,

since I know from other sources that it is precisely automatic activities

which are characterized by correctness and reliability. I should prefer

to  stress  the  fact  that  here,  as  so  often  in  biology,  normal

circumstances or those approaching the normal are less favourable

subjects for investigation than pathological ones. I expect that what

remains obscure in the elucidation of these very slight disturbances

will be illuminated by the explanation of serious disturbances.

   In misreading and slips of the pen there are also plenty of examples

in which we can discern a more remote and complicated motivation.

‘Across  Europe  in  a  Tub’  is  a  disturbance  in  reading  which  is

explained as being due to the influence of a remote thought, foreign in

its  essence,  arising  from  a  repressed  impulse  of  jealousy  and

ambition,  and  utilizing  the  ‘switch-word’  ‘Beförderung’  to  form  a

connection with the indifferent and innocent topic that was being read.

In the case of ‘Burckhard’ the name itself forms a ‘switch-word’ of this

kind.

   There is no doubt that disturbances in the functions of speech occur

more  readily,  and  make  smaller  demands  on  the  disturbing  forces,than do those in other psychical activities.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1343

 

   One is on different ground when it comes to examining forgetting in

its  proper  sense  -  that  is,  the  forgetting  of  past  experiences.  (To

distinguish them from forgetting in the stricter sense, we might speak

of the forgetting of proper names and of foreign words, described in

Chapter  I  and  II,  as  ‘slipping  the  memory’,  and  the  forgetting  of

intentions  as  ‘omissions’.)  The  basic  determinants  of  the normal

process of forgetting are unknown.¹ We are also reminded that not

everything is forgotten that we believe to be. Our explanation has here

to do only with cases where the forgetting causes us surprise, in so far

as  it  breaks  the  rule  that  unimportant  things  are  forgotten  but

important ones are preserved by memory. Analysis of the examples of

forgetting that seem to require a special explanation reveals that the

motive  for  forgetting  is  invariably  an  unwillingness  to  remember

something which can evoke distressing feelings. We come to suspect

that this motive aims at manifesting itself quite generally in mental life,

but is prevented from putting itself into effect at all regularly by other

forces which work against it. The extent and the significance of this

unwillingness  to  remember  distressing  impressions  would  seem  to

deserve  the  most  careful  psychological  examination;  moreover  we

cannot separate from this wider context the question of what special

conditions make this forgetting, that is universally aimed at, possible in

individual cases.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1907:] I may perhaps put forward the following suggestions as regards

the mechanism of forgetting in its proper sense. Mnemic material is subject in general to two
influences,  condensation  and  distortion.  Distortion  is  the  work  of  the  dominant  trends  in
mental  life,  and  is  directed  above  all  against  the  memory  traces  which  have  remained
affectively operative and which show considerable resistance to condensation. The traces that
have grown indifferent succumb unresistingly to the process of condensation; yet it can be
observed that in addition to this, the distorting trends feed on the indifferent material if they
have remained unsatisfied at the place at which they sought to manifest themselves. As these
processes of condensation and distortion continue for long periods, during which every fresh
experience acts in the direction of transforming the mnemic content, it is generally thought
that it is time which makes memory uncertain and indistinct. It is highly probable that there isno question at all of there being any direct function of time in forgetting. - In the case of
repressed memory-traces it can be demonstrated that they undergo no alteration even in the
course of the longest period of time. The unconscious is quite timeless. The most important as
well as the strangest characteristic of psychical fixation is that all impressions are preserved,
not only in the same form in which they were first received, but also in all the forms which they
have  adopted  in  their  further  developments.  This  is  a  state  of  affairs  which  cannot  be
illustrated by comparison with another sphere. Theoretically every earlier state of the mnemic
content  could  thus  be  restored  to  memory  again,  even  if  its  elements  have  long  ago
exchanged all their original connections for more recent ones.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1344

 

      In  the  forgetting  of  intentions  another  factor  comes  into  the

foreground.  The  conflict,  which  could  only  be surmised  in  the

repression  of  what  was  distressing  to  remember,  here  becomes

tangible,  and  in  the  analysis  of  the  examples  a  counter-will  can

regularly be recognized which opposes the intention without putting an

end  to  it.  As  in  the  parapraxes  already  described,  two  types  of

psychical process can be recognized here. Either the counter-will is

turned  directly  against  the  intention  (in  cases  where  the  latter’s

purpose is of some importance), or it is unrelated in its nature to the

intention itself and establishes its connection with it by means of an

external  association  (in  the  case  of  intentions  that  are  almost

indifferent).

   The same conflict governs the phenomena of bungled actions. The

impulsion  which  manifests  itself  in  disturbing  the  action  is  often  a

counter-impulsion, but still more often it is an entirely unrelated one,

which  merely  takes  the  opportunity  of  achieving  expression  by

disturbing the action while it is being carried out. The cases where the

disturbance  results  from  an  internal  contradiction  are  the  more

significant ones; they also involve the more important actions.

   In chance actions or in symptomatic actions the internal conflict

becomes  less  and  less  important.  These  motor  manifestations,  to

which  consciousness  attaches  little  value,  or  which  it  overlooks

entirely,  thus  serve  to  express  a  wide  variety  of  unconscious  or

withheld impulses; for the most part they are symbolic representations

of phantasies or wishes.

      In  regard  to  the  first  question  -  as  to  what  is  the  origin  of  thethoughts and impulses which find expression in parapraxes - we can

say that in a number of cases it is easy to show that the disturbing

thoughts  are  derived  from  suppressed  impulses  in  mental  life.  In

healthy people, egoistic, jealous and hostile feelings and impulsions,

on  which  the  pressure  of  moral  education  weighs  heavily,  make

frequent use of the pathway provided by parapraxes in order to find

some expression for their strength, which undeniably exists but is not

recognized  by  higher  mental  agencies.  Acquiescence  in  these

parapraxes and chance actions is to a large extent equivalent to a

compliant  tolerance  of  the  immoral.  Among  these  suppressed

impulses no small part is played by the various sexual currents. That

these  particular  ones  should  in  fact  appear  so  rarely  among  the

thoughts disclosed by analysis in my examples is an accident of my

material. Since the examples I have analysed are to a great extent

taken from my own mental life, the selection was partial from the first

and aimed at excluding sexual matters. At other times it appears to be

from  perfectly  innocent  objections  and  considerations  that  the

disturbing thoughts arise.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1345

 

      We  have  now  reached  the  moment  for  answering  the  second

question - that is, what psychological determinants are responsible for

a thought being compelled to seek expression not in its complete form

but in a kind of parasitic form, as a modification and disturbance of

another thought. The most striking examples of parapraxes make it

seem  probable  that  these  determinants  must  be  looked  for  in  a

relation to admissibility to consciousness: in the question, that is, of

the greater or less degree to which they bear the marked character of

being ‘repressed’. But if we follow this character through the series of

examples, it dissolves into ever vaguer indications. The inclination to

dismiss something as a waste of time, or the consideration that the

thought  in  question  is  not  properly  relevant  to  the  matter  in  hand,

appear, as motives for pushing back a thought (which is then left to

find expression by disturbing another thought), to play the same partas  does  the  moral  condemnation  of  an  insubordinate  emotional

impulse  or  as  does  derivation  from  totally  unconscious  trains  of

thought. Insight into the general nature of how parapraxes and chance

actions  are  determined  cannot  be  gained  along  these  lines.  One

single fact of significance emerges from these enquiries. The more

innocent the motivation of a parapraxis, and the less objectionable -

and  therefore  the  less  inadmissible  to  consciousness  -  the  thought

finding expression in it, the easier it is to explain the phenomenon,

once one’s attention has been turned to it. The slightest cases of slips

of the tongue are noticed immediately, and spontaneously corrected.

Where the motivation comes from really repressed impulses, the case

has  to  be  elucidated  by  careful  analysis,  which  may  itself  at  times

come up against difficulties or prove unsuccessful.

   We are therefore no doubt justified in taking the result of this last

enquiry  as  evidence  that  the  satisfactory  explanation  of  the

psychological determinants of parapraxes and chance actions is to be

looked for along other lines and by a different approach. The indulgent

reader may accordingly see in these discussions signs of the broken

edges  where  this  subject  has  been  somewhat  artificially  detached

from a wider context.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1346

 

 

   (G) A few words should be said to indicate at least in what direction

this  wider  context  lies.  The  mechanism  of  parapraxes  and  chance

actions, as we have come to know it by our employment of analysis,

can  be  seen  to  correspond  in  its  most  essential  points  with  the

mechanism of dream-formation which I have discussed in the chapter

on the ‘dream-work’ in my Interpretation of Dreams. In both cases we

find condensations and compromise-formations (contaminations). We

have  the  same  situation:  by  unfamiliar  paths,  and  by  the  way  of

external  associations,  unconscious  thoughts  find  expression  as

modifications  of  other  thoughts.  The  incongruities,  absurdities  and

errors of the dream-content, which result in the dream being scarcelyrecognized as the product of psychical activity, originate in the same

way, though it is true with a freer use of the means at hand, as our

common mistakes in everyday life. In both cases the appearance of

an incorrect function is explained by the peculiar mutual interference

between two or several correct functions.

   An important conclusion can be drawn from this conformity. The

peculiar mode of working, whose most striking achievement we see in

the content of dreams, cannot be attributed to the sleeping state of

mental  life  if  we  possess  such  abundant  evidence  in  the  form  of

parapraxes that it operates during our waking life as well. The same

connection also forbids our assuming that these psychical processes,

which strike us as abnormal and strange, are determined by a deep-

seated  decay  in  mental  activity  or  by  pathological  states  of

functioning.¹

 

   ¹ See The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a), p. 1034-5.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1347

 

      We  shall  not  be  able  to  form  a  correct  picture  of  the  strange

psychical work which brings about the occurrence of both parapraxes

and  dream  images  until  we  have  learnt  that  psychoneurotic

symptoms,  and  especially  the  psychical  formations  of  hysteria  and

obsessional  neurosis,  repeat  in  their  mechanism  all  the  essential

features of this mode of working. This is therefore the starting-point for

the  continuation  of  our  researches.  For  us,  however,  there  is  yet

another  special  interest  in  considering  parapraxes,  chance  actions

and  symptomatic  actions  in  the  light  of  this  last  analogy.  If  we

compare  them  to  the  products  of  the  psychoneuroses,  to  neurotic

symptoms,  two  frequently  repeated  statements  -  namely,  that  the

borderline between the normal and the abnormal in nervous matters is

a fluid one, and that we are all a little neurotic - acquire meaning and

support.  Without  any  medical  experience  we  can  construct  various

types  of  nervous  illness  of  this  kind  which  are  merely  hinted  at  -

formes frustres¹ - of the neuroses: cases in which the symptoms are

few, or occur rarely or not severely - in other words, cases whosecomparative mildness is located in the number, intensity and duration

of their pathological manifestations. But we might perhaps never arrive

by conjecture at precisely the type that appears most frequently to

form the transition between health and illness. For the type we are

considering,  whose  pathological  manifestations  are  parapraxes  and

symptomatic acts, is characterized by the fact that the symptoms are

located in the least important psychical functions, while everything that

can lay claim to higher psychical value remains free from disturbance.

Where  the  symptoms  are  distributed  in  the  reverse  way  -  that  is,

where they make their appearance in the most important individual

and  social  functions  and  are  able  to  disturb  nutrition,  sexual

intercourse,  professional  work  and  social  life  -  this  is  the  mark  of

severe cases of neurosis and is more characteristic of them than, for

example,  are  the  variety  and  vigour  of  their  pathological

manifestations.

   But there is one thing which the severest and the mildest cases all

have  in  common,  and  which  is  equally  found  in  parapraxes  and

chance actions: the phenomena can be traced back to incompletely

suppressed  psychical  material,  which,  although  pushed  away  by

consciousness, has nevertheless not been robbed of all capacity for

expressing itself.

 

   ¹ [‘Blurred forms.’]

                                                                                       1348

 

        FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA

                                    (1905 [1901])

 


                                                                                      1349

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1350

 

        FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA

 

                              PREFATORY REMARKS

 

In 1895 and 1896 I put forward certain views upon the pathogenesis of

hysterical  symptoms  and  upon  the  mental  processes  occurring  in

hysteria.  Since  that  time  several  years  have  passed.  In  now

proposing, therefore, to substantiate those views by giving a detailed

report of the history of a case and its treatment, I cannot avoid making

a few introductory remarks, for the purpose partly of justifying from

various standpoints the step I am taking, and partly of diminishing the

expectations to which it will give rise.

   No doubt it was awkward that I was obliged to publish the results of

my enquiries without there being any possibility of other workers in the

field testing and checking them, particularly as those results were of a

surprising and by no means gratifying character. But it will be scarcely

less awkward now that I am beginning to bring forward some of the

material  upon  which  my  conclusions  were  based  and  make  it

accessible to the judgement of the world. I shall not escape blame by

this  means.  Only,  whereas  before  I  was  accused  of  giving  no

information  about  my  patients,  now  I  shall  be  accused  of  giving

information about my patients which ought not to be given. I can only

hope that in both cases the critics will be the same, and that they will

merely have shifted the pretext for their reproaches; if so I can resignin advance any possibility of ever removing their objections.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1351

 

   Even if I ignore the ill-will of narrow-minded critics such as these, the

presentation of my case histories remains a problem which is hard for

me to solve. The difficulties are partly of a technical kind, but are partly

due to the nature of the circumstances themselves. If it is true that the

causes of hysterical disorders are to be found in the intimacies of the

patients’  psycho-sexual  life,  and  that  hysterical  symptoms  are  the

expression  of  their  most  secret  and  repressed  wishes,  then  the

complete  elucidation  of  a  case  of  hysteria  is  bound  to  involve  the

revelation of those intimacies and the betrayal of those secrets. It is

certain that the patients would never have spoken if it had occurred to

them that their admissions might possibly be put to scientific uses; and

it is equally certain that to ask them themselves for leave to publish

their case would be quite unavailing. In such circumstances persons

of delicacy, as well as those who were merely timid, would give first

place to the duty of medical discretion and would declare with regret

that  the  matter  was  one  upon  which  they  could  offer  science  no

enlightenment. But in my opinion the physician has taken upon himself

duties not only towards the individual patient but towards science as

well; and his duties towards science mean ultimately nothing else than

his duties towards the many other patients who are suffering or will

some  day  suffer  from  the  same  disorder.  Thus  it  becomes  the

physician’s duty to publish what he believes he knows of the causes

and  structure  of  hysteria,  and  it  becomes  a  disgraceful  piece  of

cowardice on his part to neglect doing so, as long as he can avoid

causing direct personal injury to the single patient concerned. I think I

have taken every precaution to prevent my patient from suffering any

such injury. I have picked out a person the scenes of whose life were

laid not in Vienna but in a remote provincial town, and whose personal

circumstances  must  therefore  be  practically  unknown  in  Vienna.  I

have  from  the  very  beginning  kept  the  fact  of  her  being  under  my

treatment such a careful secret that only one other physician - andone in whose discretion I have complete confidence - can be aware

that the girl was a patient of mine. I have waited for four whole years

since  the  end  of  the  treatment  and  have  postponed  publication  till

hearing that a change has taken place in the patient’s life of such a

character  as  allows  me  to  suppose  that  her  own  interest  in  the

occurrences and psychological events which are to be related here

may now have grown faint. Needless to say, I have allowed no name

to stand which could put a non-medical reader upon the scent; and the

publication of the case in a purely scientific, and technical periodical

should,  further,  afford  a  guarantee  against  unauthorized  readers  of

this  sort.  I  naturally  cannot  prevent  the  patient  herself  from  being

pained if her own case history should accidentally fall into her hands.

But she will learn nothing from it that she does not already know; and

she may ask herself who besides her could discover from it that she is

the subject of this paper.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1352

 

   I am aware that - in this city, at least - there are many physicians

who (revolting though it may seem) choose to read a case history of

this kind not as a contribution to the psychopathology of the neuroses,

but  as  a roman  à  clef  designed  for  their  private  delectation.  I  can

assure readers of this species that every case history which I may

have occasion to publish in the future will be secured against their

perspicacity  by  similar  guarantees  of  secrecy,  even  though  this

resolution  is  bound  to  put  quite  extraordinary  restrictions  upon  my

choice of material.

      Now  in  this  case  history  -  the  only  one  which  I  have  hitherto

succeeded  in  forcing  through  the  limitations  imposed  by  medical

discretion and unfavourable circumstances - sexual questions will be

discussed  with  all  possible  frankness,  the  organs  and  functions  of

sexual life will be called by their proper names, and the pure-minded

reader  can  convince  himself  from  my  description  that  I  have  not

hesitated to converse upon such subjects in such language even with

a young woman. Am I then, to defend myself upon this score as well?I will simply claim for myself the rights of the gynaecologist - or rather,

much more modest ones - and add that it would be the mark of a

singular and perverse prurience to suppose that conversations of this

kind are a good means of exciting or of gratifying sexual desire. For

the rest, I feel inclined to express my opinion on this subject in a few

borrowed words:

      ‘It  is  deplorable  to  have  to  make  room  for  protestations  and

declarations of this sort in a scientific work; but let no one reproach me

on this account but rather accuse the spirit of the age, owing to which

we have reached a state of things in which no serious book can any

longer be sure of survival.’ (Schmidt, 1902, Preface.)

   I will now describe the way in which I have overcome the technical

difficulties of drawing up the report of this case history. The difficulties

are very considerable when the physician has to conduct six or eight

psychotherapeutic treatments of the sort in a day, and cannot make

notes during the actual session with the patient for fear of shaking the

patient’s  confidence  and  of  disturbing  his  own  view  of  the  material

under observation. Indeed, I have not yet succeeded in solving the

problem of how to record for publication the history of a treatment of

long duration. As regards the present case, two circumstances have

come to my assistance. In the first place the treatment did not last for

more than three months; and in the second place the material which

elucidated the case was grouped around two dreams (one related in

the middle of the treatment and one at the end). The wording of these

dreams was recorded immediately after the session, and they thus

afforded a secure point of attachment for the chain of interpretations

and recollections which proceeded from them. The case history itself

was only committed to writing from memory after the treatment was at

an end, but while my recollection of the case was still fresh and was

heightened by my interest in its publication. Thus the record is not

absolutely - phonographically - exact, but it can claim to possess a

high degree of trustworthiness. Nothing of any importance has been

altered in it except in some places the order in which the explanations

are given; and this has been done for the sake of presenting the case

in a more connected form.

                 Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1353

 

   I next proceed to mention more particularly what is to be found in

this paper and what is not to be found in it. The title of the work was

originally ‘Dreams and Hysteria’, for it seemed to me peculiarly well-

adapted  for  showing  how  dream-interpretation  is  woven  into  the

history of a treatment and how it can become the means of filling in

amnesias and elucidating symptoms. It was not without good reasons

that in the year 1900 I gave precedence to a laborious and exhaustive

study of dreams (The Interpretation of Dreams) over the publications

upon  the  psychology  of  the  neuroses  which  I  had  in  view.  And

incidentally  I  was  able  to  judge  from  its  reception  with  what  an

inadequate degree of comprehension such efforts are met by other

specialists at the present time. In this instance there was no validity in

the objection that the material upon which had based my assertions

had  been  withheld  and  that  it  was  therefore  impossible  to  become

convinced of their truth by testing and checking them. For every one

can submit his own dreams to analytic examination, and the technique

of interpreting dreams may be easily learnt from the instructions and

examples which I have given. I must once more insist, just as I did at

that time, that a thorough investigation of the problems of dreams is

an  indispensable  prerequisite  for  any  comprehension  of  the  mental

processes in hysteria and the other psychoneuroses, and that no one

who wishes to shirk that preparatory labour has the smallest prospect

of advancing even a few steps into this region of knowledge. Since,

therefore,  this  case  history  presupposes  a  knowledge  of  the

interpretation  of  dreams,  it  will  seem  highly  unsatisfactory  to  any

reader to whom this presupposition does not apply. Such a reader will

find only bewilderment in these pages instead of the enlightenment he

is in search of, and he will certainly be inclined to project the cause of

his  bewilderment  on  to  the  author  and  to  pronounce  his  views

fantastic.  But  in  reality  this  bewildering  character  attaches  to  the

phenomena of the neurosis itself; its presence there is only concealed

by the physician’s familiarity with the facts, and it comes to light again

with  every  attempt  a  explaining  them.  It  could  only  be  completely

banished if we could succeed in tracing back every single element of aneurosis to factors with which we were already familiar. But everything

tends to show that, on the contrary, we shall be driven by the study of

neuroses to assume the existence of many new thing which will later

on gradually become the subject of more certain knowledge. What is

new has always aroused bewilderment and resistance.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1354

 

   Nevertheless, it would be wrong to suppose that dreams and their

interpretation occupy such a prominent position in all psycho-analyses

as they do in this example.

   While the case history before us seems particularly favoured as

regards the utilization of dreams, in other respects it has turned out

poorer than I could have wished. But its shortcomings are connected

with the very circumstances which have made its publication possible.

As I have already said, I should not have known how to deal with the

material  involved  in  the  history  of  a  treatment  which  had  lasted,

perhaps,  for  a  whole  year.  The  present  history,  which  covers  only

three months could be recollected and reviewed; but its results remain

incomplete in more than one respect. The treatment was not carried

through to its appointed end, but was broken off at the patient’s own

wish when it had reached a certain point. At that time some of the

problems of the case had not even been attacked and others had only

been imperfectly elucidated; whereas, if the work had been continued,

we should no doubt have obtained the fullest possible enlightenment

upon every particular of the case. In the following pages, therefore, I

can present only a fragment of an analysis.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1355

 

   Readers who are familiar with the technique of analysis as it was

expounded in the Studies on Hysteria will perhaps be surprised that it

should  not  have  been  possible  in  three  months  to  find  a  complete

solution at least for those of the symptoms which were taken in hand.This will become intelligible when I explain that since the date of the

Studies  psycho-analytic  technique  has  been  completely

revolutionized. At that time the work of analysis started out from the

symptoms, and aimed at clearing them up one after the other. Since

then  I  have  abandoned  that  technique,  because  I  found  it  totally

inadequate for dealing with the finer structure of a neurosis. I now let

the patient himself choose the subject of the day’s work, and in that

way I start out from whatever surface his unconscious happens to be

presenting to his notice at the moment. But on this plan everything

that has to do with the clearing-up of a particular symptom emerges

piecemeal, woven into various contexts, and distributed over widely

separated periods of time. In spite of this apparent disadvantage, the

new technique is far superior to the old, and indeed there can be no

doubt that it is the only possible one.

   In face of the incompleteness of my analytic results, I had no choice

but to follow the example of those discoverers whose good fortune it is

to bring to the light of day after their long burial the priceless though

mutilated relics of antiquity. I have restored what is missing, taking the

best  models  known  to  me  from  other  analyses;  but,  like  a

conscientious archaeologist, have not omitted to mention in each case

where the authentic parts end and my constructions begin.

      There  is  another  kind  of  incompleteness  which  I  myself  have

intentionally introduced. I have as a rule not reproduced the process of

interpretation to which the patient’s associations and communications

had to be subjected, but only the results of that process. Apart from

the dreams, therefore, the technique of the analytic work has been

revealed in only a very few places. My object in this case history was

to demonstrate the intimate structure of a neurotic disorder and the

determination of its symptoms; and it would have led to nothing but

hopeless  confusion  if  I  had  tried  to  complete  the  other  task  at  the

same  time.  Before  the  technical  rules,  most  of  which  have  been

arrived  at  empirically,  could  be  properly  laid  down,  it  would  be

necessary to collect material from the histories of a large number of

treatments. Nevertheless, the degree of shortening produced by the

omission of the technique is not to be exaggerated in this particular

case. Precisely that portion of the technical work which is the most

difficult  never  came  into  question  with  the  patient;  for  the  factor  of‘transference’, which is considered at the end of the case history, did

not come up for discussion during the short treatment.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1356

 

   For a third kind of incompleteness in this report neither the patient

nor  the  author  is  responsible.  It  is,  on  the  contrary,  obvious  that  a

single case history, even if it were complete and open to no doubt,

cannot  provide  an  answer  to all  the  questions  arising  out  of  the

problem of hysteria. It cannot give an insight into all the types of this

disorder, into all the forms of internal structure of the neurosis, into all

the  possible  kinds  of  relation  between  the  mental  and  the  somatic

which are to be found in hysteria. It is not fair to expect from a single

case  more  than  it  can  offer.  And  any  one  who  has  hitherto  been

unwilling  to  believe  that  a  psychosexual  aetiology  holds  good

generally and without exception for hysteria is scarcely likely to be

convinced  of  the  fact  by  taking  stock  of  a  single  case  history.  He

would  do  better  to  suspend  his  judgement  until  his  own  work  has

earned him the right to a conviction.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote  added  1923:]  The  treatment  described  in  this  paper  was  broken  off  on

December 31st, 1899. [1900] My account of it was written during the two weeks immediately
following, but was not published until 1905. It is not to be expected that after more than twenty
years of uninterrupted work I should see nothing to alter in my view of such a case and in my
presentment of it; but it would obviously be absurd to bring the case history ‘up to date’ by
means of emendations and additions. In all essentials, therefore, I have left it as it was, and in
the text I have merely corrected a few oversights and inaccuracies to which my excellent
English translators, Mr. and Mrs. James Strachey, have directed my attention. Such critical
remarks as I have thought it permissible to add I have incorporated in these additional notes:
so that the reader will be justified in assuming that I still hold to the opinions expressed in the
text unless he finds them contradicted in the footnotes. The problem of medical discretion
which I have discussed in this preface does not touch the remaining case histories contained
in this volume; for three of them were published with the express assent of the patients (or
rather, as regards little Hans, with that of his father), while in the fourth case (that of Schreber)
the subject of the analysis was not actually a person but a book produced by him. In Dora’s
case the secret was kept until this year. I had long been out of touch with her, but a short
while ago I heard that she had recently fallen ill again from other causes, and had confided to
her physician that she had been analysed by me when she was a girl. This disclosure made it
easy for my well-informed colleague to recognize her as the Dora of 1899. No fair judge of
analytic therapy will make it a reproach that the three months’ treatment she received at that
time  effected  no  more  than  the  relief  of  her  current  conflict  and  was  unable  to  give  herprotection against subsequent illnesses.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1357

 

                                            I

 

                            THE CLINICAL PICTURE

 

   In my Interpretation of Dreams, published in 1900, I showed that

dreams  in  general  can  be  interpreted,  and  that  after  the  work  of

interpretation has been completed they can be replaced by perfectly

correctly constructed thoughts which can be assigned a recognizable

position in the chain of mental events. I wish to give an example in the

following pages of the only practical application of which the art of

interpreting dreams seems to admit. I have already mentioned in my

book¹  how  it  was  that  I  came  upon  the  problem  of  dreams.  The

problem  crossed  my  path  as  I  was  endeavouring  to  cure

psychoneuroses by means of a particular psychotherapeutic method.

For, among their other mental experiences, my patients told me their

dreams, and these dreams seemed to call for insertion in the long

thread of connections which spun itself out between a symptom of the

disease and a pathogenic idea. At that time I learnt how to translate

the  language  of  dreams  into  the  forms  of  expression  of  our  own

thought-language, which can be understood without further help. And I

may add that this knowledge is essential for the psycho-analyst; for

the  dream  is  one  of  the  roads  along  which  consciousness  can  be

reached by the psychical material which, on account of the opposition

aroused  by  its  content,  his  been  cut  off  from  consciousness  and

repressed, and has thus become pathogenic. The dream, in short, is

one of the détours by which repression can be evaded; it is one of the

principal means employed by what is known as the indirect method of

representation in the mind. The following fragment from the history of

the treatment of a hysterical girl is intended to show the way in which

the interpretation of dreams plays a part in the work of analysis. It will

at the same time give me a first opportunity of publishing at sufficient

length to prevent further misunderstanding some of my views upon thepsychical processes of hysteria and upon its organic determinants. I

need  no  longer  apologize  on  the  score  of  length,  since  it  is  now

agreed  that  the  exacting  demands  which  hysteria  makes  upon

physician and investigator can be met only by the most sympathetic

spirit of inquiry and not by an attitude of superiority and contempt. For,

 

                                                Nicht kunst und Wissenschaft allein,

                                                Geduld will bei dem Werke sein!²

 

   ¹ The Interpretation of Dreams, Chapter II.

   ² [ Not Art and Science serve, alone;

        Patience must in the work be shown.]
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1358

 

 

   If I were to begin by giving a full and consistent case history, it would

place the reader in a very different situation from that of the medical

observer. The reports of the patient’s relatives - in the present case I

was given one by the eighteen-year-old girl’s father - usually afford a

very  indistinct  picture  of  the  course  of  the  illness.  I  begin  the

treatment, indeed, by asking the patient to give me the whole story of

his  life  and  illness,  but  even  so  the  information  I  receive  is  never

enough to let me see my way about the case. This first account may

be compared to an unnavigable river whose stream is at one moment

choked  by  masses  of  rock  and  at  another  divided  and  lost  among

shallows and sandbanks. I cannot help wondering how it is that the

authorities can produce such smooth and precise histories in cases of

hysteria. As a matter of fact the patients are incapable of giving such

reports about themselves. They can, indeed, give the physician plenty

of coherent information about this or that period of their lives; but it is

sure  to  be  followed  by  another  period  as  to  which  their

communications  run  dry,  leaving  gaps  unfilled,  and  riddles

unanswered; and then again will come yet another period which will

remain totally obscure and unilluminated by even a single piece of

serviceable information. The connections - even the ostensible ones -are for the most part incoherent, and the sequence of different events

is  uncertain.  Even  during  the  course  of  their  story  patients  will

repeatedly  correct  a  particular  or  a  date,  and  then  perhaps,  after

wavering  for  some  time,  return  to  their  first  version.  The  patients’

inability to give an ordered history of their life in so far as it coincides

with  the  history  of  their  illness  is  not  merely  characteristic  of  the

neurosis.¹  It  also  possesses  great  theoretical  significance.  For  this

inability  has  the  following  grounds.  In  the  first  place,  patients

consciously and intentionally keep back part of what they ought to tell

- things that are perfectly we known to them - because they have not

got over their feelings of timidity and shame (or discretion, where what

they say concerns other people); this is the share taken by conscious

disingenuousness.  In  the  second  place,  part  of  the  anamnestic

knowledge, which the patients have at their disposal at other times,

disappears while they are actually telling their story, but without their

making any deliberate reservations: the share taken by unconscious

disingenuousness.  In  the  third  place,  there  are  invariably  true

amnesias - gaps in the memory into which not only old recollections

but  even  quite  recent  ones  have  fallen  -  and  paramnesias,  formed

secondarily so as to fill in those gaps.² When the events themselves

have been kept in mind, the purpose underlying the amnesias can be

fulfilled just as surely by destroying a connection, and a connection is

most surely broken by altering the chronological order of events. The

latter always proves to be the most vulnerable element in the store of

memory and the one which is most easily subject to repression. Again

we meet with many recollections that are in what might be described

as the first stage of repression, and these we find surrounded with

doubts. At a later period the doubts would be replaced by a loss or a

falsification of memory.³

 

   ¹ Another physician once sent his sister to me for psychotherapeutic treatment, telling me

that she had for years been treated without success for hysteria (pains and defective gait).
The short account which he gave me seemed quite consistent with the diagnosis. In my first
hour with the patient I got her to tell me her history herself. When the story came out perfectly
clearly and connectedly in spite of the remarkable events it dealt with, I told myself that the
case could not be one of hysteria, and immediately instituted a careful physical examination.
This led to the diagnosis of a not very advanced state of tabes, which was later treated with
Hg injections (Ol. cinereum) by Professor Lang with markedly beneficial results.

   ² Amnesias and paramnesias stand in a complementary relation to each other. When thereare large gaps in the memory there will be few mistakes in it. And conversely, paramnesias
can at a first glance completely conceal the presence of amnesias.

   ³ If a patient exhibits doubts in the course of his narrative, an empirical rule teaches us to

disregard such expressions of his judgement entirely. If the narrative wavers between two
versions, we should incline to regard the first one as correct and the second as a product of
repression.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1359

 

   That this state of affairs should exist in regard to the memories

relating  to  the  history  of  the  illness  is a necessary correlate of the

symptoms  and  one  which  is  theoretically  requisite.  In  the  further

course of the treatment the patient supplies the facts which, though he

had known them all along, had been kept back by him or had not

occurred to his mind. The paramnesias prove untenable, and the gaps

in his memory are filled in. It is only towards the end of the treatment

that we have before us all intelligible, consistent, and unbroken case

history. Whereas the practical aim of the treatment is to remove all

possible symptoms and to replace them by conscious thoughts, we

may  regard  it  as  a  second  and  theoretical  aim  to  repair  all  the

damages  to  the  patient’s  memory.  These  two  aims  are  coincident.

When one is reached, so is the other; and the same path leads to

them both.

   It follows from the nature of the facts which form the material of

psycho-analysis that we are obliged to pay as much attention in our

case histories to the purely human and social circumstances of our

patients  as  to  the  somatic  data  and  the  symptoms  of  the  disorder.

Above  all,  our  interest  will  be  directed  towards  their  family

circumstances - and not only, as will be seen later, for the purpose of

enquiring into their heredity.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1360

 

 

   The family circle of the eighteen-year-old girl who is the subject ofthis paper included, besides herself, her two parents and a brother

who  was  one  and  a  half  years  her  senior.  Her  father  was  the

dominating  figure  in  this  circle,  owing  to  his  intelligence  and  his

character as much as to the circumstances of his life. It was those

circumstances  which  provided  the  framework  for  the  history  of  the

patient’s childhood and illness. At the time at which I began the girl’s

treatment her father was in his late forties, a man of rather unusual

activity  and  talents,  a  large  manufacturer  in  very  comfortable

circumstances. His daughter was most tenderly attached to him, and

for that reason her critical powers, which developed early, took all the

more offence at many of his actions and peculiarities.

   Her affection for him was still further increased by the many severe

illnesses which he had been through since her sixth year. At that time

he  had  fallen  ill  with  tuberculosis  and  the  family  had  consequently

moved  to  a  small  town  in  a  good  climate  situated  in  one  of  our

southern provinces. There his lung trouble rapidly improved; but, on

account  of  the  precautions  which  were  still  considered  necessary,

both parents and children continued for the next ten years or so to

reside  chiefly  in  this  spot,  which  I  shall  call  B--.  When  her  father’s

health  was  good,  he  used  at  times  to  be  away,  on  visits  to  his

factories. During the hottest part of the summer the family used to

move to a health resort in the hills.

   When the girl was about ten years old, her father had to go through

a course of treatment in a darkened room on account of a detached

retina.  As  a  result  of  this  misfortune  his  vision  was  permanently

impaired. His gravest illness occurred some two years later. It took the

form of a confusional attack, followed by symptoms of paralysis and

slight mental disturbances. A friend of his (who plays a part in the

story with which we shall be concerned later on) persuaded him, while

his  condition  had  scarcely  improved,  to  travel  to  Vienna  with  his

physician and come to me for advice. I hesitated for some time as to

whether I ought not to regard the case as one of tabo-paralysis, but I

finally decided upon a diagnosis of a diffuse vascular affection; and

since the patient admitted having had a specific infection before his

marriage, I prescribed an energetic course of anti-luetic treatment, as

a result of which all the remaining disturbances passed off. It is no

doubt owing to this fortunate intervention of mine that four years laterhe  brought  his  daughter,  who  had  meanwhile  grown  unmistakably

neurotic, and introduced her to me, and that after another two years

he handed her over to me for psychotherapeutic treatment.

   I had in the meantime also made the acquaintance in Vienna of a

sister  of  his,  who  was  a  little  older  than  himself.  She  gave  clear

evidence  of  a  severe  form  of  psychoneurosis  without  any

characteristically  hysterical  symptoms.  After  a  life  which  had  been

weighed  down  by  an  unhappy  marriage,  she  died  of  a  marasmus

which made rapid advances and the symptoms of which were, as a

matter  of  fact,  never  fully  cleared  up.  An  elder  brother  of  the  girl’s

father,  whom  I  once  happened  to  meet,  was  a  hypochondriacal

bachelor.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1361

 

   The sympathies of the girl herself, who, as I have said, became my

patient at the age of eighteen, had always been with the father’s side

of the family, and ever since she had fallen ill she had taken as her

model  the  aunt  who  has  just  been  mentioned.  There  could  be  no

doubt, too, that it was from her father’s family that she had derived not

only  her  natural  gifts  and  her  intellectual  precocity  but  also  the

predisposition to her illness. I never made her mother’s acquaintance.

From the accounts given me by the girl and her father I was led to

imagine her as an uncultivated woman and above all as a foolish one,

who  had  concentrated  all  her  interests  upon  domestic  affairs,

especially since her husband’s illness and the estrangement to which

it led. She presented the picture, in fact, of what might be called the

‘housewife’s psychosis’. She had no understanding of her children’s

more active interests, and was occupied all day long in cleaning the

house with its furniture and utensils and in keeping them clean - to

such an extent as to make it almost impossible to use or enjoy them.

This condition, traces of which are to be found often enough in normal

housewives, inevitably reminds one of forms of obsessional washing

and other kinds of obsessional cleanliness. But such women (and this

applied to the patient’s mother) are entirely without insight into theirillness,  so  that  one  essential  characteristic  of  an  ‘obsessional

neurosis’ is lacking. The relations between the girl and her mother had

been unfriendly for years. The daughter looked down on her mother

and  used  to  criticize  her  mercilessly,  and  she  had  withdrawn

completely from her influence.¹

 

   ¹ I do not, it is true, adopt the position that heredity is the only aetiological factor in hysteria.

But,  on  the  other  hand  -  and  I  say  this  with  particular  reference  to  some  of  my  earlier
publications, e.g. ‘Heredity and the Aetiology of the Neuroses’ (1896n), in which I combated
that view - I do not wish to give an impression of underestimating the importance of heredity in
the aetiology of hysteria or of asserting that it can be dispensed with. In the case of the
present  patient  the  information  I  have  given  about  her  father  and  his  brother  and  sister
indicates  a  sufficiently  heavy  taint;  and,  indeed,  if  the  view  is  taken  that  pathological
conditions  such  as  her  mother’s  must  also  imply  a  hereditary  predisposition,  the  patient’s
heredity may be regarded as a convergent one. To my mind, however, there is another factor
which  is  of  more  significance  in  the  girl’s  hereditary  or,  properly  speaking,  constitutional
predisposition. I have mentioned that her father had contracted syphilis before his marriage.
Now a strikingly high  percentage  of  the  patients  whom  I  have  treated  psycho-analytically
come of fathers who have suffered from tabes or general paralysis. In consequence of the
novelty of my therapeutic method, I see only the severest cases, which have already been
under treatment for years without any success. In accordance with the Erb-Fournier theory,
tabes or general paralysis in the male parent may be regarded as evidence of an earlier luetic
infection; and indeed I was able to obtain direct confirmation of such an infection in a number
of  cases.  In  the  most  recent  discussion  on  the  offspring  of  syphilitic  parents  (Thirteenth
International Medical Congress, held in Paris, August 2nd to 9th, 1900: papers by Finger,
Tarnowsky, Jullien, etc.), I find no mention of the conclusion to which I have been driven by
my experience as a neuro-pathologist - namely, that syphilis in the male parent is a very
relevant factor in the aetiology of the neuropathic constitution of children.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1362

 

   During the girl’s earlier years, her only brother (her elder by a year

and a half) had been the model which her ambitions had striven to

follow. But in the last few years the relations between the brother and

sister had grown more distant. The young man used to try so far as he

could to keep out of the family disputes; but when he was obliged to

take  sides  he  would  support  his  mother.  So  that  the  usual  sexual

attraction had drawn together the father and daughter on the one side

and the mother and son on the other.

   The patient, to whom I shall in future give the name of ‘Dora’, had

even at the age of eight begun to develop neurotic symptoms. Shebecame  subject  at  that  time  to  chronic  dyspnoea  with  occasional

accesses in which the symptom was very much aggravated. The first

onset  occurred  after  a  short  expedition  in  the  mountains  and  was

accordingly put down to over-exertion. In the course of six months,

during which she was made to rest and was carefully looked after, this

condition gradually passed off. The family doctor seems to have had

not  a  moment’s  hesitation  in  diagnosing  the  disorder  as  purely

nervous and in excluding any organic cause for the dyspnoea; but he

evidently considered this diagnosis compatible with the aetiology of

over-exertion.¹

   The little girl went through the usual infectious diseases of childhood

without suffering any lasting damage. As she herself told me - and her

words were intended to convey a deeper meaning - her brother was

as a rule the first to start the illness and used to have it very slightly,

and she would then follow suit with a severe form of it. When she was

about  twelve  she  began  to  suffer  from  unilateral  headaches  in  the

nature of a migraine, and from attacks of nervous coughing. At first

these  two  symptoms  always  appeared  together,  but  they  became

separated later on and ran different courses. The migraine grew rarer,

and by the time she was sixteen she had quite got over it. But attacks

of tussis nervosa,  which  had  no  doubt  been  started  by  a  common

catarrh, continued to occur over the whole period. When, at the age of

eighteen, she came to me for treatment, she was again coughing in a

characteristic  manner.  The  number  of  these  attacks  could  not  be

determined;  but  they  lasted  from  three  to  five  weeks,  and  on  one

occasion for several months. The most troublesome symptom during

the first half of an attack of this kind, at all events in the last few years,

used to be a complete loss of voice. The diagnosis that this was once

more a nervous complaint had been established long since; but the

various methods of treatment which are usual, including hydrotherapy

and the local application of electricity, had produced no result. It was

in such circumstances as these that the child had developed into a

mature young woman of very independent judgement, who had grown

accustomed  to  laugh  at  the  efforts  of  doctors,  and  in  the  end  to

renounce their help entirely. Moreover, she had always been against

calling in medical advice, though she had no personal objection to her

family doctor. Every proposal to consult a new physician aroused herresistance, and it was only her father’s authority which induced her to

come to me at all.

   I first saw her when she was sixteen, in the early summer. She was

suffering from a cough and from hoarseness, and even at that time I

proposed  giving  her  psychological  treatment.  My  proposal  was  not

adopted,  since  the  attack  in  question,  like  the  others,  passed  off

spontaneously, though it had lasted unusually long. During the next

winter  she  came  and  stayed  in  Vienna  with  her  uncle  and  his

daughters after the death of the aunt of whom she had been so fond.

There she fell ill of a feverish disorder which was diagnosed at the

time as appendicitis.² In the following autumn, since her father’s health

seemed to justify the step, the family left the health-resort of B--- for

good and all. They first moved to the town where her father’s factory

was situated, and then, scarcely a year later, settled permanently in

Vienna.

 

   ¹ The probable precipitating cause of this first illness will be discussed later on.

   ² On this point see the analysis of the second dream.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1363

 

   Dora was by that time in the first bloom of youth - a girl of intelligent

and  engaging  looks.  But  she  was  a  source  of  heavy  trials  for  her

parents.  Low  spirits  and  an  alteration  in  her  character  had  now

become  the  main  features  of  her  illness.  She  was  clearly  satisfied

neither with herself nor with her family; her attitude towards her father

was unfriendly, and she was on very bad terms with her mother, who

was  bent  upon  drawing  her  into  taking  a  share  in  the  work  of  the

house. She tried to avoid social intercourse, and employed herself - so

far as she was allowed to by the fatigue and lack of concentration of

which she complained - with attending lectures for women and with

carrying on more or less serious studies. One day her parents were

thrown into a state of great alarm by finding on the girl’s writing-desk,

or inside it, a letter in which she took leave of them because, as she

said, she could no longer endure her life.¹ Her father, indeed, being a

man  of  some  perspicacity,  guessed  that  the  girl  had  no  serioussuicidal intentions. But he was none the less very much shaken; and

when one day, after a slight passage of words between him and his

daughter, she had a first attack of loss of consciousness² - an event

which was subsequently covered by an amnesia - it was determined,

in spite of her reluctance, that she should come to me for treatment.

 

   ¹ As I have already explained, the treatment of the case, and consequently my insight into

the  complex  of  events  composing  it,  remained  fragmentary.  There  are  therefore  many
questions to which I have no solution to offer, or in which I can only rely upon hints and
conjectures. This affair of the letter came up in the course of one of our sessions, and the girl
showed signs of astonishment. ‘How on earth’, he asked, ‘did they find the letter? It was shut
up in my desk.’ But since she knew that her parents had read this draft of a farewell letter, I
conclude that she had herself arranged for it to fall into their hands.

   ² The attack was, I believe, accompanied by convulsions and delirious states. But since this

event  was  not  reached  by  the  analysis  either,  I  have  no  trustworthy  recollections  on  the
subject to fall back upon.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1364

 

 

   No doubt this case history, as I have so far outlined it, does not upon

the whole seem worth recording. It is merely a case of ‘petite hystérie’

with the commonest of all somatic and mental symptoms: dyspnoea,

tussis  nervosa,  aphonia,  and  possibly  migraines,  together  with

depression, hysterical unsociability, and a taedium vitae  which  was

probably not entirely genuine. More interesting cases of hysteria have

no  doubt  been  published,  and  they  have  very  often  been  more

carefully described; for nothing will be found in the following pages on

the subject of stigmata of cutaneous sensibility, limitation of the visual

field, or similar matters. I may venture to remark, however, that all

such collections of the strange and wonderful phenomena of hysteria

have  but  slightly  advanced  our  knowledge  of  a  disease  which  still

remains as great a puzzle as ever. What is wanted is precisely an

elucidation of the commonest cases and of their most frequent and

typical  symptoms.  I  should  have  been  very  well  satisfied  if  the

circumstances had allowed me to give a complete elucidation of this

case of petite hystérie. And my experiences with other patients leave

me in ho doubt that my analytic method would have enabled me to doso.

   In 1896, shortly after the appearance of my Studies on Hysteria

(written in conjunction with Dr. J. Breuer, 1895), I asked an eminent

fellow-specialist for his opinion on the psychological theory of hysteria

put forward in that work. He bluntly replied that he considered it an

unjustifiable generalization of conclusions which might hold good for a

few cases. Since then I have seen an abundance of cases of hysteria,

and  I  have  been  occupied  with  each  case  for  a  number  of  days,

weeks, or years. In not a single one of them have I failed to discover

the psychological determinants which were postulated in the Studies,

namely,  a  psychical  trauma,  a  conflict  of  affects,  and  an  additional

factor which I brought forward in later publications - a disturbance in

the sphere of sexuality. It is of course not to be expected that the

patient will come to meet the physician half-way with material which

has  become  pathogenic  for  the  very  reason  of  its  efforts  to  lie

concealed; nor must the enquirer rest content with the first ‘No’ that

crosses his path.¹

 

    ¹ Here  is  an  instance  of  this.  Another  physician  in  Vienna,  whose  conviction  of  the

unimportance of sexual factors in hysteria has probably been very much strengthened by
such experiences as this, was consulted in the case of a fourteen-year-old girl who suffered
from dangerous hysterical vomiting. He made up his mind to ask her the painful question
whether by any chance she had ever had a love-affair with a man. ‘No!’ answered the child,
no doubt with well-affected astonishment; and then repeated to her mother in her irreverent
way: ‘Only fancy! the old stupid asked me if I was in love!’ She afterwards came to me for
treatment, and proved - though not during our very first conversation, to be sure - to have
been a masturbator for many years, with a considerable leucorrhoeal discharge (which had a
close bearing on her vomiting). She had finally broken herself of the habit, but was tormented
in her abstinence by the most acute sense of guilt, so that she looked upon every misfortune
that befell her family as a divine punishment for her transgression. Besides this, she was
under  the  influence  of  the  romance  of  an  unmarried  aunt,  whose  pregnancy  (a  second
determinant for her vomiting) was supposed to have been happily hidden from her. The girl
was looked upon as a ‘mere child,’ but she turned out to be initiated into all the essentials of
sexual relations.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1365

 

 

      In  Dora’s  case,  thanks  to  her  father’s  shrewdness  which  I  haveremarked upon more than once already, there was no need for me to

look about for the points of contact between the circumstances of the

patient’s life and her illness, at all events in its most recent form. Her

father told me that he and his family while they were at B-- had formed

an  intimate  friendship  with  a  married  couple  who  had  been  settled

there for several years. Frau K. had nursed him during his long illness,

and had in that way, he said, earned a title to his undying gratitude.

Herr K. had always been most kind to Dora. He had gone walks with

her when he was there, and had made her small presents; but no one

had thought any harm of that. Dora had taken the greatest care of the

K.’s two little children, and been almost a mother to them. When Dora

and her father had come to see me two years before in the summer,

they had been just on their way to stop with Herr and Frau K., who

were spending the summer on one of our lakes in the Alps. Dora was

to have spent several weeks at the K.’s, while her father had intended

to return home after a few days. During that time Herr K. had been

staying there as well. As her father was preparing for his departure the

girl had suddenly declared with the greatest determination that she

was going with him, and she had in fact put her decision into effect. It

was not until some days later that she had thrown any light upon her

strange behaviour. She had then told her mother - intending that what

she said should be passed on to her father - that Herr K. had had the

audacity to make her a proposal while they were on a walk after a trip

upon the lake. Herr K. had been called to account by her father and

uncle on the next occasion of their meeting, but he had denied in the

most emphatic terms having on his side made any advances which

could have been open to such a construction. He had then proceeded

to throw suspicion upon the girl, saying that he had heard from Frau K.

that she took no interest in anything but sexual matters, and that she

used to read Mantegazza’s Physiology of Love and books of that sort

in their house on the lake. It was most likely, he had added, that she

had been over-excited by such reading and had merely ‘fancied’ the

whole scene she had described.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1366 

      ‘I  have  no  doubt’,  continued  her  father,  ‘that  this  incident  is

responsible  for  Dora’s  depression  and  irritability  and  suicidal  ideas.

She keeps pressing me to break off relations with Herr K. and more

particularly  with  Frau  K.,  whom  she  used  positively  to  worship

formerly. But that I cannot do. For, to begin with, I myself believe that

Dora’s tale of the man’s immoral suggestions is a phantasy that has

forced its way into her mind; and besides, I am bound to Frau K. by

ties of honourable friendship and I do not wish to cause her pain. The

poor woman is most unhappy with her husband, of whom, by the way,

I have no very high opinion. She herself has suffered a great deal with

her nerves, and I am her only support. With my state of health I need

scarcely assure you that there is nothing wrong in our relations. We

are just two poor wretches who give one another what comfort we can

by  an  exchange  of  friendly  sympathy.  You  know  already  that  I  get

nothing  out  of  my  own  wife.  But  Dora,  who  inherits  my  obstinacy,

cannot be moved from her hatred of the K.’s. She had her last attack

after a conversation in which she had again pressed me to break with

them. Please try and bring her to reason.’

      Her  father’s  words  did  not  always  quite  tally  with  this

pronouncement; for on other occasions he tried to put the chief blame

for  Dora’s  impossible  behaviour  on  her  mother  whose  peculiarities

made the house unbearable for every one. But I had resolved from the

first  to  suspend  my  judgement  of  the  true  state  of  affairs  till  I  had

heard the other side as well.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1367

 

 

   The experience with Herr K. - his making love to her and the insult to

her honour which was involved - seems to provide in Dora’s case the

psychical  trauma  which  Breuer  and  I  declared  long  ago  to  be  the

indispensable prerequisite for the production of a hysterical disorder.

But this new case also presents all the difficulties which have since led

me  to  go  beyond  that  theory,¹  besides  an  additional  difficulty  of  aspecial kind. For, as so often happens in histories of cases of hysteria,

the trauma that we know of as having occurred in the patient’s past life

is insufficient to explain or to determine the particular character of the

symptoms; we should understand just as much or just as little of the

whole business if the result of the trauma had been symptoms quite

other than tussis nervosa,  aphonia,  depression,  and taedium  vitae.

But there is the further consideration that some of these symptoms

(the cough and the loss of voice) had been produced by the patient

years  before  the  time  of  the  trauma,  and  that  their  earliest

appearances  belong  to  her  childhood,  since  they  occurred  in  her

eighth year. If, therefore, the trauma theory is not to be abandoned,

we  must  go  back  to  her  childhood  and  look  about  there  for  any

influences or impressions which might have had an effect analogous

to that of a trauma. Moreover, it deserves to be remarked that in the

investigation  even  of  cases  in  which  the  first  symptoms  had  not

already set in childhood I have been driven to trace back the patients’

life history to their earliest years.²

 

   ¹ I have gone beyond that theory, but I have not abandoned it; that is to say, I do not to-day

consider the theory incorrect, but incomplete. All that I have abandoned is the emphasis laid
upon the so-called ‘hypnoid state’, which was supposed to be occasioned in the patient by the
trauma, and to be the foundation for all the psychologically abnormal events which followed.
If, where a piece of joint work is in question, it is legitimate to make a subsequent division of
property, I should like to take this opportunity of stating that the hypothesis of ‘hypnoid states’
- which many reviewers were inclined to regard as the central portion of our work - sprang
entirely  from  the  initiative  of  Breuer.  I  regard  the  use  of  such  a  term  as  superfluous  and
misleading,  because  it  interrupts  the  continuity  of  the  problem  as  to  the  nature  of  the
psychological process accompanying the formation of hysterical symptoms.
   ² Cf. my paper on ‘The Aetiology of Hysteria’ (1896c).
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1368

 

   When the first difficulties of the treatment had been overcome, Dora

told  me  of  an  earlier  episode  with  Herr  K.,  which  was  even  better

calculated to act as a sexual trauma. She was fourteen years old at

the time. Herr K. had made an arrangement with her and his wife that

they should meet him one afternoon at his place of business in the

principal square of B-- so as to have a view of a church festival. Hepersuaded  his  wife,  however,  to  stay  at  home,  and  sent  away  his

clerks, so that he was alone when the girl arrived. When the time for

the procession approached, he asked the girl to wait for him at the

door  which  opened  on  to  the  staircase  leading  to  the  upper  story,

while he pulled down the outside shutters. He then came back, and,

instead of going out by the open door, suddenly clasped the girl to him

and pressed a kiss upon her lips. This was surely just the situation to

call up a distinct feeling of sexual excitement in a girl of fourteen who

had never before been approached. But Dora had at that moment a

violent feeling of disgust, tore herself free from the man, and hurried

past  him  to  the  staircase  and  from  there  to  the  street  door.  She

nevertheless  continued  to  meet  Herr  K.  Neither  of  them  ever

mentioned the little scene; and according to her account Dora kept it a

secret  till  her  confession  during  the  treatment.  For  some  time

afterwards, however, she avoided being alone with Herr K. The K.’s

had just made plans for an expedition which was to last for some days

and on which Dora was to have accompanied them. After the scene of

the kiss she refused to join the party, without giving any reason.

   In this scene - second in order of mention, but first in order of time -

the  behaviour  of  this  child  of  fourteen  was  already  entirely  and

completely  hysterical.  I  should  without  question  consider  a  person

hysterical in whom an occasion for sexual excitement elicited feelings

that were preponderantly or exclusively unpleasurable; and I should

do so whether or no the person were capable of producing somatic

symptoms. The elucidation of the mechanism of this reversal of affect

is one of the most important and at the same time one of the most

difficult  problems  in  the  psychology  of  the  neuroses.  In  my  own

judgement I am still some way from having achieved this end; and I

may add that within the limits of the present paper I shall be able to

bring forward only a part of such knowledge on the subject as I do

possess.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1369

 

   In order to particularize Dora’s case it is not enough merely to drawattention to the reversal of affect; there has also been a displacement

of sensation. Instead of the genital sensation which would certainly

have  been  felt  by  a  healthy  girl  in  such  circumstances,¹  Dora  was

overcome by the unpleasurable feeling which is proper to the tract of

mucous membrane at the entrance to the alimentary canal - that is by

disgust.  The  stimulation  of  her  lips  by  the  kiss  was  no  doubt  of

importance in localizing the feeling at that particular place; but I think I

can also recognize another factor in operation.²

   The disgust which Dora felt on that occasion did not become a

permanent  symptom,  and  even  at  the  time  of  the  treatment  it  was

only,  as  it  were,  potentially  present.  She  was  a  poor  eater  and

confessed  to  some  disinclination  for  food.  On  the  other  hand,  the

scene  had  left  another  consequence  behind  it  in  the  shape  of  a

sensory  hallucination  which  occurred  from  time  to  time  and  even

made its appearance while she was telling me her story. She declared

that she could still feel upon the upper part of her body the pressure of

Herr  K.’s  embrace.  In  accordance  with  certain  rules  of  symptom-

formation which I have come to know, and at the same time taking into

account  certain  other  of  the  patient’s  peculiarities,  which  were

otherwise inexplicable, - such as her unwillingness to walk past any

man whom she saw engaged in eager or affectionate conversation

with  a  lady,  -  I  have  formed  in  my  own  mind  the  following

reconstruction of the scene. I believe that during the man’s passionate

embrace  she  felt  not  merely  his  kiss  upon  her  lips  but  also  the

pressure of his erect member against her body. This perception was

revolting to her; it was dismissed from her memory, repressed, and

replaced by the innocent sensation of pressure upon her thorax, which

in turn derived an excessive intensity from its repressed source. Once

more,  therefore,  we  find  a  displacement  from  the  lower  part  of  the

body  to  the  upper.³  On  the  other  hand,  the  compulsive  piece  of

behaviour  which  I  have  mentioned  was  formed  as  though  it  were

derived from the undistorted recollection of the scene: she did not like

walking  past  any  man  who  she  thought  was  in  a  state  of  sexual

excitement, because she wanted to avoid seeing for a second time the

somatic sign which accompanies it.

 

   ¹ Our appreciation of these circumstances will be facilitated when more light has beenthrown upon them.

   ² The causes of Dora’s disgust at the kiss were certainly not adventitious, for in that case

she could not have failed to remember and mention them. I happen to know Herr K., for he
was the same person who had visited me with the patient’s father, and he was still quite
young and of prepossessing appearance.

   ³ The occurrence of displacements of this kind has not been assumed for the purpose of

this single explanation; the assumption has proved indispensable for the explanation of a
large class of symptoms. Since treating Dora I have come across another instance of an
embrace (this time without a kiss) causing a fright. It was a case of a young woman who had
previously been devotedly fond of the man she was engaged to, but had suddenly begun to
feel a coldness towards him, accompanied by severe depression, and on that account came
to me for treatment. There was no difficulty in tracing the fright back to an erection on the
man’s part, which she had perceived but had dismissed from her consciousness.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1370

 

      It  is  worth  remarking  that  we  have  here  three  symptoms  -  the

disgust, the sensation of pressure on the upper part of the body, and

the avoidance of men engaged in affectionate conversation - all of

them derived from a single experience, and that it is only by taking into

account  the  interrelation  of  these  three  phenomena  that  we  can

understand  the  way  in  which  the  formation  of  the  symptoms  came

about. The disgust is the symptom of repression in the erotogenic oral

zone,  which,  as  we  shall  hear,  had  been  over-indulged  in  Dora’s

infancy  by  the  habit  of  sensual  sucking.  The  pressure  of  the  erect

member probably led to an analogous change in the corresponding

female organ, the clitoris; and the excitation of this second erotogenic

zone was referred by a process of displacement to the simultaneous

pressure against the thorax and became fixed there. Her avoidance of

men who might possibly be in a state of sexual excitement follows the

mechanism of a phobia, its purpose being to safeguard her against

any revival of the repressed perception.

   In order to show that such a supplement to the story was possible, I

questioned  the  patient  very  cautiously  as  to  whether  she  knew

anything  of  the  physical  signs  of  excitement  in  a  man’  body.  Her

answer, as touching the present, was ‘Yes’, but, as touching the time

of  the  episode,  ‘I  think  not’.  From  the  very  beginning  I  took  the

greatest pains with this patient not to introduce her to any fresh factsin  the  region  of  sexual  knowledge;  and  I  did  this,  not  from  any

conscientious  motives,  but  because  I  was  anxious  to  subject  my

assumptions to a rigorous test in this case. Accordingly, I did not call a

thing by its name until her allusions to it had become so unambiguous

that  there  seemed  very  slight  risk  in  translating  them  into  direct

speech. Her answer was always prompt and frank: she knew about it

already. But the question of where her knowledge came from was a

riddle which her memories were unable to solve. She had forgotten

the source of all her information on this subject.¹

   If I may suppose that the scene of the kiss took place in this way, I

can arrive at the following derivation for the feelings of disgust.² Such

feelings seem originally to be a reaction to the smell (and afterwards

also to the sight) of excrement. But the genitals can act as a reminder

of  the  excretory  functions;  and  this  applies  especially  to  the  male

member, for that organ performs the function of micturition as well as

the sexual function. Indeed, the function of micturition is the earlier

known  of  the  two,  and  the only  one  known  during  the  pre-sexual

period. Thus it happens that disgust becomes one of the means of

affective expression in the sphere of sexual life. The Early Christian

Father’s  ‘inter  urinas  et  faeces  nascimur’  clings  to  sexual  life  and

cannot be detached from it in spite of every effort at idealization. I

should  like,  however,  expressly  to  emphasize  my  opinion  that  the

problem  is  not  solved  by  the  mere  pointing  out  of  this  path  of

association. The fact that this association can be called up does not

show  that  it  actually will  be  called  up.  And  indeed  in  normal

circumstances it will not be. A knowledge of the paths does not render

less necessary a knowledge of the forces which travel along them.³

 

   ¹ See the second dream .

   ² Here, as in all similar cases, the reader must be prepared to be met not by one but by

several causes - by overdetermination.

   ³ All these discussions contain much that is typical and valid for hysteria in general. The

subject of erection solves some of the most interesting hysterical symptoms. The attention
that women pay to the outlines of men’s genitals as seen through their clothing becomes,
when it has been repressed, a source of the very frequent cases of avoiding company and of
dreading society. - It is scarcely possible to exaggerate the pathogenic significance of the
comprehensive tie uniting the sexual and the excremental, a tie which is at the basis of a very
large number of hysterical phobias.
                 Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1371

 

 

   I did not find it easy, however, to direct the patient’s attention to her

relations with Herr K. She declared that she had done with him. The

uppermost  layer  of  all  her  associations  during  the  sessions,  and

everything  of  which  she  was  easily  conscious  and  of  which  she

remembered  having  been  conscious  the  day  before,  was  always

connected with her father. It was quite true that she could not forgive

her  father  for  continuing  his  relations  with  Herr  K.  and  more

particularly  with  Frau  K.  But  she  viewed  those  relations  in  a  very

different light from that in which her father wished them to appear. In

her mind there was no doubt that what bound her father to this young

and beautiful woman was a common love-affair. Nothing that could

help to confirm this view had escaped her perception, which in this

connection was pitilessly sharp; here there were no gaps to be found

in her memory. Their acquaintance with the K.’s had begun before her

father’s serious illness; but it had not become intimate until the young

woman had officially taken on the position of nurse during that illness,

while Dora’s mother had kept away from the sick-room. During the first

summer holidays after his recovery things had happened which must

have opened everyone’s eyes to the true character of this ‘friendship’.

The two families had taken a suite of rooms in common at the hotel.

One day Frau K. had announced that she could not keep the bedroom

which she had up till then shared with one of her children. A few days

later  Dora’s  father  had  given  up  his  bedroom,  and  they  had  both

moved into new rooms - the end rooms, which were only separated by

the passage, while the rooms they had given up had not offered any

such  security  against  interruption.  Later  on,  whenever  she  had

reproached  her  father  about  Frau  K.,  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of

saying  that  he  could  not  understand  her  hostility  and  that,  on  the

contrary, his children had every reason for being grateful to Frau K.

Her  mother,  whom  she  had  asked  for  an  explanation  of  this

mysterious remark, had told her that her father had been so unhappy

at that time that he had made up his mind to go into the wood and kill

himself, and that Frau K., suspecting as much, had gone after him andhad persuaded him by her entreaties to preserve his life for the sake

of his family. Of course, Dora went on, she herself did not believe this

story; no doubt the two of them had been seen together in the wood,

and her father had thereupon invented this fairy tale of his suicide so

as to account for their rendezvous.¹

   When they had returned to B--, her father had visited Frau K. every

day  at  definite  hours,  while  her  husband  was  at  his  business.

Everybody  had  talked  about  it  and  had  questioned  her  about  it

pointedly. Herr K. himself had often complained bitterly to her mother,

though he had spared her herself any allusions to the subject - which

she seemed to attribute to delicacy of feeling on his part. When they

had all gone for walks together, her father and Frau K. had always

known how to manage things so as to be alone with each other. There

could be no doubt that she had taken money from him, for she spent

more than she could possibly have afforded out of her own purse or

her  husband’s.  Dora  added  that  her  father  had  begun  to  make

handsome  presents  to  Frau  K.,  and  in  order  to  make  these  less

conspicuous had at the same time become especially liberal towards

her mother and herself. And, while previously Frau K. had been an

invalid and had even been obliged to spend months in a sanatorium

for nervous disorders because she had been unable to walk, she had

now become a healthy and lively woman.

 

   ¹ This is the point of connection with her own pretence at suicide, which may thus be

regarded as the expression of a longing for a love of the same kind.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1372

 

      Even  after  they  had  left  B--  for  the  manufacturing  town,  these

relations, already of many years’ standing, had been continued. From

time to time her father used to declare that he could not endure the

rawness of the climate, and that he must do something for himself; he

would begin to cough and complain, until suddenly he would start off

to B--, and from there write the most cheerful letters home. All these

illnesses had only been pretexts for seeing his friend again. Then one

day it had been decided that they were to move to Vienna and Dorabegan to suspect a hidden connection. And sure enough, they had

scarcely been three weeks in Vienna when she heard that the K.’s had

moved there as well. They were in Vienna, so she told me, at that very

moment, and she frequently met her father with Frau K. in the street.

She also met Herr K. very often, and he always used to turn round

and look after her; and once when he had met her out by herself he

had followed her for a long way, so as to make sure where she was

going and whether she might not have a rendezvous.

   On one occasion during the course of the treatment her father again

felt  worse,  and  went  off  to  B--  for  several  weeks;  and  the  sharp-

sighted Dora had soon unearthed the fact that Frau K. had started off

to the same place on a visit to her relatives there. It was at this time

that Dora’s criticisms of her father were the most frequent: he was

insincere,  he  had  a  strain  of  falseness  in  his  character,  he  only

thought of his own enjoyment, and he had a gift for seeing things in

the light which suited him best.

   I could not in general dispute Dora’s characterization of her father;

and there was one particular respect in which it was easy to see that

her reproaches were justified. When she was feeling embittered she

used to be overcome by the idea that she had been handed over to

Herr K. as the price of his tolerating the relations between her father

and his wife; and her rage at her father’s making such a use of her

was visible behind her affection for him. At other times she was quite

well aware that she had been guilty of exaggeration in talking like this.

The two men had of course never made a formal agreement in which

she was treated as an object for barter; her father in particular would

have been horrified at any such suggestion. But he was one of those

men who know how to evade a dilemma by falsifying their judgement

upon one of the conflicting alternatives. If it had been pointed out to

him that there might be danger for a growing girl in the constant and

unsupervised companionship of a man who had no satisfaction from

his own wife, he would have been certain to answer that he could rely

upon his daughter, that a man like K. could never be dangerous to

her, and that his friend was himself incapable of such intentions, or

that Dora was still a child and was treated as a child by K. But as a

matter of fact things were in a position in which each of the two men

avoided  drawing  any  conclusions  from  the  other’s  behaviour  whichwould have been awkward for his own plans. It was possible for Herr

K. to send Dora flowers every day for a whole year while he was in the

neighbourhood,  to  take  every  opportunity  of  giving  her  valuable

presents, and to spend all his spare time in her company, without her

parents noticing anything in his behaviour that was characteristic of

love-making.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1373

 

 

   When a patient brings forward a sound and incontestable train of

argument during psycho-analytic treatment, the physician is liable to

feel a moment’s embarrassment, and the patient may take advantage

of it by asking: ‘This is all perfectly correct and true, isn’t it? What do

you want to change in now that I’ve told it you?’ But it soon becomes

evident  that  the  patient  is  using  thoughts  of  this  kind,  which  the

analysis cannot attack, for the purpose of cloaking others which are

anxious to escape from criticism and from consciousness. A string of

reproaches against other people leads one to suspect the existence of

a string of self-reproaches with the same content. All that need be

done  is  to  turn  back  each  particular  reproach  on  to  the  speaker

himself. There is something undeniably automatic about this method

of  defending  oneself  against  a  self-reproach  by  making  the  same

reproach against some one else. A model of it is to be found in the tu

quoque arguments of children; if one of them is accused of being a

liar, he will reply without an instant’s hesitation: ‘You’re another.’ A

grown-up  person  who  wanted  to  throw  back  abuse  would  look  for

some really exposed spot in his antagonist and would not necessarily

lay  the  chief  stress  upon  the  same  content  being  repeated.  In

paranoia the projection of a reproach on to another person without any

alteration  in  its  content  and  therefore  without  any  consideration  for

reality becomes manifest as the process of forming delusions.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1374 

   Dora’s reproaches against her father had a ‘lining’ or ‘backing’ of

self-reproaches  of  this  kind  with  a  corresponding  content  in  every

case, as I shall show in detail. She was right in thinking that her father

did  not  wish  to  look  too  closely  into  Herr  K.’s  behaviour  to  his

daughter, for fear of being disturbed in his own love-affair with Frau K.

But Dora herself had done precisely the same thing. She had made

herself an accomplice in the affair, and had dismissed from her mind

every sign which tended to show its true character. It was not until

after her adventure by the lake that her eyes were opened and that

she began to apply such a severe standard to her father. During all

the previous years she had given every possible assistance to her

father’s relations with Frau K. She would never go to see her if she

thought  her  father  was  there;  but,  knowing  that  in  that  case  the

children  would  have  been  sent  out,  she  would  turn  her  steps  in  a

direction where she would be sure to meet them, and would go for a

walk with them. There had been some one in the house who had been

anxious at an early stage to open her eyes to the nature of her father’s

relations with Frau K., and to induce her to take sides against her.

This was her last governess, an unmarried woman, no longer young,

who was well-read and of advanced views.¹ The teacher and her pupil

were for a while upon excellent terms, until suddenly Dora became

hostile to her and insisted on her dismissal. So long as the governess

had any influence she used it for stirring up feeling against Frau K.

She  explained  to  Dora’s  mother  that  it  was  incompatible  with  her

dignity to tolerate such an intimacy between her husband and another

woman; and she drew Dora’s attention to all the obvious features of

their relations. But her efforts were in vain. Dora remained devoted to

Frau K. and would hear of nothing that might make her think ill of her

relations with her father. On the other hand she very easily fathomed

the motives by which her governess was actuated. She might be blind

in one direction, but she was sharp-sighted enough in the other. She

saw  that  the  governess  was  in  love  with  her  father.  When  he  was

there,  she  seemed  to  be  quite  another  person:  at  such  times  she

could  be  amusing  and  obliging.  While  the  family  were  living  in  the

manufacturing town and Frau K. was not on the horizon, her hostility

was  directed  against  Dora’s  mother,  who  was  then  her  moreimmediate rival. Up to this point Dora bore her no ill-will. She did not

become angry until she observed that she herself was a subject of

complete indifference to the governess, whose pretended affection for

her was really meant for her father. While her father was away from

the manufacturing town the governess had no time to spare for her,

would not go for walks with her, and took no interest in her studies. No

sooner  had  her  father  returned  from  B--  than  she  was  once  more

ready  with  every  sort  of  service  and  assistance.  Thereupon  Dora

dropped her.

 

   ¹ This governess used to read every sort of book on sexual life and similar subjects, and

talked to the girl about them, at the same time asking her quite frankly not to mention their
conversations to her parents, as one could never tell what line they might take about them.
For some time I looked upon this woman as the source of all Dora’s secret knowledge, and
perhaps I was not entirely wrong in this.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1375

 

   The poor woman had thrown a most unwelcome light on a part of

Dora’s  own  behaviour.  What  the  governess  had  from  time  to  time

been to Dora, Dora had been to Herr K.’s children. She had been a

mother to them, she had taught them, she had gone for walks with

them,  she  had  offered  them  a  complete  substitute  for  the  slight

interest which their own mother showed in them. Herr K. and his wife

had often talked of getting a divorce; but it never took place, because

Herr K., who was an affectionate father, would not give up either of the

two children. A common interest in the children had from the first been

a bond between Herr K. and Dora. Her preoccupation with his children

was evidently a cloak for something else that Dora was anxious to

hide from herself and from other people.

      The  same  inference  was  to  be  drawn  both  from  her  behaviour

towards  the  children,  regarded  in  the  light  of  the  governess’s

behaviour towards herself, and from her silent acquiescence in her

father’s relations with Frau K. - namely, that she had all these years

been in love with Herr K. When I informed her of this conclusion she

did not assent to it. It is true that she at once told me that other people

besides (one of her cousins, for instance - a girl who had stopped withthem for some time at B--) had said to her: ‘Why you’re simply wild

about  that  man!’  But  she  herself  could  not  be  got  to  recollect  any

feelings of the kind. Later on, when the quantity of material that had

come  up  had  made  it  difficult  for  her  to  persist  in  her  denial,  she

admitted that she might have been in love with Herr K. at B--' but

declared that since the scene by the lake it had all been over.¹ In any

case it was quite certain that the reproaches which she made against

her father of having been deaf to the most imperative calls of duty and

of having seen things in the light which was most convenient from the

point of view of his own passions - these reproaches recoiled on her

own head.²

 

   ¹ Compare the second dream.

   ² The question then arises: If Dora loved Herr K., what was the reason for her refusing him

in the scene by the lake? Or at any rate, why did her refusal take such a brutal form, as
though she were embittered against him? And how could a girl who was in love feel insulted
by a proposal which was made in a manner neither tactless nor offensive?.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1376

 

   Her other reproach against her father was that his ill-health was only

a pretext and that he exploited it for his own purposes. This reproach,

too, concealed a whole section of her own secret history. One day she

complained  of  a  professedly  new  symptom,  which  consisted  of

piercing gastric pains. ‘Whom are you copying now?’ I asked her, and

found I had hit the mark. The day before she had visited her cousins,

the  daughters  of  the  aunt  who  had  died.  The  younger  one  had

become engaged, and this had given occasion to the elder one for

falling ill with gastric pains, and she was to be sent off to Semmering.

Dora thought it was all just envy on the part of the elder sister; she

always got ill when she wanted something, and what she wanted now

was to be away from home so as not to have to look on at her sister’s

happiness.¹ But Dora’s own gastric pains proclaimed the fact that she

identified  herself  with  her  cousin,  who,  according  to  her,  was  a

malingerer. Her grounds for this identification were either that she too

envied the luckier girl her love, or that she saw her own story reflectedin that of the elder sister, who had recently had a love-affair which had

ended unhappily.² But she had also learned from observing Frau K.

what useful things illnesses could become. Herr K. spent part of the

year in travelling. Whenever he came back, he used to find his wife in

bad health, although, as Dora knew, she had been quite well only the

day before. Dora realized that the presence of the husband had the

effect of making his wife ill, and that she was glad to be ill so as to be

able to escape the conjugal duties which she so much detested. At

this point in the discussion Dora suddenly brought in an allusion to her

own alternations between poor and bad health during the first years of

her girlhood at B--; and I was thus driven to suspect that her states of

health were to be regarded as depending upon something else, in the

same way as Frau K.’s. (It is a rule of psycho-analytic technique that

an  internal  connection  which  is  still  undisclosed  will  announce  its

presence  by  means  of  a  contiguity  -  a  temporal  proximity  of

associations; just as in writing, if ‘a’ and ‘b’ are put side by side, it

means that the syllable ‘ab’ is to be formed out of them.) Dora had had

a very large number of attacks of coughing accompanied by loss of

voice. Could it be that the presence or absence of the man she loved

had had an influence upon the appearance and disappearance of the

symptoms  of  her  illness?  If  this  were  so,  it  must  be  possible  to

discover  some  coincidence  or  other  which  would  betray  the  fact.  I

asked her what the average length of these attacks had been. ‘From

three  to  six  weeks,  perhaps.’  How  long  had  Herr  K.’s  absences

lasted? ‘Three to six weeks, too’, she was obliged to admit. Her illness

was therefore a demonstration of her love for K., just as his wife’s was

a demonstration of her dislike. It was only necessary to suppose that

her behaviour had been the opposite of Frau K.’s and that she had

been ill when he was absent and well when he had come back. And

this really seemed to have been so, at least during the first period of

the attacks. Later on it no doubt became necessary to obscure the

coincidence  between  her  attacks  of  illness  and  the  absence  of  the

man she secretly loved, lest its regularity should betray her secret.

The length of the attacks would then remain as a trace of their original

significance.

 

   ¹ An event of everyday occurrence between sisters.   ² I shall discuss later on what further conclusion I drew from these gastric pains.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1377

 

   I remembered that long before, while I was working at Charcot’s

clinic, I had seen and heard how in cases of hysterical mutism writing

operated vicariously in the place of speech. Such patients were able

to write more fluently, quicker, and better than others did or than they

themselves had done previously. The same thing had happened with

Dora. In the first days of her attacks of aphonia ‘writing had always

come specially easy to her’. No psychological elucidation was really

required  for  this  peculiarity,  which  was  the  expression  of  a

physiological  substitutive  function  enforced  by  necessity;  it  was

noticeable, however, that such an elucidation was easily to be found.

Herr K. used to write to her at length while he was travelling and to

send her picture post-cards. It used to happen that she alone was

informed as to the date of his return, and that his arrival took his wife

by surprise. Moreover, that a person will correspond with an absent

friend whom he cannot talk to is scarcely less obvious than that if he

has lost his voice he will try to make himself understood in writing.

Dora’s aphonia, then, allowed of the following symbolic interpretation.

When the man she loved was away she gave up speaking;  speech

had lost its value since she could not speak to him. On the other hand,

writing  gained  in  importance,  as  being  the  only  means  of

communication with him in his absence.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1378

 

 

   Am I now going on to assert that in every instance in which there are

periodical attacks of aphonia we are to diagnose the existence of a

loved person who is at times away from the patient?  Nothing could be

further from my intention. The determination of Dora’s symptoms is far

too specific for it to be possible to expect a frequent recurrence of thesame  accidental  aetiology.  But,  if  so,  what  is  the  value  of  our

elucidation of the aphonia in the present case? Have we not merely

allowed ourselves to become the victims of a jeu d’esprit? I think not.

In  this  connection  we  must  recall  the  question  which  has  so  often

been raised, whether the symptoms of hysteria are of psychical or of

somatic  origin,  or  whether,  if  the  former  is  granted,  they  are

necessarily all  of  them  psychically  determined.  Like  so  many  other

questions  to  which  we  find  investigators  returning  again  and  again

without  success,  this  question  is  not  adequately  framed.  The

alternatives stated in it do not cover the real essence of the matter. As

far as I can see, every hysterical symptom involves the participation of

both sides. It cannot occur without the presence of a certain degree of

somatic compliance offered by some normal or pathological process in

or connected with one of the bodily organs. And it cannot occur more

than  once  -  and  the  capacity  for  repeating  itself  is  one  of  the

characteristics  of  a  hysterical  symptom  -  unless  it  has  a  psychical

significance, a meaning. The hysterical symptom does not carry this

meaning with it, but the meaning is lent to it, soldered to it, as it were;

and in every instance the meaning can be a different one, according to

the  nature  of  the  suppressed  thoughts  which  are  struggling  for

expression.  However,  there  are  a  number  of  factors  at  work  which

tend  to  make  less  arbitrary  the  relations  between  the  unconscious

thoughts and the somatic processes that are at their disposal as a

means  of  expression,  and  which  tend  to  make  those  relations

approximate to a few typical forms. For therapeutic purposes the most

important  determinants  are  those  given  by  the  fortuitous  psychical

material; the clearing-up of the symptoms is achieved by looking for

their psychical significance. When everything that can be got rid of by

psycho-analysis has been cleared away, we are in a position to form

all kinds of conjectures, which probably meet the facts, as regards the

somatic  basis  of  the  symptoms  -  a  basis  which  is  as  a  rule

constitutional and organic. Thus in Dora’s case we shall not content

ourselves  with  a  psycho-analytic  interpretation  of  her  attacks  of

coughing and aphonia; but we shall also indicate the organic factor

which was the source of the ‘somatic compliance’ that enabled her to

express her love for a man who was periodically absent. And if the

connection between the symptomatic expression and the unconsciousmental content should strike us as being in this case a clever tour de

force,  we  shall  be  relieved  to  hear  that  it  succeeds  in  creating  the

same impression in every other case and in every other instance.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1379

 

I  am  prepared  to  be  told  at  this  point  that  there  is  no  very  great

advantage in having been taught by psycho-analysis that the clue to

the problem of hysteria is to be found not in ‘a peculiar instability of the

molecules of the nerves’ or in a liability to ‘hypnoid states’ - but in a

‘somatic compliance’. But in reply to the objection I may remark that

this new view has not only to some extent pushed the problem further

back, but has also to some extent diminished it. We have no longer to

deal with the whole problem, but only with the portion of it involving

that  particular  characteristic  of  hysteria which  differentiates  it  from

other  psychoneuroses.  The  mental  events  in  all  psycho-neuroses

proceed for a considerable distance along the same lines before any

question  arises  of  the  ‘somatic  compliance’  which  may  afford  the

unconscious mental processes a physical outlet. When this factor is

not forthcoming, something other than a hysterical symptom will arise

out of the total situation; yet it will still be something of an allied nature,

a phobia, perhaps, or an obsession - in short, a psychical symptom.

 

   I now return to the reproach of malingering which Dora brought

against  her  father.  It  soon  became  evident  that  this  reproach

corresponded to self-reproaches not only concerning her earlier states

of ill-health but also concerning the present time. At such points the

physician is usually faced by the task of guessing and filling in what

the analysis offers him in the shape only of hints and allusions. I was

obliged to point out to the patient that her present ill-health was just as

much actuated by motives and was just as tendentious as had been

Frau K.’s illness, which she had understood so well. There could be

no doubt, I said, that she had an aim in view which she hoped to gain

by her illness. That aim could be none other than to detach her father

from  Frau  K.  She  had  been  unable  to  achieve  this  by  prayers  orarguments; perhaps she hoped to succeed by frightening her father

(there was her farewell letter), or by awakening his pity (there were

her fainting-fits), or if all this was in vain, at least she would be taking

her revenge on him. She knew very well, I went on, how much he was

attached to her, and that tears used to come into his eyes whenever

he was asked after his daughter’s health. I felt quite convinced that

she would recover at once if only her father were to tell her that he

had sacrificed Frau K, for the sake of her health. But, I added, I hoped

he would not let himself be persuaded to do this, for then she would

have learned what a powerful weapon she had in her hands, and she

would certainly not fail on every future occasion to make use once

more of her liability to ill health. Yet if her father refused to give way to

her,  I  was  quite  sure  she  would  not  let  herself  be  deprived  of  her

illness so easily.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1380

 

 

   I will pass over the details which showed how entirely correct all of

this was, and I will instead add a few general remarks upon the part

played in hysteria by the motives of illness. A motive for being ill is

sharply to be distinguished as a concept from a potentiality for illness -

from  the  material  out  of  which  symptoms  are  formed.  The  motives

have  no  share  in  the  formation  of  symptoms,  and  indeed  are  not

present at the beginning of the illness. They only appear secondarily

to it; but it is not until they have appeared that the disease is fully

constituted.¹ Their presence can be reckoned upon in every case in

which there is real suffering and which is of fairly long standing. A

symptom comes into the patient’s mental life at first as an unwelcome

guest; it has everything against it; and that is why it may vanish so

easily, apparently of its own accord, under the influence of time. To

begin  with  there  is  no  use  to  which  it  can  be  put  in  the  domestic

economy  of  the  mind;  but  very  often  it  succeeds  in  finding  one

secondarily.  Some  psychical  current  or  other  finds  it  convenient  to

make use of it, and in that way the symptom manages to obtain asecondary  function  and  remains,  as  it  were,  anchored  fast  in  the

patient’s mental life. And so it happens that any one who tries to make

him  well  is  to  his  astonishment  brought  up  against  a  powerful

resistance, which teaches him that the patient’s intention of getting rid

of  his  complaint  is  not  so  entirely  and  completely  serious  as  it

seemed.² Let us imagine a workman, a bricklayer, let us say, who has

fallen off a house and been crippled, and now earns his livelihood by

begging  at  the  street-corner.  Let  us  then  suppose  that  a  miracle-

worker  comes  along  and  promises  him  to  make  his  crooked  leg

straight and capable of walking. It would be unwise, I think, to look

forward  to  seeing  an  expression  of  peculiar  bliss  upon  the  man’s

features. No doubt at the time of the accident he felt he was extremely

unlucky, when he realized that he would never be able to do any more

work and would have to starve or live upon charity. But since then the

very thing which in the first instance threw him out of employment has

become his source of income: he lives by his disablement. If that is

taken  from  him  he  may  become  totally  helpless.  He  has  in  the

meantime forgotten his trade and lost his habits of industry; he has

grown accustomed to idleness, and perhaps to drink as well.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1923:] This is not quite right. The statement that the motives of illness

are not present at the beginning of the illness, but only appear secondarily to it, cannot be
maintained. In the very next paragraph motives for being ill are mentioned which were in
existence  before  the  outbreak  of  illness,  and  were  partly  responsible  for  that  outbreak.  I
subsequently found a better way of meeting the facts, by introducing a distinction between the
primary advantage derived from the illness and the secondary one. The motive for being ill is,
of course, invariably the gaining of some advantage. What follows in the later sentences of
this paragraph applies to the secondary gain. But in every neurotic illness a primary gain has
also  to  be  recognized.  In  the  first  place,  falling  ill  involves  a  saving  of  psychical  effort;  it
emerges as being economically the most convenient solution where there is a mental conflict
(we speak of a ‘flight into illness’), even though in most cases the ineffectiveness of such an
escape becomes manifest at a later stage. This element in the primary gain may be described
as the internal or psychological one, and it is, so to say, a constant one. But beyond this,
external factors (such as in the instance given of the situation of a woman subjugated by her
husband) may contribute motives for falling ill; and these will constitute the external element in
the primary gain.

   ² A man of letters, who incidentally is also a physician - Arthur Schnitzler - has expressed

this piece of knowledge very correctly in his Paracelsus.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1381 

   The motives for being ill often begin to be active even in childhood.

A little girl in her greed for love does not enjoy having to share the

affection of her parents with her brothers and sisters; and she notices

that  the  whole  of  their  affection  is  lavished  on  her  once  more

whenever  she  arouses  their  anxiety  by  falling  ill.  She  has  now

discovered a means of enticing out her parents’ love, and will make

use  of  that  means  as  soon  as  she  has  the  necessary  psychical

material at her disposal for producing an illness. When such a child

has grown up to be a woman she may find all the demands she used

to make in her childhood countered owing to her marriage with an

inconsiderate  husband,  who  may  subjugate  her  will,  mercilessly

exploit her capacity for work, and lavish neither his affection nor his

money upon her. In that case ill-health will be her one weapon for

maintaining her position. It will procure her the care she longs for; it

will  force  her  husband  to  make  pecuniary  sacrifices  for  her  and  to

show her consideration, as he would never have done while she was

well; and it will compel him to treat her with solicitude if she recovers,

for otherwise a relapse will threaten. Her state of ill-health will have

every appearance of being objective and involuntary - the very doctor

who treats her will bear witness to the fact; and for that reason she will

no  need  to  feel  any  conscious  self-reproaches  at  making  such

successful use of a means which she had found effective in her years

of childhood.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1382

 

      And  yet  illnesses  of  this  kind are  the  result  of  intention  for  the

purposes  they  serve  .  They  are  as  a  rule  levelled  at  a  particular

person,  and  consequently  vanish  with  that  person’s  departure.  The

crudest and most commonplace views on the character of hysterical

disorder  -  such  as  are  to  be  heard  from  uneducated  relatives  or

nurses - are in a certain sense right. It is true that the paralysed and

bedridden woman would spring to her feet if a fire were to break out in

her room, and that the spoiled wife would forget all her sufferings if herchild  were  to  fall  dangerously  ill  or  if  some  catastrophe  were  to

threaten the family circumstances. People who speak of the patients

in  this  way  are  right  except  upon  a  single  point:  they  overlook  the

psychological  distinction  between  what  is  conscious  and  what  is

unconscious. This may be permissible where children are concerned,

but  with  adults  it  is  no  longer  possible.  That  is  why  all  these

asseverations  that  it  is  ‘only  a  question  of  willing’  and  all  the

encouragements and abuse that are addressed to the patient are of

no avail. An attempt must first be made by the roundabout methods of

analysis to convince the patient herself of the existence in her of an

intention to be ill.

   It is in combating the motives of illness that the weak point in every

kind of therapeutic treatment of hysteria lies. This in quite generally

true, and it applies equally to psycho-analysis. Destiny has an easier

time  of  it  in  this  respect:  it  need  not  concern  itself  either  with  the

patient’s constitution or with his pathogenic material; it has only to take

away a motive for being ill, and the patient is temporarily or perhaps

even permanently freed from his illness. How many fewer miraculous

cures  and  spontaneous  disappearances  of  symptoms  should  we

physicians have to register in cases of hysteria, if we were more often

given a sight of the human interests which the patient keeps hidden

from us!  In one case, some stated period of time has elapsed; in a

second, consideration for some other person has ceased to operate;

in  a  third,  the  situation  has  been  fundamentally  changed  by  some

external event - and the whole disorder which up till then had shown

the greatest obstinacy, vanishes at a single blow, apparently of its own

accord, but really because it has been deprived of its most powerful

motive, one of the uses to which it has been put in the patient’s life.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1383

 

   Motives that support the patient in being ill are probably to be found

in all fully developed cases. But there are some in which the motives

are  purely  internal  -  such  as  desire  for  self-punishment,  that  is,

penitence  and  remorse.  It  will  be  found  much  easier  to  solve  thetherapeutic problem in such cases than in those in which the illness is

related to the attainment of some external aim. In Dora’s case that aim

was clearly to touch her father’s heart and to detach him from Frau K.

 

      None  of  her  father’s  actions  seemed  to  have  embittered  her  so

much as his readiness to consider the scene by the lake as a product

of her imagination. She was almost beside herself at the idea of its

being  supposed  that  she  had  merely  fancied  something  on  that

occasion.  For  a  long  time  I  was  in  perplexity  as  to  what  the  self-

reproach could be which lay behind her passionate repudiation of this

explanation of the episode. It was justifiable to suspect that there was

something concealed, for a reproach which misses the mark gives no

lasting  offence.  On  the  other  hand,  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that

Dora’s story must correspond to the facts in every respect. No sooner

had  she  grasped  Herr  K.’s  intention  than,  without  letting  him  finish

what he had to say, she had given him a slap in the face and hurried

away. Her behaviour must have seemed as incomprehensible to the

man after she had left him as to us, for he must long before have

gathered from innumerable small signs that he was secure of the girl’s

affections. In our discussion of Dora’s second dream we shall come

upon the solution of this riddle as well as upon the self-reproach which

we have hitherto failed to discover.

   As she kept on repeating her complaints against her father with a

wearisome monotony, and as at the same time her cough continued, I

was  led  to  think  that  this  symptom  might  have  some  meaning  in

connection with her father. And apart from this, the explanation of the

symptom  which  I  had  hitherto  obtained  was  far  from  fulfilling  the

requirements which I am accustomed to make of such explanations.

According to a rule which I had found confirmed over and over again

by experience, though I had not yet ventured to erect it into a general

principle, a symptom signifies the representation - the realization - of a

phantasy with a sexual content, that is to say, it signifies a sexual

situation. It would be better to say that at least one of the meanings of

a  symptom  is  the  representation  of  a  sexual  phantasy,  but  that  no

such limitation is imposed upon the content of its other meanings. Any

one who takes up psycho-analytic work will quickly discover that a

symptom has more than one meaning and serves to represent severalunconscious  mental  processes  simultaneously.  And  I  should  like  to

add  that  in  my  estimation  a  single  unconscious  mental  process  or

phantasy will scarcely ever suffice for the production of a symptom.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1384

 

   An opportunity very soon occurred for interpreting Dora’s nervous

cough in this way by means of an imagined sexual situation. She had

once again been insisting that Frau K. only loved her father because

he was ‘ein vermögender Mann [‘a man of means’]. Certain details of

the way in which she expressed herself (which I pass over here, like

most other purely technical parts of the analysis) led me to see that

behind this phrase its opposite lay concealed, namely, that her father

was ‘ein unvermögender Mann’ [‘a man without means’]. This could

only be meant in a sexual sense - that her father, as a man, was

without means, was impotent.¹ Dora confirmed this interpretation from

her conscious knowledge; whereupon I pointed out the contradiction

she was involved in if on the one hand she continued to insist that her

father’s relation with Frau K. was a common love-affair, and on the

other hand maintained that her father was impotent, or in other words

incapable of carrying on an affair of such a kind. Her answer showed

that she had no need to admit the contradiction. She knew very well,

she  said,  that  there  was  more  than  one  way  of  obtaining  sexual

gratification. (The source of this piece of knowledge, however, was

once  more  untraceable.)  I  questioned  her  further,  whether  she

referred to the use of organs other than the genitals for the purpose of

sexual intercourse, and she replied in the affirmative. I could then go

on to say that in that case she must be thinking of precisely those

parts of the body which in her case were in a state of irritation, - the

throat and the oral cavity. To be sure, she would not hear of going so

far  as  this  in  recognizing  her  own  thoughts;  and  indeed,  if  the

occurrence of the symptom was to be made possible at all, it was

essential that she should not be completely clear on the subject. But

the conclusion was inevitable that with her spasmodic cough, which,

as is usual, was referred for its exciting stimulus to a tickling in herthroat, she pictured to herself a scene of sexual gratification per os

between  the  two  people  whose  love-affair  occupied  her  mind  so

incessantly.  A  very  short  time  after  she  had  tacitly  accepted  this

explanation  her  cough  vanished  -  which  fitted  in  very  well  with  my

view; but I do not wish to lay too much stress upon this development,

since her cough had so often before disappeared spontaneously.

 

   ¹ [‘Unvermögend’ means literally ‘unable’, and is commonly used in the sense of both ‘not

rich’ and ‘impotent’.]
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1385

 

 

   This short piece of the analysis may perhaps have excited in the

medical reader - apart from the scepticism to which he is entitled -

feelings of astonishment and horror; and I am prepared at this point to

look  into  these  two  reactions  so  as  to  discover  whether  they  are

justifiable. The astonishment is probably caused by my daring to talk

about such delicate and unpleasant subjects to a young girl - or, for

that  matter,  to  any  woman  who  is  sexually  active.  The  horror  is

aroused, no doubt, by the possibility that an inexperienced girl could

know about practices of such a kind and could occupy her imagination

with them. I would advise recourse to moderation and reasonableness

upon both points. There is no cause for indignation either in the one

case or in the other. It is possible for a man to talk to girls and women

upon  sexual  matters  of  every  kind  without  doing  them  harm  and

without bringing suspicion upon himself, so long as, in the first place,

he adopts a particular way of doing it, and, in the second place, can

make them feel convinced that it is unavoidable. A gynaecologist, after

all, under the same conditions, does not hesitate to make them submit

to  uncovering  every  possible  part  of  their  body.  The  best  way  of

speaking about such things is to be dry and direct; and that is at the

same time the method furthest removed from the prurience with which

the  same  subjects  are  handled  in  ‘society’,  and  to  which  girls  and

women alike are so thoroughly accustomed. I call bodily organs and

processes by their technical names, and I tell these to the patient ifthey - the names, I mean - happen to be unknown to her. J’appelle un

chat un chat. I have certainly heard of some people - doctors and

laymen  -  who  are  scandalized  by  a  therapeutic  method  in  which

conversations of this sort occur, and who appear to envy either me or

my  patients  the  titillation  which,  according  to  their  notions,  such  a

method  must  afford.  But  I  am  too  well  acquainted  with  the

respectability of these gentry to excite myself over them. I shall avoid

the temptation of writing a satire upon them. But there is one thing that

I will mention: often, after I have for some time treated a patient who

had not at first found it easy to be open about sexual matters, I have

had  the  satisfaction  of  hearing  her  exclaim:  ‘Why,  after  all,  your

treatment is far more respectable than Mr. X.’s conversation!’

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1386

 

   No one can undertake the treatment of a case of hysteria until he is

convinced  of  the  impossibility  of  avoiding  the  mention  of  sexual

subjects, or unless he is prepared to allow himself to be convinced by

experience. The right attitude is: ‘pour faire une omlette il faut casser

des oeufs.’ The patients themselves are easy to convince; and there

are  only  too  many  opportunities  of  doing  so  in  the  course  of  the

treatment.  There  is  no  necessity  for  feeling  any  compunction  at

discussing the facts of normal or abnormal sexual life with them. With

the  exercise  of  a  little  caution  all  that  is  done  is  to  translate  into

conscious  ideas  what  was  already  known  in  the  unconscious;  and,

after all, the whole effectiveness of the treatment is based upon our

knowledge that the affect attached to an unconscious idea operates

more strongly and, since it cannot be inhibited, more injuriously than

the affect attached to a conscious one. There is never any danger of

corrupting an inexperienced girl. For where there is no knowledge of

sexual processes even in the unconscious, no hysterical symptom will

arise; and where hysteria is found there can no longer be any question

of ‘innocence of mind’ in the sense in which parents and educators

use the phrase. With children of ten, of twelve, or of fourteen, with

boys  and  girls  alike,  I  have  satisfied  myself  that  the  truth  of  thisstatement can invariably be relied upon.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1387

 

      As  regards  the  second  kind  of  emotional  reaction,  which  is  not

directed against me this time, but against my patient - supposing that

my view of her is correct - and which regards the perverse nature of

her  phantasies  as  horrible,  I  should  like  to  say  emphatically  that  a

medical  man  has  no  business  to  indulge  in  such  passionate

condemnation.  I  may  also  remark  in  passing  that  it  seems  to  me

superfluous for a physician who is writing upon the aberrations of the

sexual  instincts  to  seize  every  opportunity  of  inserting  into  the  text

expressions of his personal repugnance at such revolting things. We

are  faced  by  a  fact;  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  we  shall  grow

accustomed to it, when we have put our own tastes on one side. We

must  learn  to  speak  without  indignation  of  what  we  call  the  sexual

perversions - instances in which the sexual function has extended its

limits  in  respect  either  to  the  part  of  the  body  concerned  or  to  the

sexual object chosen. The uncertainty in regard to the boundaries of

what is to be called normal sexual life, when we take different races

and different epochs into account, should in itself be enough to cool

the zealot’s ardour. We surely ought not to forget that the perversion

which is the most repellent to us, the sensual love of a man for a man,

was not only tolerated by a people so far our superiors in cultivation as

were the Greeks, but was actually entrusted by them with important

social functions. The sexual life of each one of us extends to a slight

degree - now in this direction, now in that - beyond the narrow lines

imposed  as  the  standard  of  normality.  The  perversions  are  neither

bestial nor degenerate in the emotional sense of the word. They are a

development  of  germs  all  of  which  are  contained  in  the

undifferentiated sexual disposition of the child, and which, by being

suppressed or by being diverted to higher, asexual aims - by being

‘sublimated’ - are destined to provide the energy for a great number of

our cultural achievements. When, therefore, any one has become a

gross and manifest pervert, it would be more correct to say that hehas remained  one,  for  he  exhibits  a  certain  stage  of inhibited

development. All psychoneurotics are persons with strongly marked

perverse tendencies, which have been repressed in the course of their

development  and  have  become  unconscious.  Consequently  their

unconscious phantasies  show  precisely  the  same  content  as  the

documentarily recorded actions of perverts - even though they have

not  read  Krafft-Ebing’s Psychopathia  Sexualis,  to  which  simple-

minded people attribute such a large share of the responsibility for the

production of perverse tendencies. Psychoneuroses are, so to speak,

the negative  of  perversions.  In  neurotics  their  sexual  constitution,

under  which  the  effects  of  heredity  are  included,  operates  in

combination  with  any  accidental  influences  in  their  life  which  may

disturb the development of normal sexuality. A stream of water which

meets with an obstacle in the river-bed is dammed up and flows back

into old channels which had formerly seemed fated to run dry. The

motive forces leading to the formation of hysterical symptoms draw

their strength not only from repressed normal sexuality but also from

unconscious perverse activities.¹

 

   ¹ These remarks upon the sexual perversions had been written some years before the

appearance  of  Bloch’s  excellent  book  (Beiträge  zur  Äetiologie  der  Psychopathia  sexualis,
1902 and 1903). See also my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality, published this year.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1388

 

      The  less  repellent  of  the  so-called  sexual  perversions  are  very

widely  diffused  among  the  whole  population,  as  every  one  knows

except medical writers upon the subject. Or, I should rather say, they

know it too; only they take care to forget it at the moment when they

take up their pens to write about it. So it is not to be wondered at that

this hysterical girl of nearly nineteen, who had heard of the occurrence

of such a method of sexual intercourse ( sucking at the male organ),

should  have  developed  an  unconscious  phantasy  of  this  sort  and

should have given it expression by an irritation in her throat and by

coughing. Nor would it have been very extraordinary if she had arrived

at such a phantasy even without having had any enlightenment fromexternal  sources  -  an  occurrence  which  I  have  quite  certainly

observed in other patients. For in her case a noteworthy fact afforded

the necessary somatic prerequisite for this independent creation of a

phantasy  which  would  coincide  with  the  practices  of  perverts.  She

remembered very well that in her childhood she had been a thumb-

sucker. Her father, too recollected breaking her of the habit after it had

persisted into her fourth or fifth year. Dora herself had a clear picture

of a scene from her early childhood in which she was sitting on the

floor in a corner sucking her left thumb and at the same time tugging

with her right hand at the lobe of her brother’s ear as he sat quietly

beside her. Here we have an instance of the complete form of self-

gratification by sucking, as it has also been described to me by other

patients, who had subsequently become anaesthetic and hysterical.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1389

 

   One of these patients gave me a piece of information which sheds a

clear light on the origin of this curious habit. This young woman had

never broken herself of the habit of sucking. She retained a memory of

her childhood, dating back, according to her, to the first half of her

second year, in which she saw herself sucking at her nurse’s breast

and at the same time pulling rhythmically at the lobe of her nurse’s

ear.  No  one  will  feel  inclined  to  dispute,  I  think,  that  the  mucous

membrane  of  the  lips  and  mouth  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  primary

‘erotogenic zone’, since it preserves this earlier significance in the act

of kissing, which is looked upon as normal. An intense activity of this

erotogenic  zone  at  an  early  age  thus  determines  the  subsequent

presence of a somatic compliance on the part of the tract of mucous

membrane which begins at the lips. Thus, at a time when the sexual

object proper, that is, the male organ, has already become known,

circumstances may arise which once more increase the excitation of

the  oral  zone,  whose  erotogenic  character  has,  as  we  have  seen,

been retained. It then needs very little creative power to substitute the

sexual object of the moment (the penis) for the original object (the

nipple) or for the finger which does duty for it, and to place the currentsexual  object  in  the  situation  in  which  gratification  was  originally

obtained.  So  we  see  that  this  excessively  repulsive  and  perverted

phantasy of sucking at a penis has the most innocent origin. It is a

new version of what may be described as a prehistoric impression of

sucking at the mother’s or nurse’s breast - an impression which has

usually been revived by contact with children who are being nursed. In

most instances a cow’s udder has aptly played the part of an image

intermediate between a nipple and a penis.

 

   The interpretation we have just been discussing of Dora’s throat

symptoms may also give rise to a further remark. It may be asked how

this sexual situation imagined by her can be compatible with our other

explanation of the symptoms. That explanation, it will be remembered,

was to the effect that the coming and going of the symptoms reflected

the presence and absence of the man she was in love with, and, as

regards  his  wife’s  behaviour,  expressed  the  following  thought:  ‘If I

were his wife, I should love him in quite a different way; I should be ill

(from longing, let us say) when he was away, and well (from joy) when

he was home again.’ To this objection I must reply that my experience

in  the  clearing-up  of  hysterical  symptoms  has  shown  that  it  is  not

necessary for the various meanings of a symptom to be compatible

with one another, that is, to fit together into a connected whole. It is

enough  that  the  unity  should  be  constituted  by  the  subject-matter

which has given rise to all the various phantasies. In the present case,

moreover, compatibility even of the first kind is not out of the question.

One of the two meanings is related more to the cough, and the other

to the aphonia and the periodicity of the disorder. A closer analysis

would  probably  have  disclosed  a  far  greater  number  of  mental

elements in relation to the details of the illness.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1390

 

   We have already learnt that it quite regularly happens that a single

symptom corresponds to several meanings simultaneously. We may

now add that it can express several meanings in succession. In thecourse  of  years  a  symptom  can  change  its  meaning  or  its  chief

meaning, or the leading role can pass from one meaning to another. It

is  as  though  there  were  a  conservative  trait  in  the  character  of

neuroses which ensures that a symptom that has once been formed

shall if possible be retained, even though the unconscious thought to

which it gave expression has lost its meaning . Moreover, there is no

difficulty  in  explaining  this  tendency  towards  the  retention  of  a

symptom upon a mechanical basis. The production of a symptom of

this kind is so difficult, the translation of a purely psychical excitation

into physical terms - the process which I have called ‘conversion’ -

depends on the concurrence of so many favourable conditions, the

somatic  compliance  necessary  for  conversion  is  so  seldom

forthcoming,  that  an  impulsion  towards  the  discharge  of  an

unconscious excitation will so far as possible make use of any channel

for discharge which may already be in existence. It appears to be far

more  difficult  to  create  a  fresh  conversion  than  to  form  paths  of

association between a new thought which is in need of discharge and

the old one which is no longer in need of it. The current flows along

these  paths  from  the  new  source  of  excitation  to  the  old  point  of

discharge - pouring into the symptom, in the words of the Gospel, like

new wine into an old bottle. These remarks would make it seem that

the somatic side of a hysterical symptom is the more stable of the two

and  the  harder  to  replace,  while  the  psychical  side  is  a  variable

element  for  which  a  substitute  can  more  easily  be  found.  Yet  we

should not try to infer anything from this comparison as regards the

relative  importance  of  the  two  elements.  From  the  point  of  view  of

mental  therapeutics  the  mental  side  must  always  be  the  more

significant.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1391

 

 

   Dora’s incessant repetition of the same thoughts about her father’s

relations with Frau K. made it possible to derive still further important

material from the analysis.   A train of thought such as this may be described as excessively

intense,  or  better reinforced,  or  ‘supervalent’  [‘überwertig’]  in

Wernicke’s sense. It shows its pathological character in spite of its

apparently  reasonable  content,  by  the  single  peculiarity  that  no

amount of conscious and voluntary effort of thought on the patient’s

part  is  able  to  dissipate  or  remove  it.  A  normal  train  of  thought,

however intense it may be, can eventually be disposed of. Dora felt

quite rightly that her thoughts about her father required to be judged in

a special way. ‘I can think of nothing else’, she complained again and

again. ‘I know my brother says we children have no right to criticize

this behaviour of Father’s. He declares that we ought not to trouble

ourselves about it, and ought even to be glad, perhaps, that he has

found a woman he can love, since Mother understands him so little. I

can quite see that, and I should like to think the same as my brother,

but I can’t. I can’t forgive him for it.’¹

   Now what is one to do in the face of a supervalent thought like this,

after one has heard what its conscious grounds are and listened to the

ineffectual protests made against it? Reflection will suggest that this

excessively intense train of thought must owe its reinforcement to the

unconscious.  It  cannot  be  resolved  by  any  effort  of  thought,  either

because  it  itself  reaches  with  its  root  down  into  unconscious,

repressed  material,  or  because  another  unconscious  thought  lies

concealed  behind  it.  In  the  latter  case,  the  concealed  thought  is

usually the direct contrary of the supervalent one. Contrary thoughts

are always closely connected with each other and are often paired off

in such a way that the one thought is excessively intensely conscious

while  its  counterpart  is  repressed  and  unconscious.  This  relation

between the two thoughts is an effect of the process of repression. For

repression is often achieved by means of an excessive reinforcement

of  the  thought  contrary  to  the  one  which  is  to  be  repressed.  This

process I call reactive reinforcement, and the thought which asserts

itself with excessive intensity in consciousness and (in the same way

as a prejudice) cannot be removed I call a reactive thought. The two

thoughts then act towards each other much like the two needles of an

astatic  galvanometer.  The  reactive  thought  keeps  the  objectionable

one under repression by means of a certain surplus of intensity; but

for that reason it itself is ‘damped’ and proof against conscious effortsof thought. So that the way to deprive the excessively intense thought

of  its  reinforcement  is  by  bringing  its  repressed  contrary  into

consciousness.

 

   ¹ A supervalent thought of this kind is often the only symptom, beyond deep depression, of

a pathological condition which is usually described as ‘melancholia’, but which can be cleared
up by psycho-analysis like a hysteria.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1392

 

      We  must  also  be  prepared  to  meet  with  instances  in  which  the

supervalence of a thought is due not to the presence of one only of

these  two  causes  but  to  a  concurrence  of  both  of  them.  Other

complications, too, may arise, but they can easily be fitted into the

general scheme.

 

   Let us now apply our theory to the instance provided by Dora’s case.

We will begin with the first hypothesis, namely, that her preoccupation

with her father’s relations to Frau K, owed its obsessive character to

the fact that its root was unknown to her and lay in the unconscious. It

is not difficult to divine the nature of that root from her circumstances

and her conduct. Her behaviour obviously went far beyond what would

have been appropriate to filial concern. She felt and acted more like a

jealous wife - in a way which would have been comprehensible in her

mother.  By  her  ultimatum  to  her  father  (‘either  her  or  me’),  by  the

scenes she used to make, by the suicidal intentions she allowed to

transpire, - by all this she was clearly putting herself in her mother’s

place. If we have rightly guessed the nature of the imaginary sexual

situation which underlay her cough, in that phantasy she must have

been putting herself in Frau K.’s place. She was therefore identifying

herself both with the woman her father had once loved and with the

woman he loved now. The inference is obvious that her affection for

her father was a much stronger one than she knew or than she would

have cared to admit: in fact, that she was in love with him.

                 Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1393

 

   I have learnt to look upon unconscious love relations like this (which

are marked by their abnormal consequences) - between a father and

a daughter, or between a mother and a son - as a revival of germs of

feeling in infancy. I have shown at length elsewhere¹ at what an early

age sexual attraction makes itself felt between parents and children,

and I have explained that the legend of Oedipus is probably to be

regarded as a poetical rendering of what is typical in these relations.

Distinct traces are probably to be found in most people of an early

partiality of this kind - on the part of a daughter for her father, or on the

part  of  a  son  for  his  mother;  but  it  must  be  assumed  to  be  more

intense  from  the  very  first  in  the  case  of  those  children  whose

constitution  marks  them  down  for  a  neurosis,  who  develop

prematurely and have a craving for love. At this point certain other

influences, which need not be discussed here, come into play, and

lead  to  a  fixation  of  this  rudimentary  feeling  of  love  or  to  a

reinforcement  of  it;  so  that  it  turns  into  something  (either  while  the

child is still young or not until it has reached the age of puberty) which

must  be  put  on  a  par  with  a  sexual  inclination  and  which,  like  the

latter, has the forces of the libido at its command.² The nature of her

disposition  had  always  drawn  her  towards  her  father,  and  his

numerous illnesses were bound to have increased her affection for

him.  In  some  of  these  illnesses  he  would  allow  no  one  but  her  to

discharge the lighter duties of nursing. He had been so proud of the

early growth of her intelligence that he had made her his confidante

while she was still a child. It was really she and not her mother whom

Frau K.’s appearance had driven out of more than one position.

 

   ¹ In my Interpretation of Dreams, 1900a, and in the third of my Three Essays, 1905d.

   ² The decisive factor in this connection is no doubt the early appearance of true genital

sensations, either spontaneously or as a result of seduction or masturbation. (See below.)
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1394

    When I told Dora that I could not avoid supposing that her affection

for  her  father  must  at  a  very  early  moment  have  amounted  to  her

being completely in love with him, she of course gave me her usual

reply: ‘I don’t remember that.’ But she immediately went on to tell me

something analogous about a seven-year-old girl who was her cousin

(on her mother’s side) and in whom she often thought she saw a kind

of reflection of her own childhood. This little girl had (not for the first

time) been the witness of a heated dispute between her parents, and,

when Dora happened to come in on a visit soon afterwards, whispered

in her ear: ‘You can’t think how I hate that person!’ (pointing to her

mother), ‘and when she’s dead I shall marry Daddy.’ I am in the habit

of regarding associations such as this, which bring forward something

that agrees with the content of an assertion of mine, as a confirmation

from the unconscious of what I have said. No other kind of ‘Yes’ can

be extracted from the unconscious; there is no such thing at all as an

unconscious ‘No’.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1923:] There is another very remarkable and entirely trustworthy form of

confirmation from the unconscious, which I had not recognized at the time this was written:
namely, an exclamation on the part of the patient of ‘I didn’t think that’, or ‘I didn’t think of that’.
This can be translated point-blank into: ‘Yes, I was unconscious of that.’
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1395

 

 

   For years on end she had given no expression to this passion for

her  father.  On  the  contrary,  she  had  for  a  long  time  been  on  the

closest terms with the woman who had supplanted her with her father,

and she had actually, as we know from her self-reproaches, facilitated

this woman’s relations with her father. Her own love for her father had

therefore been recently revived; and, if so, the question arises to what

end  this  had  happened.  Clearly  as  a  reactive  symptom,  so  as  to

suppress  something  else  -  something,  that  is,  that  still  exercised

power in the unconscious. Considering how things stood, I could not

help supposing in the first instance that what was suppressed in this

manner was her love of Herr K. I could not avoid the assumption thatshe was still in love with him, but that, for unknown reasons, since the

scene  by  the  lake  her  love  had  aroused  in  her  violent  feelings  of

opposition, and that the girl had brought forward and reinforced her

old affection for her father in order to avoid and further necessity for

paying conscious attention to the love which she had felt in the first

years of her girlhood and which had now become distressing to her. In

this way I gained an insight into a conflict which was well calculated to

unhinge the girl’s mind. On the one hand she was filled with regret at

having rejected the man’s proposal, and with longing for his company

and all the little signs of his affection; while on the other hand these

feelings of tenderness and longing were combated by powerful forces,

amongst which her pride was one of the most obvious. Thus she had

succeeded in persuading herself that she had done with Herr K. - that

was the advantage she derived from this typical process of repression;

and yet she was obliged to summon up her infantile affection for her

father  and  to  exaggerate  it,  in  order  to  protect  herself  against  the

feelings  of  love  which  were  constantly  pressing  forward  into

consciousness.  The  further  fact  that  she  was  almost  incessantly  a

prey to the most embittered jealousy seemed to admit of still another

determination.¹

 

   ¹ We shall come upon this.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1396

 

      My  expectations  were  by  no  means  disappointed  when  this

explanation of mine was met by Dora with a most emphatic negative.

The  ‘No’    uttered  by  a  patient  after  a  repressed  thought  has  been

presented to his conscious perception for the first time does no more

than register the existence of a repression and its severity; it acts, as it

were, as a gauge of the repression’s strength. If this ‘No’, instead of

being regarded as the expression of an impartial judgement (of which,

indeed, the patient is incapable), is ignored, and if work is continued,

the  first  evidence  soon  begins  to  appear  that  in  such  a  case  ‘No’ 

signifies the desired ‘Yes’. Dora admitted that she found it impossible

to be as angry with Herr K. as he had deserved. She told me that oneday she had met Herr K. in the street while she was walking with a

cousin of hers who did not know him. The other girl had exclaimed all

at once: ‘Why, Dora, what’s wrong with you? You’ve gone as white as

a sheet!’ She herself had felt nothing of this change of colour; but I

explained  to  her  that  the  expression  of  emotion  and  the  play  of

features obey the unconscious rather than the conscious, and are a

means of betraying the former.¹ Another time Dora came to me in the

worst of tempers after having been uniformly cheerful for several days.

She could give no explanation of this. She felt so contrary to-day, she

said; it was her uncle’s birthday, and she could not bring herself to

congratulate him, she did not know why. My powers of interpretation

were at a low ebb that day; I let her go on talking, and she suddenly

recollected that it was Herr K.’s birthday too - a fact which I did not fail

to use against her. And it was then no longer hard to explain why the

handsome  presents  she  had  had  on  her  own  birthday  a  few  days

before had given her no pleasure. One gift was missing, and that was

Herr K.’s, the gift which had plainly once been the most prized of all.

   Nevertheless Dora persisted in denying my contention for some time

longer, until, towards the end of the analysis, the conclusive proof of

its correctness came to light.

 

   ¹ Compare the lines:

                Ruhig mag ich Euch erscheinen,
                Ruhig gehen sehn.
 
                [Quiet can I watch thy coming,
                Quiet watch thee go.]
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1397

 

 

   I must now turn to consider a further complication to which I should

certainly give no space if I were a man of letters engaged upon the

creation of a mental state like this for a short story, instead of being a

medical  man  engaged  upon  its  dissection.  The  element  to  which  I

must now allude can only serve to obscure and efface the outlines of

the fine poetic conflict which we have been able to ascribe to Dora.This element would rightly fall a sacrifice to the censorship of a writer,

for  he,  after  all,  simplifies  and  abstracts  when  he  appears  in  the

character  of  a  psychologist.  But  in  the  world  of  reality,  which  I  am

trying to depict here, a complication of motives, an accumulation and

conjunction of mental activities - in a word, overdetermination - is the

rule.  For  behind  Dora’s  supervalent  train  of  thought  which  was

concerned with her father’s relations with Frau K. there lay concealed

a feeling of jealousy which had that lady as its object - a feeling, that

is, which could only be based upon an affection on Dora’s part for one

of her own sex. It has long been known and often been pointed out

that at the age of puberty boys and girls show clear signs, even in

normal cases, of the existence of an affection for people of their own

sex.  A  romantic  and  sentimental  friendship  with  one  of  her  school

friends,  accompanied  by  vows,  kisses,  promises  of  eternal

correspondence,  and  all  the  sensibility  of  jealousy,  is  the  common

precursor of a girl’s first serious passion for a man. Thenceforward, in

favourable  circumstances,  the  homosexual  current  of  feeling  often

runs completely dry. But if a girl is not happy in her love for a man, the

current is often set flowing again by the libido in later years and is

increased up to a greater or lesser degree of intensity. If this much

can be established without difficulty of healthy persons, and if we take

into account what has already been said about the fuller development

in neurotics of the normal germs of perversion, we shall expect to find

in these latter too a fairly strong homosexual predisposition. It must,

indeed, be so; for I have never yet come through a single psycho-

analysis of a man or a woman without having to take into account a

very  considerable  current  of  homosexuality.  When,  in  a  hysterical

woman or girl, the sexual libido which is directed towards men has

been energetically suppressed, it will regularly be found that the libido

which is directed towards women has become vicariously reinforced

and even to some extent conscious.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1398

 

   I shall not in this place go any further into this important subject,which is especially indispensable to an understanding of hysteria in

men, because Dora’s analysis came to an end before it could throw

any light on this side of her mental life. But I should like to recall the

governess, whom I have already mentioned, and with whom Dora had

at first enjoyed the closest interchange of thought, until she discovered

that she was being admired and fondly treated not for her own sake

but  for  her  father’s;  whereupon  she  had  obliged  the  governess  to

leave. She used also to dwell with noticeable frequency and a peculiar

emphasis  on  the  story  of  another  estrangement  which  appeared

inexplicable even to herself. She had always been on particularly good

terms with the younger of her two cousins the girl who had later on

become engaged - and had shared all sorts of secrets with her. When,

for the first time after Dora had broken off her stay by the lake, her

father was going back to B--, she had naturally refused to go with him.

This cousin had then been asked to travel with him instead, and she

had accepted the invitation. From that time forward Dora had felt a

coldness  towards  her,  and  she  herself  was  surprised  to  find  how

indifferent she had become, although, as she admitted, she had very

little  ground  for  complaint  against  her.  These  instances  of

sensitiveness led me to inquire what her relations with Frau K. had

been up till the time of the breach. I then found that the young woman

and the scarcely grown girl had lived for years on a footing of the

closest intimacy. When Dora stayed with the K.’s she used to share a

bedroom  with  Frau  K.,  and  the  husband  used  to  be  quartered

elsewhere. She had been the wife’s confidante and adviser in all the

difficulties of her married life. There was nothing they had not talked

about.  Medea  had  been  quite  content  that  Creusa  should  make

friends with her two children; and she certainly did nothing to interfere

with the relations between the girl and the children’s father. How Dora

managed to fall in love with the man about whom her beloved friend

had  so  many  bad  things  to  say  is  an  interesting  psychological

problem.  We  shall  not  be  far  from  solving  it  when  we  realize  that

thoughts in the unconscious live very comfortably side by side, and

even contraries get on together without disputes - a state of things

which persists often enough even in the conscious.

                 Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1399

 

   When Dora talked about Frau K., she used to praise her ‘adorable

white body’ in accents more appropriate to a lover than to a defeated

rival. Another time she told me, more in sorrow than in anger, that she

was  convinced  the  presents  her  father  had  brought  her  had  been

chosen by Frau K., for she recognized her taste. Another time, again,

she pointed out that, evidently through the agency of Frau K., she had

been given a present of some jewellery which was exactly like some

that she had seen in Frau K.’s possession and had wished for aloud at

the time. Indeed, I can say in general that I never heard her speak a

harsh or angry word against the lady, although from the point of view

of her supervalent thought she should have regarded her as the prime

author of her misfortunes. She seemed to behave inconsequently; but

her  apparent  inconsequence  was  precisely  the  manifestation  of  a

complicating  current  of  feeling.  For  how  had  this  woman  to  whom

Dora was so enthusiastically devoted behaved to her? After Dora had

brought forward her accusation against Herr K., and her father had

written to him and had asked for an explanation, Herr K. had replied in

the first instance by protesting sentiments of the highest esteem for

her and by proposing that he should come to the manufacturing town

to  clear  up  every  misunderstanding.  A  few  weeks  later,  when  her

father  spoke  to  him  at  B--,  there  was  no  longer  any  question  of

esteem. On the contrary, Herr K. spoke of her with disparagement,

and produced as his trump card the reflection that no girl who read

such books and was interested in such things could have any title to a

man’s  respect.  Frau  K.,  therefore,  had  betrayed  her  and  had

calumniated  her;  for  it  had  only  been  with  her  that  she  had  read

Mantegazza  and  discussed  forbidden  topics.  It  was  a  repetition  of

what had happened with the governess: Frau K. had not loved her for

her own sake but on account of her father. Frau K. had sacrificed her

without  a  moment’s  hesitation  so  that  her  relations  with  her  father

might not be disturbed. This mortification touched her, perhaps, more

nearly and had a greater pathogenic effect than the other one, which

she  tried  to  use  as  a  screen  for  it,  -  the  fact  that  she  had  been

sacrificed by her father. Did not the obstinacy with which she retainedthe  particular  amnesia  concerning  the  sources  of  her  forbidden

knowledge point directly to the great emotional importance for her of

the accusation against her upon that score, and consequently to her

betrayal by her friend?

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1400

 

   I believe, therefore, that I am not mistaken in supposing that Dora’s

supervalent train of thought, which was concerned with her father’s

relations  with  Frau  K.,  was  designed  not  only  for  the  purpose  of

suppressing her love for Herr K., which had once been conscious, but

also to conceal her love for Frau K., which was in a deeper sense

unconscious. The supervalent train of thought was directly contrary to

the latter current of feeling. She told herself incessantly that her father

had sacrificed her to this woman, and made noisy demonstrations to

show that she grudged her the possession of her father; and in this

was she concealed from herself the contrary fact, which was that she

grudged her father Frau K.’s love, and had not forgiven the woman

she  loved  for  the  disillusionment  she  had  been  caused  by  her

betrayal.  The  jealous  emotions  of  a  woman  were  linked  in  the

unconscious with a jealousy such as might have been felt by a man.

These masculine or, more properly speaking, gynaecophilic currents

of feeling are to be regarded as typical of the unconscious erotic life of

hysterical girls.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1401

 

                                            II

 

                                THE FIRST DREAM

 

   Just at a moment when there was a prospect that the material that

was coming up for analysis would throw light upon an obscure point in

Dora’s childhood, she reported that a few nights earlier she had onceagain had a dream which she had already dreamt in exactly the same

way on many previous occasions. A periodically recurrent dream was

by its very nature particularly well calculated to arouse my curiosity;

and in any case it was justifiable in the interests of the treatment to

consider the way in which the dream worked into the analysis as a

whole.  I  therefore  determined  to  make  an  especially  careful

investigation of it.

   Here is the dream as related by Dora: ‘A house was on fire.¹ My

father  was  standing  beside  my  bed  and  woke  me  up.  I  dressed

quickly. Mother wanted to stop and save her jewel-case; but Father

said: "I refuse to let myself and my two children be burnt for the sake

of  your  jewel-case."  We  hurried  downstairs,  and  as  soon  as  I  was

outside I woke up.’

   As the dream was a recurrent one, I naturally asked her when she

had  first  dreamt  it.  She  told  me  she  did  not  know.  But  she

remembered having had the dream three nights in succession at L--

(the place on the lake where the scene with Herr K. had taken place ),

and  it  had  now  come  back  again  a  few  nights  earlier,  here.²  My

expectations  from  the  clearing-up  of  the  dream  were  naturally

heightened when I heard of its connection with the events at L--. But I

wanted to discover first what had been the exciting cause of its recent

recurrence, and I therefore asked Dora to take the dream bit by bit

and tell me what occurred to her in connection with it. She had already

had  some  training  in  dream-interpretation  from  having  previously

analysed a few minor specimens.

 

   ¹ In answer to an inquiry Dora told me that there had never really been a fire at their house.

   ² The content of the dream makes it possible to establish that it in fact  occurred for the first

time at L--.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1402

 

   ‘Something occurs to me,’ she said, ‘but it cannot belong to the

dream, for it is quite recent, whereas I have certainly had the dream

before.’

   ‘That makes no difference,’ I replied. ‘Start away! It will simply turnout to be the most recent thing that fits in with the dream.’

   ‘Very well, then. Father has been having a dispute with Mother in the

last few days, because she locks the dining-room door at night. My

brother’s room, you see, has no separate entrance, but can only be

reached through the dining-room. Father does not want my brother to

be locked in like that at night. He says it will not do: something might

happen in the night so that it might be necessary to leave the room.’

   ‘And that made you think of the risk of fire?’

   ‘Yes.’

   ‘Now, I should like you to pay close attention to the exact words you

used. We may have to come back to them. You said that "something

might happen in the night so that it might be necessary to leave the

room".’

      But  Dora  had  now  discovered  the  connecting  link  between  the

recent  exciting  cause  of  the  dream  and  the  original  one,  for  she

continued:

   ‘When we arrived at L-- that time, Father and I, he openly said he

was afraid of fire. We arrived in a violent thunderstorm, and saw the

small wooden house without any lightning-conductor. So his anxiety

was quite natural.’

   What I now had to do was to establish the relation between the

events at L-- and the recurrent dreams which she had had there. I

therefore said: ‘Did you have the dream during your first nights at L--

or during your last ones? in other words, before or after the scene in

the  wood  by  the  lake  of  which  we  have  heard  so  much?’  (I  must

explain that I knew that the scene had not occurred on the very first

day, and that she had remained at L-- for a few days after it without

giving any hint of the incident.)

 

   ¹ I laid stress on these words because they took me aback. They seemed to have an

ambiguous ring about them. Are not certain physical needs referred to in the same words? 
Now, in a line of associations ambiguous words (or, as we may call them, ‘switch-words’) act
like points at a junction. If the points are switched across from the position in which they
appear to lie in the dream, then we find ourselves on another set of rails; and along this
second track run the thoughts which we are in search of but which still lie concealed behind
the dream.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria                                                                                      1403

 

   Her first reply was that she did not know, but after a while she

added: ‘Yes. I think it was after the scene.’

   So now I knew that the dream was a reaction to that experience. But

why had it recurred there three times? I continued my questions: ‘How

long did you stop on at L-- after the scene?’

   ‘Four more nights. On the following day I went away with Father.’

   ‘Now I am certain that the dream was an immediate effect of your

experience with Herr K. It was at L-- that you dreamed it for the first

time, and not before. You have only introduced this uncertainty in your

memory  so  as  to  obliterate  the  connection  in  your  mind.¹  But  the

figures do not quite fit in to my satisfaction yet. If you stayed at L-- for

four nights longer, the dream might have occurred four times over.

Perhaps this was so?’

   She no longer disputed my contention; but instead of answering my

question she proceeded:² ‘In the afternoon after our trip on the lake,

from which we (Herr K. and I) returned at midday, I had gone to lie

down as usual on the sofa in the bed room to have a short sleep. I

suddenly awoke and saw Herr K. standing beside me . . .’

   ‘In fact, just as you saw your father standing beside your bed in the

dream?’

   ‘Yes. I asked him sharply what it was he wanted there. By way of

reply he said he was not going to be prevented from coming into his

own  bedroom  when  he  wanted;  besides,  there  was  something  he

wanted to fetch. This episode put me on my guard, and I asked Frau

K.  whether  there  was  not  a  key  to  the  bedroom  door.  The  next

morning I locked myself in while I was dressing. That afternoon, when

I wanted to lock myself in so as to lie down again on the sofa, the key

was gone. I was convinced that Herr K. had removed it.’

   ‘Then here we have the theme of locking or not locking a room

which  appeared  in  the  first  association  to  the  dream  and  also

happened to occur in the exciting cause of the recent recurrence of

the dream.³ I wonder whether the phrase "I dressed quickly" may not

also belong to this context?’

 

   ¹ Compare what was said on p. 1359 on the subject of doubt accompanying a recollection.   ² This was because a fresh piece of material had to emerge from her memory before the

question I had put could be answered.

   ³ I suspected, though I did not as yet say so to Dora, that she had seized upon this element

on account of a symbolic meaning which it possessed. ‘Zimmer’ [‘room’] in dreams stands
very frequently for ‘Frauenzimmer’ [a slightly derogatory word for ‘woman’; literally, ‘women’s
apartments’]. The question whether a woman is ‘open’ or ‘shut’ can naturally not be a matter
of indifference. It is well known, too, what sort of ‘key’ effects the opening in such a case.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1404

 

   ‘It was then that I made up my mind not to stop on with the K.’s

without Father. On the subsequent mornings I could not help feeling

afraid that Herr K. would surprise me while I was dressing: so I always

dressed very quickly. You see, Father lived at the hotel, and Frau K.

used always to go out early so as to go on expeditions with him. But

Herr K. did not annoy me again.’

   ‘I understand. On the afternoon of the day after the scene in the

wood you formed your intention of escaping from his persecution, and

during the second, third, and fourth nights you had time to repeat that

intention in your sleep. (You already knew on the second afternoon -

before the dream, therefore - that you would not have the key on the

following morning to lock yourself in with while you were dressing; and

you could then form the design of dressing as quickly as possible.) But

your  dream  recurred  each  night,  for  the  very  reason  that  it

corresponded to an intention. An intention remains in existence until it

has been carried out. You said to yourself, as it were: "I shall have no

rest and I can get no quiet sleep until I am out of this house." In your

account of the dream you turned it the other way and said: "As soon

as I was outside I woke up.".’

 

   At this point I shall interrupt my report of the analysis in order to

compare  this  small  piece  of  dream-interpretation  with  the  general

statements  I  have  made  upon  the  mechanism  of  the  formation  of

dreams. I argued in my book, The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a),

that every dream is a wish which is represented as fulfilled, that the

representation acts as a takes disguise if the wish is a repressed one,

belonging to the unconscious, and that except in the case of children’sdreams only an unconscious wish or one which reaches down into the

unconscious has the force necessary for the formation of a dream. I

fancy my theory would have been more certain of general acceptance

if  I  had  contented  myself  with  maintaining  that  every  dream  had  a

meaning, which could be discovered by means of a certain process of

interpretation; and that when the interpretation had been completed

the dream could be replaced by thoughts which would fall into place at

an easily recognizable point in the waking mental life of the dreamer. I

might then have gone on to say that the meaning of a dream turned

out  to  be  of  as  many  different  sorts  as  the  processes  of  waking

thought;  that  in  one  case  it  would  be  a  fulfilled  wish,  in  another  a

realized  fear,  or  again  a  reflection  persisting  on  into  sleep,  or  an

intention (as in the instance of Dora’s dream), or a piece of creative

thought during sleep, and so on. Such a theory would no doubt have

proved  attractive  from  its  very  simplicity,  and  it  might  have  been

supported  by  a  great  many  examples  of  dreams  that  had  been

satisfactorily interpreted, as for instance by the one which has been

analysed in these pages.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1405

 

   But instead of this I formulated a generalization according to which

the  meaning  of  dreams  is  limited  to  a  single  form,  to  the

representation  of wishes,  and  by  so  doing  I  aroused  a  universal

inclination to dissent. I must, however, observe that I did not consider

it either my right or my duty to simplify a psychological process so as

to make it more acceptable to my readers, when my researches had

shown me that it presented a complication which could not be reduced

to uniformity until the inquiry had been carried into another field. It is

therefore  of  special  importance  to  me  to  show  that  apparent

exceptions such as this dream of Dora’s, which has shown itself in the

first instance to be the continuation into sleep of an intention formed

during the day - nevertheless lend fresh support to the rule which is in

dispute.

    Much of the dream, however, still remained to be interpreted, and I

proceeded with my questions: ‘What is this about the jewel-case that

your mother wanted to save?’

   ‘Mother is very fond of jewellery and had had a lot given her by

Father.’

   ‘And you?’

   ‘I used to be very fond of jewellery too, once; but I have not worn

any  since  my  illness.  -  Once,  four  years  ago’  (a  year  before  the

dream),  ‘Father  and  Mother  had  a  great  dispute  about  a  piece  of

jewellery. Mother wanted to be given a particular thing - pearl drops to

wear in her ears. But Father does not like that kind of thing, and he

brought her a bracelet instead of the drops. She was furious, and told

him that as he had spent so much money on a present she did not like

he had better just give it to some one else.’

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1406

 

      ‘I  dare  say  you  thought  to  yourself  you  would  accept  it  with

pleasure.’

   ‘I don’t know.¹ I don’t in the least know how Mother comes into the

dream; she was not with us at L-- at the time.’²

   ‘I will explain that to you presently. Does nothing else occur to you in

connection with the jewel-case? So far you have only talked about

jewellery and have said nothing about a case.’

   ‘Yes, Herr K. had made me a present of an expensive jewel-case a

little time before.’

   ‘Then a return-present would have been very appropriate. Perhaps

you do not know that "jewel-case" ["Schmuckkästchen"] is a favourite

expression  for  the  same  thing  that  you  alluded  to  not  long  ago  by

means of the reticule you were wearing³ - for the female genitals, I

mean.’

                                    4
   ‘I knew you would say that.’

 

   ¹ The regular formula with which she confessed to anything that had been repressed.

   ² This  remark  gave  evidence  of  a  complete  misunderstanding  of  the  rules  of  dream-interpretation, though on other occasions Dora was perfectly familiar with them. This fact,
coupled with the hesitancy and meagreness of her associations with the jewel-case, showed
me that we were here dealing with material which had been very intensely repressed.

   ³ This reference to the reticule will be explained further on.

  4
    A  very  common  way  of  putting  aside  a  piece  of  knowledge  that  emerges  from  the

repressed.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1407

 

   ‘That is to say, you knew that it was so. - The meaning of the dream

is  now  becoming  even  clearer.  You  said  to  yourself:  "This  man  is

persecuting me; he wants to force his way into my room. My ‘jewel-

case’  is in danger, and if anything happens it will be Father’s fault."

For that reason in the dream you chose a situation which expresses

the opposite - a danger from which your father is saving you. In this

part of the dream everything is turned into its opposite; you will soon

discover why. As you say, the mystery turns upon your mother. You

ask how she comes into the dream?  She is, as you know, your former

rival  in  your  father’s  affections.  In  the  incident  of  the  bracelet,  you

would have been glad to accept what your mother had rejected. Now

let  us  just  put  "give"  instead  of  "accept"  and  "withhold"  instead  of

"reject". Then it means that you were ready to give your father what

your  mother  withheld  from  him;  and  the  thing  in  question  was

connected with jewellery.¹ Now bring your mind back to the jewel-case

which Herr K. gave you. You have there the starting-point for a parallel

line of thoughts, in which Herr K. is to be put in the place of your father

just as he was in the matter of standing beside your bed. He gave you

a jewel-case; so you are to give him your jewel-case. That was why I

spoke  just  now  of  a  "return-present".  In  this  line  of  thoughts  your

mother must be replaced by Frau K. (You will not deny that she, at

any rate, was present at the time.) So you are ready to give Herr K,

what his wife withholds from him. That is the thought which has had to

be repressed with so much energy, and which has made it necessary

for every one of its elements to be turned into its opposite. The dream

confirms once more what I had already told you before you dreamt it -

that you are summoning up your old love for your father in order to

protect yourself against your love for Herr K. But what do all theseefforts show? Not only that you are afraid of Herr K., but that you are

still more afraid of yourself, and of the temptation you feel to yield to

him. In short, these efforts prove once more how deeply you loved

him.’²

   Naturally Dora would not follow me in this part of the interpretation. I

myself,  however,  had  been  able  to  arrive  at  a  further  step  in  the

interpretation,  which  seemed  to  me  indispensable  both  for  the

anamnesis of the case and for the theory of dreams. I promised to

communicate this to Dora at the next session.

 

   ¹ We shall be able later on to interpret even the drops in a way which will fit in with the

context.

   ² I added: ‘Moreover, the re-appearance of the dream in the last few days forces me to the

conclusion that you consider that the same situation has arisen once again, and that you have
decided to give up the treatment - to which, after all, it is only your father who makes you
come.’ The sequel showed how correct my guess had been. At this point my interpretation
touches for a moment upon the subject of ‘transference’ - a theme which is of the highest
practical and theoretical importance, but into which I shall not have much further opportunity
of entering in the present paper.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1408

 

 

   The fact was that I could not forget the hint which seemed to be

conveyed by the ambiguous words already noticed - that it might be

necessary to leave the room; that an accident might happen in the

night.  Added  to  this  was  the  fact  that  the  elucidation  of  the  dream

seemed  to  me  incomplete  so  long  as  a  particular  requirement

remained  unsatisfied;  for,  though  I  do  not  wish  to  insist  that  this

requirement is a universal one, I have a predilection for discovering a

means of satisfying it. A regularly formed dream stands, as it were,

upon two legs, one of which is in contact with the main and current

exciting  cause,  and  the  other  with  some  momentous  event  in  the

years of childhood. The dream sets up a connection between those

two factors - the event during childhood and the event of the present

day - and it endeavours to re-shape the present on the model of the

remote past. For the wish which creates the dream always springsfrom the period of childhood; and it is continually trying to summon

childhood  back  into  reality  and  to  correct  the  present  day  by  the

measure of childhood. I believed that I could already clearly detect

those elements of Dora’s dream which could be pieced together into

an allusion to an event in childhood.

   I opened the discussion of the subject with a little experiment, which

was, as usual, successful. There happened to be a large match-stand

on the table. I asked Dora to look round and see whether she noticed

anything special on the table, something that was not there as a rule.

She noticed nothing. I then asked her if she knew why children were

forbidden to play with matches.

   ‘Yes; on account of the risk of fire. My uncle’s children are very fond

of playing with matches.’

   ‘Not only on that account. They are warned not to "play with fire",

and a particular belief is associated with the warning.’

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1409

 

   She knew nothing about it. - ‘Very well, then; the fear is that if they

do they will wet their bed. The antithesis of "water" and "fire" must be

at the bottom of this. Perhaps it is believed that they will dream of fire

and then try and put it out with water. I cannot say exactly. But I notice

that the antithesis of water and fire has been extremely useful to you

in the dream. Your mother wanted to save the jewel-case so that it

should not be burnt; while in the dream-thoughts it is a question of the

"jewel-case" not being wetted. But fire is not only used as the contrary

of water, it also serves directly to represent love (as in the phrase "to

be consumed with love"). So that from "fire" one set of rails runs by

way of this symbolic meaning to thoughts of love; while the other set

runs by way of the contrary "water", and, after sending off a branch

line  which  provides  another  connection  with  "love"  (for  love  also

makes things wet), leads in a different direction. And what direction

can  that  be?  Think  of  the  expressions  you  used:  that an  accident

might happen in the night, and that it might be necessary to leave the

room.  Surely  the  allusion  must  be  to  a  physical  need?  And  if  youtranspose the accident into childhood what can it be but bed-wetting?

But what is usually done to prevent children from wetting their bed?

Are they not woken up in the night out of their sleep, exactly as your

father  woke  you  up  in  the  dream?  This,  then,  must  be  the  actual

occurrence which enabled you to substitute your father for Herr K.,

who really, woke you up out of your sleep. I am accordingly driven to

conclude that you were addicted to bed-wetting up to a later age than

is usual with children. The same must also have been true of your

brother; for your father said: "I refuse to let my two children go to their

destruction. . . ." Your brother has no other sort of connection with the

real situation at the K.’s; he had not gone with you to L--. And now,

what have your recollections to say to this?’

   ‘I know nothing about myself,’ was her reply, ‘but my brother used to

wet his bed up till his sixth or seventh year; and it used sometimes to

happen to him in the daytime too.’

   I was on the point of remarking to her how much easier it is to

remember things of that kind about one’s brother than about oneself,

when she continued the train of recollections which had been revived:

‘Yes. I used to do it too, for some time, but not until my seventh or

eighth year. It must have been serious, because I remember now that

the doctor was called in. It lasted till a short time before my nervous

asthma.’

   ‘And what did the doctor say to it?’

   ‘He explained it as nervous weakness; it would soon pass off, he

thought; and he prescribed a tonic.’¹

 

   ¹ This physician was the only one in whom she showed any confidence, because this

episode showed her that he had not penetrated her secret. She felt afraid of any other doctor
about whom she had not yet been able to form a judgement, and we can now see that the
motive of her fear was the possibility that he might guess her secret.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1410

 

 

   The interpretation of the dream now seemed to me to be complete.¹

But Dora brought me an addendum to the dream on the very next day.She had forgotten to relate, she said, that each time after waking up

she had smelt smoke. Smoke, of course, fitted in well with fire, but it

also showed that the dream had a special relation to myself; for when

she used to assert that there was nothing concealed behind this or

that, I would often say by way of rejoinder: ‘There can be no smoke

without  fire!’  Dora  objected,  however,  to  such  a  purely  personal

interpretation,  saying  that  Herr  K.  and  her  father  were  passionate

smokers - as I am too, for the matter of that. She herself had smoked

during her stay by the lake, and Herr K. had rolled a cigarette for her

before  he  began  his  unlucky  proposal.  She  thought,  too,  that  she

clearly remembered having noticed the smell of smoke on the three

occasions of the dream’s occurrence at L--, and not for the first time at

its recent reappearance. As she would give me no further information,

it  was  left  to  me  to  determine  how  this  addendum  was  to  be

introduced into the texture of the dream-thoughts. One thing which I

had to go upon was the fact that the smell of smoke had only come up

as  an  addendum  to  the  dream,  and  must  therefore  have  had  to

overcome  a  particularly  strong  effort  on  the  part  of  repression.

Accordingly it was probably related to the thoughts which were the

most obscurely presented and the most successfully repressed in the

dream, to the thoughts, that is, concerned with the temptation to show

herself willing to yield to the man. If that were so, the addendum to the

dream could scarcely mean anything else than the longing for a kiss,

which, with a smoker, would necessarily smell of smoke. But a kiss

had passed between Herr K. and Dora some two years further back,

and it would certainly have been repeated more than once if she had

given way to him. So the thoughts of temptation seemed in this way to

have  harked  back  to  the  earlier  scene,  and  to  have  revived  the

memory of the kiss against whose seductive influence the little ‘thumb-

sucker’ had defended herself at the time, by the feeling of disgust.

Taking  into  consideration,  finally,  the  indications  which  seemed  to

point to there having been a transference on to me - since I am a

smoker  too  -  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  idea  had  probably

occurred to her one day during a session that she would like to have a

kiss from me. This would have been the exciting cause which led her

to repeat the warning dream and to form her intention of stopping the

treatment. Everything fits together very satisfactorily upon this view;but  owing  to  the  characteristics  of  ‘transference’  its  validity  is  not

susceptible of definite proof.

 

   ¹ The essence of the dream might perhaps be translated into words such as these: ‘The

temptation is so strong. Dear Father, protect me again as you used to in my childhood, and
prevent my bed from being wetted!’
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1411

 

 

   I might at this point hesitate whether I should first consider the light

thrown by this dream on the history of the case, or whether I should

rather  begin  by  dealing  with  the  objection  to  my  theory  of  dreams

which may be based on it interpretation. I shall take the former course.

   The significance of enuresis in the early history of neurotics is worth

going into thoroughly. For the sake of clearness I will confine myself to

remarking that Dora’s case of bed-wetting was not the usual one. The

disorder was not simply that the habit had persisted beyond what is

considered the normal period, but, according to her explicit account, it

had begun by disappearing and had then returned at a relatively late

age - after her sixth year. Bed-wetting of this kind has, to the best of

my knowledge, no more likely cause than masturbation, a habit whose

importance  in  the  aetiology  of  bed-wetting  in  general  is  still

insufficiently appreciated. In my experience, the children concerned

have themselves at one time been very well aware of this connection,

and all its psychological consequences follow from it as though they

had  never  forgotten  it.  Now,  at  the  time  when  Dora  reported  the

dream, we were engaged upon a line of enquiry which led straight

towards an admission that she had masturbated in childhood. A short

while before, she had raised the question of why it was that precisely

she had fallen ill, and, before I could answer, had put the blame on her

father.  The  justification  for  this  was  forthcoming  not  out  of  her

unconscious  thoughts  but  from  her  conscious  knowledge.  It  turned

out,  to  my  astonishment,  that  the  girl  knew  what  the  nature  of  her

father’s illness had been. After his return from consulting me she had

overheard a conversation in which the name of the disease had beenmentioned. At a still earlier period - at the time of the detached retina -

an oculist who was called in must have hinted at a luetic aetiology; for

the inquisitive and anxious girl overheard an old aunt of hers saying to

her mother: ‘He was ill before his marriage, you know’, and adding

something  which  she  could  not  understand,  but  which  she

subsequently connected in her mind with improper subjects.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1412

 

   Her father, then, had fallen ill through leading a loose life, and she

assumed that he had handed on his bad health to her by heredity. I

was careful not to tell her that, as I have already mentioned, I too was

of opinion that the offspring of luetics were very specially predisposed

to severe neuropsychoses. The line of thought in which she brought

this accusation against her father was continued in her unconscious

material.  For  several  days  on  end  she  identified  herself  with  her

mother  by  means  of  slight  symptoms  and  peculiarities  of  manner,

which  gave  her  an  opportunity  for  some  really  remarkable

achievements  in  the  direction  of  intolerable  behaviour.  She  then

allowed it to transpire that she was thinking of a stay she had made at

Franzensbad, which she had visited with her mother - I forget in what

year.  Her  mother  was  suffering  from  abdominal  pains  and  from  a

discharge  (a  catarrh)  which  necessitated  a  cure  at  Franzensbad.  It

was Dora’s view - and here again she was probably right - that this

illness was due to her father, who had thus handed on his venereal

disease  to  her  mother.  It  was  quite  natural  that  in  drawing  this

conclusion  she  should,  like  the  majority  of  laymen,  have  confused

gonorrhoea and syphilis, as well as what is contagious and what is

hereditary. The persistence with which she held to this identification

with her mother almost forced me to ask her whether she too was

suffering  from  a  venereal  disease;  and  I  then  learnt  that  she  was

afflicted with a catarrh (leucorrhoea) whose beginning, she said, she

could not remember.

                 Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1413

 

      I  then  understood  that  behind  the  train  of  thought  in  which  she

brought these open accusations against her father there lay concealed

as usual a self-accusation. I met her half-way by assuring her that in

my view the occurrence of leucorrhoea in young girls pointed primarily

to masturbation, and I considered that all the other causes which were

commonly assigned to that complaint were put in the background by

masturbation.¹ I added that she was now on the way to finding an

answer to her own question of why it was that precisely she had fallen

ill - by confessing that she had masturbated, probably in childhood.

Dora denied flatly that she could remember any such thing. But a few

days later she did something which I could not help regarding as a

further step towards the confession. For on that day she wore at her

waist - a thing she never did on any other occasion before or after - a

small reticule of a shape which had just come into fashion; and, as

she lay on the sofa and talked, she kept playing with it - opening it,

putting a finger into it, shutting it again, and so on. I looked on for

some time, and then explained to her the nature of a ‘symptomatic

act’.² I give the name of symptomatic acts to those acts which people

perform, as we say, automatically, unconsciously, without attending to

them, or as if in a moment of distraction. They are actions to which

people would like to deny any significance, and which, if questioned

about them, they would explain as being indifferent and accidental.

Closer  observation,  however,  will  show  that  these  actions,  about

which consciousness knows nothing or wishes to know nothing, in fact

give  expression  to  unconscious  thoughts  and  impulses,  and  are

therefore most valuable and instructive as being manifestations of the

unconscious which have been able to come to the surface. There are

two sorts of conscious attitudes possible towards these symptomatic

acts. If we can ascribe inconspicuous motives to them we recognize

their existence; but if no such pretext can be found for conscious use

we usually fail altogether to notice that we have performed them. Dora

found no difficulty in producing a motive: ‘Why should I not wear a

reticule like this, as it is now the fashion to do?’ But a justification of

this  kind  does  not  dismiss  the  possibility  of  the  action  in  questionhaving an unconscious origin. Though on the other hand the existence

of  such  an  origin  and  the  meaning  attributed  to  the  act  cannot  be

conclusively established. We must content ourselves with recording

the fact that such a meaning fits in quite extraordinarily well with the

situation  as  a  whole  and  with  the  programme  laid  down  by  the

unconscious.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1923:] This is an extreme view which I should no longer maintain to-day.

   ² See my Psychopathology of Everyday Life, 1901b.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1414

 

      On  some  other  occasion  I  will  publish  a  collection  of  these

symptomatic acts as they are to be observed in the healthy and in

neurotics. They are sometimes very easy to interpret. Dora’s reticule,

which  came  apart  at  the  top  in  the  usual  way,  was  nothing  but  a

representation of the genitals, and her playing with it, her opening it

and  putting  her  finger  in  it,  was  an  entirely  unembarrassed  yet

unmistakable pantomimic announcement of what she would like to do

with them - namely, to masturbate. A very entertaining episode of a

similar  kind  occurred  to  me  a  short  time  ago.  In  the  middle  of  a

session the patient - a lady who was no longer young - brought out a

small ivory box, ostensibly in order to refresh herself with a sweet. She

made some efforts to open it, and then handed it to me so that I might

convince myself how hard it was to open. I expressed my suspicion

that the box must mean something special, for this was the very first

time I had seen it, although its owner had been coming to me for more

than a year. To this the lady eagerly replied: ‘I always have this box

about me; I take it with me wherever I go.’ She did not calm down until

I had pointed out to her with a laugh how well her words were adapted

to quite another meaning. The box - Dose, πύξις -, like the reticule and

the  jewel-case,  was  once  again  only  a  substitute  for  the  shell  of

Venus, for the female genitals.

   There is a great deal of symbolism of this kind in life, but as a rule

we pass it by without heeding it. When I set myself the task of bringing

to  light  what  human  beings  keep  hidden  within  them,  not  by  thecompelling power of hypnosis, but by observing what they say and

what they show, I thought the task was a harder one than it really is.

He that has eyes to see and ears to hear may convince himself that

no mortal can keep a secret. If his lips are silent, he chatters with his

finger-tips; betrayal oozes out of him at every pore. And thus the task

of  making  conscious  the  most  hidden  recesses  of  the  mind  is  one

which it is quite possible to accomplish.

      Dora’s  symptomatic  act  with  the  reticule  did  not  immediately

precede  the  dream.  She  started  the  session  which  brought  us  the

narrative of the dream with another symptomatic act. As I came into

the room in which she was waiting she hurriedly concealed a letter

which  she  was  reading.  I  naturally  asked  her  whom  the  letter  was

from, and at first she refused to tell me. Something then came out

which was a matter of complete indifference and had no relation to the

treatment. It was a letter from her grandmother, in which she begged

Dora to write to her more often. I believe that Dora only wanted to play

‘secrets’ with me, and to hint that she was on the point of allowing her

secret to be torn from her by the doctor. I was then in a position to

explain  her  antipathy  to  every  new  doctor.  She  was  afraid  lest  he

might arrive at the foundation of her illness, either by examining her

and discovering her catarrh, or by questioning her and eliciting the fact

of her addiction to bed-wetting - lest he might guess, in short, that she

had  masturbated.  And  afterwards  she  would  speak  very

contemptuously of the doctor whose perspicacity she had evidently

over-estimated beforehand.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1415

 

   The reproaches against her father for having made her ill, together

with the self-reproach underlying them, the leucorrhoea, the playing

with the reticule, the bed-wetting after her sixth year, the secret which

she would not allow the doctors to tear from her - the circumstantial

evidence  of  her  having  masturbated  in  childhood  seems  to  me

complete  and  without  a  flaw.  In  the  present  case  I  had  begun  to

suspect the masturbation when she had told me of her cousin’s gastricpains, and had then identified herself with her by complaining for days

together  of  similar  painful  sensations.  It  is  well  known  that  gastric

pains occur especially often in those who masturbate. According to a

personal communication made to me by Wilhelm Fliess, it is precisely

gastralgias of this character which can be interrupted by an application

of cocaine to the ‘gastric spot’ discovered by him in the nose, and

which  can  be  cured  by  the  cauterization  of  the  same  spot.  In

confirmation  of  my  suspicion  Dora  gave  me  two  facts  from  her

conscious knowledge: she herself had frequently suffered from gastric

pains, and she had good reasons for believing that her cousin was a

masturbator. It is a very common thing for patients to recognize in

other  people  a  connection  which,  on  account  of  their  emotional

resistances, they cannot perceive in themselves. And, indeed, Dora

no  longer  denied  my  supposition,  although  she  still  remembered

nothing. Even the date which she assigned to the bed-wetting, when

she said that it lasted ‘till a short time before the appearance of the

nervous  asthma’,  appears  to  me  to  be  of  clinical  significance.

Hysterical  symptoms  hardly  ever  appear  so  long  as  children  are

masturbating, but only afterwards, when a period of abstinence has

set in;¹ they form a substitute for masturbatory satisfaction, the desire

for which continues to persist in the unconscious until another and

more normal kind of satisfaction appears - where that is still attainable.

For upon whether it is still attainable or not depends the possibility of a

hysteria being cured by marriage and normal sexual intercourse. But if

the satisfaction afforded in marriage is again removed - as it may be

owing  to coitus  interruptus,  psychological  estrangement,  or  other

causes  -  then  the  libido  flows  back  again  into  its  old  channel  and

manifests itself once more in hysterical symptoms.

 

   ¹ This is also true in principle of adults; but in their case a relative abstinence, a diminution

in  the  amount  of  masturbation,  is  a  sufficient  cause,  so  that,  if  the  libido  is  very  strong,
hysteria and masturbation may be simultaneously present.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1416

 

   I should like to be able to add some definite information as to whenand under what particular influence Dora gave up masturbating; but

owing to the incompleteness of the analysis I have only fragmentary

material to present. We have heard that the bed-wetting lasted until

shortly before she first fell ill with dyspnoea. Now the only light she

was  able  to  throw  upon  this  first  attack  was  that  at  the  time  of  its

occurrence her father was away from home for the first time since his

health had improved. In this small recollection there must be a trace of

an allusion to the aetiology of the dyspnoea. Dora’s symptomatic acts

and certain other signs gave me good reasons for supposing that the

child,  whose  bedroom  had  been  next  door  to  her  parents’,  had

overheard her father in his wife’s room at night and had heard him (for

he  was  always  short  of  breath)  breathing  hard  while  they  had

intercourse. Children, in such circumstances, divine something sexual

in the uncanny sounds that reach their ears. Indeed, the movements

expressive  of  sexual  excitement  lie  within  them  ready  to  hand,  as

innate  pieces  of  mechanism.  I  maintained  years  ago  that  the

dyspnoea and palpitations that occur in hysteria and anxiety neurosis

are only detached fragments of the act of copulation; and in many

cases, as in Dora’s, I have been able to trace back the symptom of

dyspnoea  or  nervous  asthma  to  the  same  exciting  cause  -  to  the

patient’s having overheard sexual intercourse taking place between

adults. The sympathetic excitement which may be supposed to have

occurred in Dora on such an occasion may very easily have made the

child’s  sexuality  veer  round  and  have  replaced  her  inclination  to

masturbation by an inclination to anxiety. A little while later, when her

father was away and the child, devotedly in love with him, was wishing

him  back,  she  must  have  reproduced  in  the  form  of  an  attack  of

asthma the impression she had received. She had preserved in her

memory  the  event  which  had  occasioned  the  first  onset  of  the

symptom,  and  we  can  conjecture  from  it  the  nature  of  the  train  of

thought, charged with anxiety, which had accompanied the attack. The

first  attack  had  come  on  after  she  had  over-exerted  herself  on  an

expedition in the mountains, so that she had probably been really a

little out of breath. To this was added the thought that her father was

forbidden  to  climb  mountains  and  was  not  allowed  to  over-exert

himself, because he suffered from shortness of breath; then came the

recollection of how much he had exerted himself with her mother thatnight, and the question whether it might not have done him harm; next

came  concern  whether she  might  not  have  over-exerted  herself  in

masturbating - an act which, like the other, led to a sexual orgasm

accompanied by slight dyspnoea - and finally came a return of the

dyspnoea in an intensified form as a symptom. Part of this material I

was  able  to  obtain  directly  from  the  analysis,  but  the  rest  required

supplementing. But the way in which the occurrence of masturbation

in  Dora’s  case  was  verified  has  already  shown  us  that  material

belonging to a single subject can only be collected piece by piece at

various times and in different connections.¹

 

   ¹ The proof of infantile masturbation in other cases is established in a precisely similar way.

The evidence for it is mostly of a similar nature: indications of the presence of leucorrhoea,
bed-wetting, hand-ceremonials (obsessional washing), and such things. It is always possible
to discover with certainty from the nature of the symptoms of the case whether the habit was
discovered by the person in charge of the child or not, or whether this sexual activity was
brought to an end by long efforts on the child’s part to break itself of the habit, or by a sudden
change. In Dora’s case the masturbation had remained undiscovered, and had come to an
end at a single blow (cf. her secret, her fear of doctors, and the replacement by dyspnoea).
The patients, it is true, invariably dispute the conclusiveness of circumstantial evidence such
as this, and they do so even when they have retained a conscious recollection of the catarrh
or of their mother’s warning (e.g. ‘That makes people stupid; it’s dangerous’). But some time
later the memory, which has been so long repressed, of this piece of infantile sexual life
emerges with certainty, and it does so in every instance. I am reminded of the case of a
patient  of  mine  suffering  from  obsessions,  which  were  direct  derivatives  of  infantile
masturbation.  Her  peculiarities,  such  as  self-prohibitions  and  self-punishments,  the  feeling
that if she had done this she must not do that, the idea that she must not be interrupted, the
introduction  of  pauses  between  one  procedure  (with  her  hands)  and  the  next,  her  hand-
washing, etc, - all of these turned out to be unaltered fragments of her nurse’s efforts to break
her of the habit. The only thing which had remained permanently in her memory were the
words of warning: ‘Ugh! That’s dangerous!’ Compare also in this connection my Three Essays
on the Theory of Sexuality, 1905d.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1417

 

      There  now  arise  a  whole  series  of  questions  of  the  greatest

importance concerning the aetiology of hysteria: is Dora’s case to be

regarded as aetiologically typical?  does it represent the only type of

causation? and so on. Nevertheless, I am sure that I am taking the

right  course  in  postponing  my  answer  to  such  questions  until  a

considerable number of other cases have been similarly analysed andpublished. Moreover, I should have to begin by criticizing the way in

which the questions are framed. Instead of answering ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ to

the question whether the aetiology of this case is to be looked for in

masturbation  during  childhood,  I  should  first  have  to  discuss  the

concept of aetiology as applied to the psychoneuroses. It would then

become evident that the standpoint from which I should be able to

answer  the  question  would  be  very  widely  removed  from  the

standpoint from which it was put. Let it suffice if we can reach the

conviction  that  in  this  case  the  occurrence  of  masturbation  in

childhood  is  established,  and  that  its  occurrence  cannot  be  an

accidental element nor an immaterial one in the conformation of the

clinical picture.¹

 

   ¹ Dora’s brother must have been concerned in some way with her having acquired the habit

of masturbation; for in this connection she told me, with all the emphasis which betrays the
presence of a ‘screen memory’, that her brother used regularly to pass on all his infectious
illnesses to her, and that while he used to have them lightly she used, on the contrary, to have
them severely. In the dream her brother as well as she was saved from ‘destruction’; he, too,
had been subject to bed-wetting, but had got over the habit before his sister. Her declaration
that she had been able to keep abreast with her brother up to the time of her first illness, but
that after that she had fallen behind him in her studies, was in a certain sense also a ‘screen
memory’. It was as though she had been a boy up till that moment, and had then become
girlish for the first time. She had in truth been a wild creature; but after the ‘asthma’ she
became quiet and well-behaved. That illness formed the boundary between two phases of her
sexual life, of which the first was masculine in character, and the second feminine.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1418

 

   A consideration of the significance of the leucorrhoea to which Dora

admitted  promises  to  give  us  a  still  better  understanding  of  her

symptoms. She had learnt to call her affection a ‘catarrh’ at the time

when her mother had had to visit Franzensbad on account of a similar

complaint; and the word ‘catarrh’ acted once again as a ‘switch-word’

and enabled the whole set of thoughts upon her father’s responsibility

for her illness to manifest themselves in the symptom of the cough.

The cough, which no doubt originated in the first instance from a slight

actual catarrh, was, moreover, an imitation of her father (whose lungs

were affected), and could serve as an expression of her sympathy andconcern  for  him.  But  besides  this,  it  proclaimed  aloud,  as  it  were,

something of which she may then have been still unconscious: ‘I am

my father’s daughter. I have a catarrh, just as he has. He has made

me ill, just as he has made Mother ill. It is from him that I have got my

evil passions, which are punished by illness.’¹

 

   ¹ This word played the same part with the fourteen-year old girl whose case history I have

compressed into a few lines on p. 1365 n. I had established the child in a pension with an
intelligent lady, who took charge of her for me. The lady reported that the little girl could not
bear her to be in the room while she was going to bed, and that when she was in bed she had
a marked cough, of which there was no trace in the daytime. When the girl was questioned
about these symptoms, the only thing that occurred to her was that her grandmother coughed
in the same way, and that she was said to have a catarrh. It was clear from this that the child
herself had a catarrh, and that she did not want to be observed while she performed her
evening ablutions. This catarrh which, thanks to its name, had been displaced from the lower
to the upper part of her body, exhibited a quite unusual degree of intensity.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1419

 

   Let us next attempt to put together the various determinants that we

have  found  for  Dora’s  attacks  of  coughing  and  hoarseness.  In  the

lowest stratum we must assume the presence of real and organically

determined irritation of the throat - which acted like the grain of sand

around which an oyster forms its pearl. This irritation was susceptible

to fixation, because it concerned a part of the body which in Dora had

to a high degree retained its significance as an erotogenic zone. And

the irritation was consequently well fitted to give expression to excited

states of the libido. It was brought to fixation by what was probably its

first psychical coating - her sympathetic imitation of her father - and by

her subsequent self-reproaches on account of her ‘catarrh’. The same

group of symptoms, moreover, showed itself capable of representing

her relations with Herr K.; it could express her regret at his absence

and her wish to make him a better wife. After a part of her libido had

once more turned towards her father, the symptom obtained what was

perhaps its last meaning; it came to represent sexual intercourse with

her father by means of Dora’s identifying herself with Frau K. I can

guarantee that this series is by no means complete. Unfortunately, an

incomplete  analysis  cannot  enable  us  to  follow  the  chronologicalsequence  of  the  changes  in  a  symptom’s  meaning,  or  to  display

clearly the succession and coexistence of its various meanings. It may

legitimately  be  expected  of  a  complete  analysis  that  it  should  fulfil

these demands.

   I must now proceed to touch upon some further relations existing

between Dora’s genital catarrh and her hysterical symptoms. At a time

when any psychological elucidation of hysteria was still very remote, I

used  to  hear  experienced  fellow-doctors  who  were  my  seniors

maintain  that  in  the  case  of  hysterical  patients  suffering  from

leucorrhoea any increase in the catarrh was regularly followed by an

intensification  of  the  hysterical  troubles,  and  especially  of  loss  of

appetite and vomiting. No one was very clear about the nature of the

connection but I fancy the general inclination was towards the opinion

held  by  gynaecologists.  According  to  their  hypothesis,  as  is  well

known, disorders of the genitals exercise upon the nervous functions a

direct  and  far-reaching  influence  in  the  nature  of  an  organic

disturbance - though a therapeutic test of this theory is apt to leave

one  in  the  lurch.  In  the  light  of  our  present  knowledge  we  cannot

exclude the possibility of the existence of a direct organic influence of

this sort; but it is at all events easier to indicate its psychical coating.

The pride taken by women in the appearance of their genitals is quite

a special feature of their vanity; and disorders of the genitals which

they think calculated to inspire feelings of repugnance or even disgust

have an incredible power of humiliating them, of lowering their self-

esteem,  and  of  making  them  irritable,  sensitive,  and  distrustful.  An

abnormal secretion of the mucous membrane of the vagina is looked

upon as a source of disgust.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1420

 

   It will be remembered that Dora had a lively feeling of disgust after

being kissed by Herr K., and that we saw grounds for completing her

story of the scene of the kiss by supposing that, while she was being

embraced,  she  noticed  the  pressure  of  the  man’s  erect  member

against  her  body.  We  now  learn  further  that  the  same  governesswhom Dora cast off on account of her faithlessness had, from her own

experience  of  life,  propounded  to  Dora  the  view  that  all  men  were

frivolous and untrustworthy. To Dora that must mean that all men were

like  her  father.  But  she  thought  her  father  suffered  from  venereal

disease - for had he not handed it on to her and her mother? She

might therefore have imagined to herself that all men suffered from

venereal disease, and naturally her conception of venereal disease

was modelled on her one experience of it - a personal one at that. To

suffer from venereal disease, therefore, meant for her to be afflicted

with a disgusting discharge. So may we not have here a further motive

for  the  disgust  she  felt  at  the  moment  of  the  embrace?  Thus  the

disgust which was transferred on to the contact of the man would be a

feeling  which  had  been  projected  according  to  the  primitive

mechanism I have already mentioned (p. 1373), and would be related

ultimately to her own leucorrhoea.

   I suspect that we are here concerned with unconscious processes of

thought which are twined around a pre-existing structure of organic

connections, much as festoons of flowers are twined around a wire; so

that on another occasion one might find other lines of thought inserted

between  the  same  points  of  departure  and  termination.  Yet  a

knowledge of the thought connections which have been effective in

the  individual  case  is  of  a  value  which  cannot  be  exaggerated  for

clearing  up  the  symptoms.  It  is  only  because  the  analysis  was

prematurely broken off that we have been obliged in Dora’s case to

resort  to  framing  conjectures  and  filling  in  deficiencies.  Whatever  I

have brought forward for filling up the gaps is based upon other cases

which have been more thoroughly analysed.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1421

 

 

      The  dream  from  the  analysis  of  which  we  have  derived  this

information  corresponded,  as  we  have  seen,  to  an  intention  which

Dora carried with her into her sleep. It was therefore repeated each

night until the intention had been carried out; and it reappeared yearslater when an occasion arose for forming an analogous intention. The

intention might have been consciously expressed in some such words

as  these:  ‘I  must  fly  from  this  house,  for  I  see  that  my  virginity  is

threatened  here;  I  shall  go  away  with  my  father,  and  I  shall  take

precautions not to be surprised while I am dressing in the morning.’

These thoughts were clearly expressed in the dream; they formed part

of  a  mental  current  which  had  achieved  consciousness  and  a

dominating  position  in  waking  life.  Behind  them  can  be  discerned

obscure traces of a train of thought which formed part of a contrary

current and had consequently been suppressed. This other train of

thought  culminated  in  the  temptation  to  yield  to  the  man,  out  of

gratitude for the love and tenderness he had shown her during the last

few years, and it may perhaps have revived the memory of the only

kiss she had so far had from him. But according to the theory which I

developed in my Interpretation of Dreams such elements as these are

not enough for the formation of a dream. On that theory a dream is not

an  intention  represented  as  having  been  carried  out,  but  a  wish

represented as having been fulfilled, and, moreover, in most cases a

wish dating from childhood. It is our business now to discover whether

this principle may not be contradicted by the present dream.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1422

 

      The  dream  does  in  fact  contain  infantile  material,  though  it  is

impossible at a first glance to discover any connections between that

material and Dora’s intention of flying from Herr K.’s house and the

temptation of his presence. Why should a recollection have emerged

of her bed-wetting when she was a child and of the trouble her father

used to take to teach the child clean habits? We may answer this by

saying that it was only by the help of this train of thought that it was

possible  to  suppress  the  other  thoughts  which  were  so  intensely

occupied with the temptation to yield or that it was possible to secure

the dominance of the intention which had been formed of combating

those other thoughts. The child decided to fly with her father; in reality

she fled to her father because she was afraid of the man who waspursuing her; she summoned up an infantile affection for her father so

that it might protect her against her present affection for a stranger.

Her father was himself partly responsible for her present danger, for

he had handed her over to this strange man in the interests of his own

love-affair. And how much better it had been when that same father of

hers had loved no one more than her, and had exerted all his strength

to  save  her  from  the  dangers  that  had  then  threatened  her!  The

infantile, and now unconscious, wish to put her father in the strange

man’s place had the potency necessary for the formation of a dream.

If there were a past situation similar to a present one, and differing

from it only in being concerned with one instead of with the other of

the two persons mentioned in the wish, that situation would become

the main one in the dream. But there had been such a situation. Her

father had once stood beside her bed, just as Herr K. had the day

before, and had woken her up, with a kiss perhaps, as Herr K. may

have meant to do. Thus her intention of flying from the house was not

in  itself  capable  of  producing  a  dream;  but  it  became  so  by  being

associated  with  another  intention  which  was  founded  upon  infantile

wishes.  The  wish  to  replace  Herr  K.  by  her  father  provided  the

necessary motive power for the dream. Let me recall the interpretation

I  was  led  to  adopt  of  Dora’s  reinforced  train  of  thought  about  her

father’s relations with Frau K. My interpretation was that she had at

that point summoned up an infantile affection for her father so as to be

able to keep her repressed love for Herr K. in its state of repression.

This same sudden revulsion in the patient’s mental life was reflected

in the dream.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1423

 

   I have made one or two observations in my Interpretation of Dreams

on the relation between the waking thoughts which are continued into

sleep (the ‘day’s residues’) and the unconscious wish which forms the

dream. I will quote them here as they stand, for I have nothing to add

to them, and the analysis of this dream of Dora’s proves afresh that

the facts are as I have supposed: ‘I am ready to admit that there is awhole  class  of  dreams  the instigation  to  which  arises  principally  or

even  exclusively  from  the  residues  of  daytime  life;  and  I  think  that

even  my  wish  that  I  might  at  long  last  become  a  Professor

Extraordinarius¹ might have allowed me to sleep through the night in

peace if my worry over my friend’s health had not still persisted from

the previous day. But the worry alone could not have made a dream.

The motive force which the dream required had to be provided by a

wish; it was the business of the worry to get hold of a wish to act as

the motive force of the dream.

   ‘The position may be explained by an analogy. A daytime thought

may  very  well  play  the  part  of entrepeneur  for  a  dream;  but  the

entrepeneur, who, as people say, has the idea and the initiative to

carry it out, can do nothing without capital; he needs a capitalist who

can afford the outlay, and the capitalist who provides the psychical

outlay for the dream is invariably and indisputably, whatever may be

the thoughts of the previous day, a wish from the unconscious.’

   Any one who has learnt to appreciate the delicacy of the fabric of

structures  such  as  dreams  will  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  Dora’s

wish that her father might take the place of the man who was her

tempter  called  up  in  her  memory  not  merely  a  casual  collection  of

material from her childhood, but precisely such material as was most

intimately bound up with the suppression of her temptation. For if Dora

felt unable to yield to her love for the man, if in the end she repressed

that love instead of surrendering to it, there was no factor upon which

her decision depended more directly than upon her premature sexual

enjoyment and its consequence - her bed-wetting, her catarrh, and her

disgust. An early history of this kind can afford a basis for two kinds of

behaviour in response to the demands of love in maturity - which of

the two will depend upon the summation of constitutional determinants

in  the  subject.  He  will  either  exhibit  an  abandonment  to  sexuality

which is entirely without resistances and borders upon perversity; or

there will be a reaction - he will repudiate sexuality, and will at the

same time fall ill of a neurosis. In the case of our present patient, her

constitution and the high level of her intellectual and moral upbringing

decided in favour of the latter course.

 

   ¹ This is a reference to the analysis of a dream quoted in the book as an example. 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1424

 

    I should like, further, to draw special attention to the fact that the

analysis of this dream has given us access to certain details of the

pathogenically  operative  events  which  had  otherwise  been

inaccessible  to  memory,  or  at  all  events  to  reproduction.  The

recollection of the bed-wetting in childhood had, as we have seen,

already been repressed. And Dora had never mentioned the details of

her persecution by Herr K.; they had never occurred to her mind.

 

   I add a few remarks which may help towards the synthesis of this

dream. The dream-work began on the afternoon of the day after the

scene in the wood, after Dora had noticed that she was no longer able

to lock the door of her room. She then said to herself: ‘I am threatened

by a serious danger here,’ and formed her intention of not stopping on

in  the  house  alone  but  of  going  off  with  her  father.  This  intention

became capable of forming a dream, because it succeeded in finding

a continuation in the unconscious. What corresponded to it there was

her  summoning  up  her  infantile  love  for  her  father  as  a  protection

against the present temptation. The change which thus took place in

her  became  fixed  and  brought  her  into  the  attitude  shown  by  her

supervalent  train  of  thought  -  jealousy  of  Frau  K.  on  her  father’s

account, as though she herself were in love with him. There was a

conflict within her between a temptation to yield to the man’s proposal

and a composite force rebelling against that feeling. This latter force

was made up of motives of respectability and good sense, of hostile

feelings  caused  by  the  governess’s  disclosures  (jealousy  and

wounded  pride,  as  we  shall  see  later),  and  of  a  neurotic  element,

namely, the tendency to a repudiation of sexuality which was already

present in her and was based on her childhood history. Her love for

her  father,  which  she  summoned  up  to  protect  her  against  the

temptation, had its origin in this same childhood history.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria                                                                                      1425

 

      Her  intention  of  flying  to  her  father,  which,  as  we  have  seen,

reached down into the unconscious, was transformed by the dream

into a situation which presented as fulfilled the wish that her father

should save her from the danger. In this process it was necessary to

put on one side a certain thought which stood in the way; for it was her

father himself who had brought her into the danger. The hostile feeling

against  her  father  (her  desire  for  revenge),  which  was  here

suppressed, was, as we shall discover, one of the motive forces of the

second dream.

      According  to  the  necessary  conditions  of  dream-formation  the

imagined situation must be chosen so as to reproduce a situation in

infancy. A special triumph is achieved if a recent situation, perhaps

even the very situation which is the exciting cause of the dream, can

be transformed into an infantile one. This has actually been achieved

in the present case, by a purely chance disposition of the material.

Just as Herr K. had stood beside her sofa and woken her up, so her

father  had  often  done  in  her  childhood.  The  whole  trend  of  her

thoughts could be most aptly symbolized by her substitution of her

father for Herr K. in that situation.

   But the reason for which her father used to wake her up long ago

had been to prevent her from making her bed wet.

   This ‘wet’ had a decisive influence on the further content of the

dream; though it was represented in it only by a distant allusion and by

its opposite.

   The opposite of ‘wet’ and ‘water’ can easily be ‘fire’ and ‘burning’.

The  chance  that,  when  they  arrived  at  the  place,  her  father  had

expressed  his  anxiety  at  the  risk  of  fire,  helped  to  decide  that  the

danger from which her father was to rescue her should be a fire. The

situation chosen for the dream-picture was based upon this chance,

and upon the opposition to ‘wet’: ‘There was a fire. Her father was

standing beside her bed to wake her.’ Her father’s chance utterance

would, no doubt, not have obtained such an important position in the

dream if it had not fitted in so excellently with the dominating current of

feeling, which was determined to regard him at any cost as a protector

and  saviour.  ‘He  foresaw  the  danger  from  the  very  moment  of  ourarrival!  He was in the right!’ (In actual fact, it was he who had brought

the girl into danger.)

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1426

 

   In consequence of certain connections which can easily be made

from it, the word ‘wet’ served in the dream-thoughts as a nodal point

between several groups of ideas. ‘Wet’ was connected not only with

the bed-wetting, but also with the group of ideas relating to sexual

temptation  which  lay  suppressed  behind  the  content  of  the  dream.

Dora  knew  that  there  was  a  kind  of  getting  wet  involved  in  sexual

intercourse, and that during the act of copulation the man presented

the woman with something liquid in the form of drops. She also knew

that the danger lay precisely in that, and that it was her business to

protect her genitals from being moistened.

   ‘Wet’ and ‘drops’ at the same time opened the way to the other

group of associations - the group relating to the disgusting catarrh,

which in her later years had no doubt possessed the same mortifying

significance for her as the bed-wetting had in her childhood. ‘Wet’ in

this connection had the same meaning as ‘dirtied’. Her genitals, which

ought to have been kept clean, had been dirtied already by the catarrh

- and this applied to her mother no less than to herself (p. 1412). She

seemed to understand that her mother’s mania for cleanliness was a

reaction against this dirtying.

   The two groups of ideas met in this one thought: ‘Mother got both

things  from  father:  the  sexual  wetness  and  the  dirtying  discharge.’

Dora’s  jealousy  of  her  mother  was  inseparable  from  the  group  of

thoughts  relating  to  her  infantile  love  for  her  father  which  she

summoned up for her protection. But this material was not yet capable

of representation. If, however, a recollection could be found which was

equally closely connected with both the groups related to the word

‘wet’, but which avoided any offensiveness, then such a recollection

would  be  able  to  take  over  the  representation  in  the  dream  of  the

material in question.

   A recollection of this sort was furnished by the episode of the ‘drops’-  the  jewellery  [‘Schmuck’]  that  Dora’s  mother  wanted  to  have.  In

appearance  the  connection  between  this  reminiscence  and  the  two

groups of thoughts relating to sexual wetness and to being dirtied was

a purely external and superficial one, of a verbal character. For ‘drops’

was used ambiguously as a ‘switch-word’, while ‘jewellery’ [‘Schmuck’]

was taken as an equivalent to ‘clean’, and thus as a rather forced

contrary  of  ‘dirtied’.¹  But  in  reality  the  most  substantial  connections

can  be  shown  to  have  existed  between  the  things  denoted

themselves. The recollection originated from the material connected

with  Dora’s  jealousy  of  her  mother,  which,  though  its  roots  were

infantile, had persisted far beyond that period. By means of these two

verbal bridges it was possible to transfer on to the single reminiscence

of the ‘jewel-drops’ the whole of the significance attaching to the ideas

of  her  parents’  sexual  intercourse,  and  of  her  mother’s  gonorrhoea

and tormenting passion for cleanliness.

 

   ¹ [The German word ‘Schmuck’ has a much wider meaning than the English ‘jewellery’,

though that is the sense in which it occurs in the compound ‘Schmuckkästchen’, ‘jewel-case’.
As a substantive, ‘Schmuck’ denotes ‘finery’ of all kinds, not only personal adornments, but
embellishments of objects and decorations in general. In an adjectival sense, it can mean
‘smart’, ‘ tidy’, or ‘neat’.]
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1427

 

      But  a  still  further  displacement  had  to  be  effected  before  this

material  appeared  in  the  dream.  Though  ‘drops’  is  nearer  to  the

original ‘wet’, it was the more distant ‘jewellery’ that found a place in

the dream. When, therefore, this element had been inserted into the

dream-situation  which  had  already  been  established,  the  account

might have run: ‘Mother wanted to stop and save her jewellery.’ But a

subsequent  influence  now  made  itself  felt,  and  led  to  the  further

alteration  of  ‘jewellery’  into  ‘jewel-case’.  This  influence  came  from

elements in the underlying group relating to the temptation offered by

Herr  K.  He  had  never  given  her  jewellery,  but  he  had  given  her  a

‘case’ for it, which meant for her all the marks of preference and all the

tenderness for which she felt she ought now to have been grateful.

And the composite word thus formed, ‘jewel-case’, had beyond this aspecial claim to be used as a representative element in the dream. Is

not ‘jewel-case’ [‘Schmuckkästen’] a term commonly used to describe

female genitals that are immaculate and intact? And is it not, on the

other hand, an innocent word? Is it not, in short, admirably calculated

both to betray and to conceal the sexual thoughts that lie behind the

dream?

   ‘Mother’s jewel-case’ was therefore introduced in two places in the

dream;  and  this  element  replaced  all  mention  of  Dora’s  infantile

jealousy, of the drops (that is, of the sexual wetness), of being dirtied

by  the  discharge,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  of  her  present  thoughts

connected with the temptation - the thoughts which were urging her to

reciprocate the man’s love, and which depicted the sexual situation

(alike  desirable  and  menacing)  that  lay  before  her.  The  element  of

‘jewel-case’ was more than any other a product of condensation and

displacement, and a compromise between contrary mental currents.

The  multiplicity  of  its  origin  -  both  from  infantile  and  contemporary

sources  -  is  no  doubt  pointed  to  by  its  double  appearance  in  the

content of the dream.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1428

 

      The  dream  was  a  reaction  to  a  fresh  experience  of  an  exciting

nature; and this experience must inevitably have revived the memory

of the only previous experience which was at all analogous to it. The

latter was the scene of the kiss in Herr K.’s place of business, when

she  had  been  seized  with  disgust.  But  this  same  scene  was

associatively accessible from other directions too, namely, from the

group of thoughts relating to the catarrh (p. 83), and from her present

temptation. The scene therefore brought to the dream a contribution of

its own, which had to be made to fit in with the dream situation that

had already been laid down: ‘There was a fire’ . . . no doubt the kiss

smelt  of  smoke;  so  she  smelt  smoke  in  the  dream,  and  the  smell

persisted till after she was awake.

   By inadvertence, I unfortunately left a gap in the analysis of the

dream. Dora’s father was made to say, ‘I refuse to let my two childrengo to their destruction . . .’ (‘as a result of masturbation’ should no

doubt be added from the dream-thoughts). Such speeches in dreams

are regularly constructed out of pieces of actual speeches which have

either been made or heard. I ought to have made enquiries as to the

actual  source  of  this  speech.  The  results  of  my  enquiry  would  no

doubt  have  shown  that  the  structure  of  the  dream  was  still  more

complicated,  but  would  at  the  same  time  have  made  it  easier  to

penetrate.

      Are  we  to  suppose  that  when  this  dream  occurred  at  L--  it  had

precisely the same content as when it recurred during the treatment?

It does not seem necessary to do so. Experience shows that people

often assert that they have had the same dream, when as a matter of

fact the separate appearances of the recurrent dream have differed

from one another in numerous details and in other respects that were

of no small importance. Thus one of my patients told me that she had

had  her  favourite  dream  again  the  night  before,  and  that  it  always

recurred in the same form: she had dreamed of swimming in the blue

sea, of joyfully cleaving her way through the waves, and so on. On

closer investigation it turned out that upon a common background now

one detail and now another was brought out; on one occasion, even,

she was swimming in a frozen sea and was surrounded by icebergs.

This  patient  had  other  dreams,  which  turned  out  to  be  closely

connected with the recurrent one, though even she made no attempt

to claim that they were identical with it. Once, for instance, she was

looking at a view of Heligoland (based on a photograph, but life-size)

which showed the upper and lower parts of the island simultaneously;

on  the  sea  was  a  ship,  in  which  were  two  people  whom  she  had

known in her youth, and so on.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1429

 

   What is certain is that in Dora’s case the dream which occurred

during the treatment had gained a new significance connected with

the  present  time,  though  perhaps  its  manifest  content  had  not

changed. The dream-thoughts behind it included a reference to mytreatment,  and  it  corresponded  to  a  renewal  of  the  old  intention  of

withdrawing from a danger. If her memory was not deceiving her when

she declared that even at L-- she had noticed the smoke after she

woke up, it must be acknowledged that she had brought my proverb,

‘There  can  be  no  smoke  without  fire’,  very  ingeniously  into  the

completed  form  of  the  dream,  in  which  it  seemed  to  serve  as  an

overdetermination  of  the  last  element.  It  was  undeniably  a  mere

matter of chance that the most recent exciting cause - her mother’s

locking  the  dining-room  door  so  that  her  brother  was  shut  into  his

bedroom - had provided a connection with her persecution by Herr K.

at L--, where her decision had been made when she found she could

not  lock  her  bedroom  door.  It  is  possible  that  her  brother  did  not

appear in the dream on the earlier occasions, so that the words ‘my

two children’ did not form part of its content until after the occurrence

of its latest exciting cause.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1430

 

                                            III

 

                              THE SECOND DREAM

 

   A few weeks after the first dream the second occurred, and when it

had been dealt with the analysis was broken off. It cannot be made as

completely  intelligible  as  the  first,  but  it  afforded  a  desirable

confirmation  of  an  assumption  which  had  become  necessary  about

the patient’s mental state, it filled up a gap in her memory, and it made

it possible to obtain a deep insight into the origin of another of her

symptoms.

   Dora described the dream as follows: ‘I was walking about in a town

which I did not know. I saw streets and squares which were strange to

me.¹ l then came into a house where I lived, went to my room, and

found a letter from Mother lying there. She wrote saying that as I had

left home without my parents’ knowledge she had not wished to write

to me to say that Father was ill. "Now he is dead, and if you like² youcan come." I then went to the station ["Bahnhof"]and asked about a

hundred times: " Where is the station?" I always got the answer: "Five

minutes." I then saw a thick wood before me which I went into, and

there I asked a man whom I met. He said to me: "Two and a half

hours more." ³ He offered to accompany me. But I refused and went

alone. I saw the station in front of me and could not reach it. At the

same time I had the usual feeling of anxiety that one has in dreams

when one cannot move forward. Then I was at home. I must have

been  travelling  in  the  meantime,  but  I  know  nothing  about  that.  I

walked  into  the  porter’s  lodge,  and  enquired  for  our  flat.  The

maidservant opened the door to me and replied that Mother and the

                                                              4
others were already at the cemetery [“Friedhof"].’

 

   ¹ To this she subsequently made an important addendum: ‘I saw a monument in one of the

squares.’

   ² To this came the addendum: ‘There was a question-mark after this word, thus: “like?”.’

   ³ In repeating the dream she said: ‘Two hours.’

4
    In the next session Dora brought me two addenda to this: ‘I saw myself particularly

distinctly going up the stairs,’ and ‘After she had answered I went to my room, but not the
least sadly, and began reading a big book that lay on my writing-table.’
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1431

 

   It was not without some difficulty that the interpretation of this dream

proceeded. In consequence of the peculiar circumstances in which the

analysis was broken off - circumstances connected with the content of

the dream - the whole of it was not cleared up. And for this reason,

too, I am not equally certain at every point of the order in which my

conclusions  were  reached.  I  will  begin  by  mentioning  the  subject-

matter with which the current analysis was dealing at the time when

the dream intervened. For some time Dora herself had been raising a

number  of  questions  about  the  connection  between  some  of  her

actions  and  the  motives  which  presumably  underlay  them.  One  of

these questions was: ‘Why did I say nothing about the scene by the

lake for some days after it had happened?’ Her second question was:

‘Why  did  I  then  suddenly  tell  my  parents  about  it?’  Moreover,  herhaving felt so deeply injured by Herr K.’s proposal seemed to me in

general to need explanation, especially as I was beginning to realize

that Herr K. himself had not regarded his proposal to Dora as a mere

frivolous  attempt  at  seduction.  I  looked  upon  her  having  told  her

parents of the episode as an action which she had taken when she

was already under the influence of a morbid craving for revenge. A

normal girl, I am inclined to think, will deal with a situation of this kind

by herself.

      I  shall  present  the  material  produced  during  the  analysis  of  this

dream in the somewhat haphazard order in which it recurs to my mind.

 

   She was wandering about alone in a strange town and saw streets

and squares. Dora assured me that it was certainly not B--, which I

had first hit upon, but a town in which she had never been. It was

natural  to  suggest  that  she  might  have  seen  some  pictures  or

photographs and have taken the dream-pictures from them. After this

remark of mine came the addendum about the monument in one of

the squares and immediately afterwards her recognition of its source.

At  Christmas  she  had  been  sent  an  album  from  a  German  health-

resort,  containing  views  of  the  town;  and  the  very  day  before  the

dream she had looked this out to show it to some relatives who were

stopping with them. It had been put in a box for keeping pictures in,

and she could not lay her hands on it at once. She had therefore said

to  her  mother:  ‘Where  is  the  box?.’¹  One  of  the  pictures  was  of  a

square with a monument in it. The present had been sent to her by a

young engineer, with whom she had once had a passing acquaintance

in the manufacturing town. The young man had accepted a post in

Germany, so as to become sooner self-supporting; and he took every

opportunity of reminding Dora of his existence. It was easy to guess

that  he  intended  to  come  forward  as  a  suitor  one  day,  when  his

position had improved. But that would take time, and it meant waiting.

 

    ¹ In  the  dream  she  said:  ‘Where  is  the  station?’  The  resemblance  between  the  two

questions led me to make an inference which I shall go into presently.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1432 

   The wandering about in a strange town was overdetermined. It led

back  to  one  of  the  exciting  causes  from  the  day  before.  A  young

cousin of Dora’s had come to stay with them for the holidays, and

Dora had had to show him round Vienna. This cause was, it is true, a

matter of complete indifference to her. But her cousin’s visit reminded

her of her own first brief visit to Dresden. On that occasion she had

been a stranger and had wandered about, not failing, of course, to

visit the famous picture gallery. Another cousin of hers, who was with

them and knew Dresden, had wanted to act as a guide and take her

round the gallery. But she declined and went alone, and stopped in

front of the pictures that appealed to her. She remained two hours in

front of the Sistine Madonna, rapt in silent admiration. When I asked

her what had pleased her so much about the picture she could find no

clear answer to make. At last she said: ‘The Madonna.’

   There could be no doubt that these associations really belonged to

the material concerned in forming the dream. They included portions

which reappeared in the dream unchanged (‘she declined and went

alone’ and ‘two hours’). I may remark at once that ‘pictures’ was a

nodal point in the network of her dream-thoughts (the pictures in the

album, the pictures at Dresden). I should also like to single out, with a

view to subsequent investigation, the theme of the ‘Madonna’, of the

virgin mother. But what was most evident was that in this first part of

the dream she was identifying herself with a young man. This young

man was wandering about in a strange place, he was striving to reach

a goal, but he was being kept back, he needed patience and must

wait. If in all this she had been thinking of the engineer, it would have

been  appropriate  for  the  goal  to  have  been  the  possession  of  a

woman, of herself. But instead of this it was - a station. Nevertheless,

the relation of the question in the dream to the question which had

been put in real life allows us to substitute ‘box’ for ‘station’. A box and

a woman: the notions begin to agree better.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1433

    She asked quite a hundred times.  . . . This led to another exciting

cause of the dream, and this time to one that was less indifferent. On

the  previous  evening  they  had  had  company,  and  afterwards  her

father had asked her to fetch him the brandy: he could not get to sleep

unless he had taken some brandy. She had asked her mother for the

key of the sideboard; but the latter had been deep in conversation,

and  had  not  answered  her,  until  Dora  had  exclaimed  with  the

exaggeration of impatience: ‘I’ve asked you a hundred times already

where the key is.’ As a matter of fact, she had of course only repeated

the question about five times.¹

   ‘Where is the key?’ seems to me to be the masculine counterpart to

the  question  ‘Where  is  the box?'²  They  are  therefore  questions

referring to - the genitals.

   Dora went on to say that during this same family gathering some

one had toasted her father and had expressed the hope that he might

continue to enjoy the best of health for many years to come, etc. At

this a strange quiver passed over her father’s tired face, and she had

understood  what  thoughts  he  was  having  to  keep  down.  Poor  sick

man! who could tell what span of life was still to be his?

   This brings us to the contents of the letter in the dream. Her father

was dead, and she had left home by her own choice. In connection

with this letter I at once reminded Dora of the farewell letter which she

had written to her parents or had at least composed for their benefit.

This letter had been intended to give her father a fright, so that he

should give up Frau K.; or at any rate to take revenge on him if he

could  not  be  induced  to  do  that.  We  are  here  concerned  with  the

subject of her death and of her father’s death. (Cf. ‘cemetery’ later on

in  the  dream.)  Shall  we  be  going  astray  if  we  suppose  that  the

situation which formed the façade of the dream was a phantasy of

revenge directed against her father?  The feelings of pity for him which

she remembered from the day before would be quite in keeping with

this. According to the phantasy she had left home and gone among

strangers,  and  her  father’s  heart  had  broken  with  grief  and  with

longing for her. Thus she would be revenged. She understood very

clearly what it was that her father needed when he could not get to

sleep without a drink of brandy.³ We will make a note of Dora’s craving

for  revenge  as  a  new  element  to  be  taken  into  account  in  anysubsequent synthesis of her dream-thoughts.

 

   ¹ In the dream the number five occurs in the mention of the period of ‘five minutes’. In my

book  on  the  interpretation  of  dreams  I  have  given  several  examples  of  the  way  in  which
numbers occurring in the dream-thoughts are treated by dreams. We frequently find them torn
out of their true context and inserted into a new one.

   ² See the first dream, p. 1403.

   ³ There can be no doubt that sexual satisfaction is the best soporific, just as sleeplessness

is almost always the consequence of lack of satisfaction. Her father could not sleep because
he  was  debarred  from  sexual  intercourse  with  the  woman  he  loved.  (Compare  in  this
connection the phrase discussed just below: ‘I get nothing out of my wife.’)
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1434

 

      But  the  contents  of  the  letter  must  be  capable  of  further

determination. What was the source of the words ‘if you like’? It was at

this point that the addendum of there having been a question-mark

after the word ‘like’ occurred to Dora, and she then recognized these

words  as  a  quotation  out  of  the  letter  from  Frau  K.  which  had

contained the invitation to L--, the place by the lake. In that letter there

had been a question-mark placed, in a most unusual fashion, in the

very middle of a sentence, after the intercalated words ‘if you would

like to come’.

   So here we were back again at the scene by the lake and at the

problems connected with it. I asked Dora to describe the scene to me

in detail. At first she produced little that was new. Herr K.’s exordium

had been somewhat serious; but she had not let him finish what he

had to say. No sooner had she grasped the purport of his words than

she had slapped him in the face and hurried away. I enquired what his

actual words had been. Dora could only remember one of his pleas:

‘You know I get nothing out of my wife.’¹ In order to avoid meeting him

again she had wanted to get back to L-- on foot, by walking round the

lake, and she had asked a man whom she met how far it was. On his

replying  that  it  was  ‘Two  and  a  half  hours’,  she  had  given  up  her

intention  and  had  after  all  gone  back  to  the  boat,  which  left  soon

afterwards. Herr K. had been there too and had come up to her and

begged her to forgive him and not to mention the incident. But she hadmade no reply. - Yes. The wood in the dream had been just like the

wood by the shore of the lake, the wood in which the scene she had

just described once more had taken place. But she had seen precisely

the same thick wood the day before, in a picture at the Secessionist

exhibition. In the background of the picture there were nymphs.²

 

   ¹ These words will enable us to solve one of our problems.

   ² Here for the third time we come upon ‘picture’ (views of towns, the Dresden gallery), but in

a much more significant connection. Because of what appears in the picture (the wood, the
nymphs), the ‘Bild’  [‘picture’]  is  turned  into  a  ‘Weibsbild’  [literally,  ‘picture  of  a  woman’-  a
somewhat derogatory expression for ‘woman’].
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1435

 

   At this point a certain suspicion of mine became a certainty. The use

of  ‘Bahnhof’  [‘station’;  literally,  ‘railway-court’]¹  and  ‘Friedhof’

[‘cemetery’;  literally,  ‘peace-court’]  to  represent  the  female  genitals

was striking enough in itself, but it also served to direct my awakened

curiosity to the similarly formed ‘Vorhof’ [‘vestibulum’; literally, ‘fore-

court’]  -  an  anatomical  term  for  a  particular  region  of  the  female

genitals. This might have been no more than mistaken ingenuity. But

now, with the addition of ‘nymphs’ visible in the background of a ‘thick

wood’, no further doubts could be entertained. Here was a symbolic

geography of sex!  ‘Nymphae’, as is known to physicians though not to

laymen (and even by the former the term is not very commonly used),

is the name given to the labia minora, which lie in the background of

the ‘thick wood’ of the pubic hair. But any one who employed such

technical names as ‘vestibulum’ and ‘nymphae’ must have derived his

knowledge from books, and not from popular ones either, but from

anatomical text-books or from an encyclopaedia - the common refuge

of youth when it is devoured by sexual curiosity. If this interpretation

were correct, therefore, there lay concealed behind the first situation in

the dream a phantasy of defloration, the phantasy of a man seeking to

force an entrance into the female genitals.²

 

   ¹ Moreover,  a  ‘station’  is  used  for  purposes  of  ‘Verkehr’  [‘traffic’,  intercourse’,  ‘sexual

intercourse’]:  this  fact  determines  the  psychical  coating  in  a  number  of  cases  of  railwayphobia.

   ² The phantasy of defloration formed the second component of the situation. The emphasis

upon the difficulty of getting forward and the anxiety felt in the dream indicated the stress
which the dreamer was so ready to lay upon her virginity - a point alluded to in another place
by  means  of  the  Sistine  Madonna.  These  sexual  thoughts  gave  an  unconscious  ground-
colouring to the wishes (which were perhaps merely kept secret ) concerned with the suitor
who was waiting for her in Germany. We have already recognized the phantasy of revenge as
the first component of the same situation in the dream. The two components do not coincide
completely, but only in part. We shall subsequently come upon the traces of a third and still
more important train of thought.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1436

 

   I informed Dora of the conclusions I had reached. The impression

made  upon  her  must  have  been  forcible,  for  there  immediately

appeared a piece of the dream which had been forgotten: she went

calmly to her room, and began reading a big book that lay on her

writing table.¹ The emphasis here was upon the two details ‘calmly’

and ‘big’ in connection with ‘book’. I asked whether the book was in

encyclopaedia format, and she said it was. Now children never read

about forbidden subjects in an encyclopaedia calmly. They do it in fear

and trembling, with an uneasy look over their shoulder to see if some

one  may  not  be  coming.  Parents  are  very  much  in  the  way  while

reading of this kind is going on. But this uncomfortable situation had

been  radically  improved,  thanks  to  the  dream’s  power  of  fulfilling

wishes. Dora’s father was dead, and the others had already gone to

the cemetery. She might calmly read whatever she chose. Did not this

mean that one of her motives for revenge was a revolt against her

parents’ constraint? If her father was dead she could read or love as

she pleased.

   At first she would not remember ever having read anything in an

encyclopaedia;  but  she  then  admitted  that  a  recollection  of  an

occasion of the kind did occur to her, though it was of an innocent

enough nature. At the time when the aunt she was so fond of had

been so seriously ill and it had already been settled that Dora was to

go to Vienna, a letter had come from another uncle, to say that they

could not go to Vienna, as a boy of his, a cousin of Dora’s therefore,

had  fallen  dangerously  ill  with  appendicitis.  Dora  had  thereuponlooked  up  in  the  encyclopaedia  to  see  what  the  symptoms  of

appendicitis were. From what she had then read she still recollected

the characteristic localization of the abdominal pain.

 

   ¹ On another occasion, instead of ‘calmly’ she said ‘not the least sadly’ (p. 1430 n.) - I can

quote  this  dream  as  fresh  evidence  for  the  correctness  of  an  assertion  made  in  my
Interpretation of Dreams (Chapter VII, Section A; p. 953) to the effect that those pieces of a
dream which are at first forgotten and are only subsequently remembered are invariably the
most important from the point of view of understanding the dream. In the same place I went
on to the conclusion that the forgetting of dreams must also be explained as an effect of
endopsychic resistance.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1437

 

   I then remembered that shortly after her aunt’s death Dora had had

an attack of what had been alleged to be appendicitis. Up till then I

had  not  ventured  to  count  that  illness  among  her  hysterical

productions. She told me that during the first few days she had had

high fever and had felt the pain in her abdomen that she had read

about in the encyclopaedia. She had been given cold fomentations but

had not been able to bear them. On the second day her period had set

in, accompanied by violent pains. (Since her health had been bad, the

periods  had  been  very  irregular.)  At  that  time  she  used  to  suffer

continually from constipation.

   It was not really possible to regard this state as a purely hysterical

one. Although hysterical fever does undoubtedly occur, yet it seemed

too arbitrary to put down the fever accompanying this questionable

illness to hysteria instead of to some organic cause operative at the

time. I was on the point of abandoning the track, when she herself

helped me along it by producing her last addendum to the dream: she

saw herself particularly distinctly going up the stairs.

   I naturally required a special determinant for this. Dora objected that

she would anyhow have had to go upstairs if she had wanted to get to

her flat, which was on an upper floor. It was easy to brush aside this

objection (which was probably not very seriously intended) by pointing

out that if she had been able to travel in her dream from the unknown

town to Vienna without making a railway journey she ought also tohave been able to leave out a flight of stairs. She then proceeded to

relate  that  after  the  appendicitis  she  had  not  been  able  to  walk

properly  and  had  dragged  her  right  foot.  This  state  of  things  had

continued  for  a  long  time,  and  on  that  account  she  had  been

particularly  glad  to  avoid  stairs.  Even  now  her  foot  sometimes

dragged. The doctors whom she had consulted at her father’s desire

had been very much astonished at this most unusual after-effect of an

appendicitis, especially as the abdominal pains had not recurred and

did not in any way accompany the dragging of the foot.¹

 

    ¹ We  must  assume  the  existence  of  some  somatic  connection  between  the  painful

abdominal sensations known as ‘ovarian neuralgia’ and locomotor disturbances in the leg on
the same side; and we must suppose that in Dora’s case the somatic connection had been
given an interpretation of a particularly specialized sort, that is to say, that it had been overlaid
with and brought into the service of a particular psychological meaning. The reader is referred
to my analogous remarks in connection with the analysis of Dora’s symptom of coughing and
with the relation between catarrh and loss of appetite.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1438

 

   Here, then, we have a true hysterical symptom. The fever may have

been organically determined - perhaps by one of those very frequent

attacks of influenza that are not localized in any particular part of the

body.  Nevertheless  it  was  now  established  that  the  neurosis  had

seized upon this chance event and made use of it for an utterance of

its own. Dora had therefore given herself an illness which she had

read up about in the encyclopaedia, and she had punished herself for

dipping  into  its  pages.  But  she  was  forced  to  recognize  that  the

punishment could not possibly apply to her reading the innocent article

in question. It must have been inflicted as the result of a process of

displacement,  after  another  occasion  of  more  guilty  reading  had

become  associated  with  this  one;  and  the  guilty  occasion  must  lie

concealed in her memory behind the contemporaneous innocent one.¹

It  might  still  be  possible,  perhaps,  to  discover  the  nature  of  the

subjects she had read about on that other occasion.

   What, then, was the meaning of this condition, of this attempted

simulation  of  a  perityphlitis?    The  remainder  of  the  disorder,  thedragging of one leg, was entirely out of keeping with perityphlitis. It

must,  no  doubt,  fit  in  better  with  the  secret  and  possibly  sexual

meaning of the clinical picture; and if it were elucidated might in its

turn throw light on the meaning which we were in search of. I looked

about for a method of approaching the puzzle. Periods of time had

been mentioned in the dream; and time is assuredly never a matter of

indifference in any biological event. I therefore asked Dora when this

attack of appendicitis had taken place; whether it had been before or

after the scene by the lake. Every difficulty was resolved at a single

blow by her prompt reply: ‘Nine months later.’ The period of time is

sufficiently  characteristic.  Her  supposed  attack  of  appendicitis  had

thus enabled the patient with the modest means at her disposal (the

pains and the menstrual flow) to realize a phantasy of childbirth.² Dora

was  naturally  aware  of  the  significance  of  this  period  of  time,  and

could not dispute the probability of her having, on the occasion under

discussion,  read  up  in  the  encyclopaedia  about  pregnancy  and

childbirth. But what was all this about her dragging her leg? I could

now hazard a guess. That is how people walk when they have twisted

a foot. So she had made a ‘false step’: which was true indeed if she

could give birth to a child nine months after the scene by the lake. But

there was still another requirement upon the fulfilment of which I had

to insist. I am convinced that a symptom of this kind can only arise

where it has an infantile prototype. All my experience hitherto has led

me  to  hold  firmly  to  the  view  that  recollections  derived  from  the

impressions of later years do not possess sufficient force to enable

them to establish themselves as symptoms. I scarcely dared hope that

Dora  would  provide  me  with  the  material  that  I  wanted  from  her

childhood, for the fact is that I am not yet in a position to assert the

general validity of this rule, much as I should like to be able to do so.

But in this case there came an immediate confirmation of it. Yes, said

Dora, once when she was a child she had twisted the same foot; she

had slipped on one of the steps as she was going downstairs. The foot

- and it was actually the same one that she afterwards dragged - had

swelled up and had to be bandaged and she had had to lie up for

some weeks. This had been a short time before the attack of nervous

asthma in her eighth year.

    ¹ This is quite a typical example of the way in which symptoms arise from exciting causes

which appear to be entirely unconnected with sexuality.

   ² I have already indicated that the majority of hysterical symptoms, when they have attained

their full pitch of development, represent an imagined situation of sexual life - such as a scene
of sexual intercourse, pregnancy, childbirth, confinement, etc.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1439

 

   The next thing to do was to turn to account our knowledge of the

existence of this phantasy: ‘If it is true that you were delivered of a

child nine months after the scene by the lake, and that you are going

about to this very day carrying the consequences of your false step

with  you,  then  it  follows  that  in  your  unconscious  you  must  have

regretted the upshot of the scene. In your unconscious thoughts, that

is to say, you have made an emendation in it. The assumption that

underlies  your  phantasy  of  childbirth  is  that  on  that  occasion

something  took  place,¹  that  on  that  occasion  you  experienced  and

went through everything that you were in fact obliged to pick up later

on from the encyclopaedia. So you see that your love for Herr K. did

not come to an end with the scene, but that (as I maintained) it has

persisted  down  to  the  present  day  -  though  it  is  true  that  you  are

unconscious of it.’ - And Dora disputed the fact no longer.²

 

   ¹ The phantasy of defloration is thus found to have an application to Herr K., and we begin

to see why this part of the dream contained material taken from the scene by the lake - the
refusal, two and a half hours, the wood, the invitation to L--.

   ² I may here add a few supplementary interpretations to those that have already been

given: The ‘Madonna’ was obviously Dora herself; in the first place because of the ‘adorer’
who had sent her the pictures, in the second place because she had won Herr K.’s love
chiefly by the motherliness she had shown towards his children, and lastly because she had
had a child though she was still a girl (this being a direct allusion to the phantasy of childbirth).
Moreover, the notion of the ‘Madonna’ is a favourite counter-idea in the mind of girls who feel
themselves oppressed by imputations of sexual guilt, - which was the case with Dora. A first
suspicion of this connection came to me while I was working as a physician at the Psychiatric
Clinic of the University. I there came across a case of confusional insanity with hallucinations,
in which the attack, which ran a rapid course, turned out to be a reaction to a reproach made
against the patient by her fiancé. - If the analysis had been continued, Dora’s maternal longing
for a child would probably have been revealed as an obscure though powerful motive in her
behaviour. The numerous questions which she had been raising latterly seem to have been
belated derivatives of questions inspired by the sexual curiosity which she had tried to gratify
with the encyclopaedia. The subjects which she read up in it were presumably pregnancy,childbirth,  virginity,  and  so  on.  -  In  reproducing  the  dream  Dora  had  forgotten  one  of  the
questions which need to be inserted into the course of the second situation in the dream. This
question could only be; ‘Does Herr -- live here?’ or ‘Where does Herr -- live?’ There must have
been some reason for her having forgotten this apparently innocent question, especially as
she need not have brought it into the dream at all. This reason, it seems to me, lay in her
surname itself, which also denoted an object and in fact more than one kind of object, and
which could therefore be regarded as an ‘ambiguous’ word. Unluckily I cannot give the name
and show how well designed it was to indicate something ‘ambiguous’ and ‘improper’. This
interpretation was supported by the discovery of a similar play upon words in another part of
the dream, where the material was derived from Dora’s recollections of her aunt’s death (‘they
have already gone to the cemetery’) and where there was similarly a play upon her aunt’s
name. These improper words seemed to point to a second and oral source of information,
since the encyclopaedia would not cover them. I should not have been surprised to hear that
this source had been Frau K. herself, Dora’s calumniator. In that case she would have been
the one person whom Dora generously spared, while she pursued the others with an almost
malignant vindictiveness. Behind the almost limitless series of displacements which were thus
brought to light, it was possible to divine the operation of a single simple factor - Dora’s deep-
rooted homosexual love for Frau K.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1440

 

   The labour of elucidating the second dream had so far occupied two

hours.  At  the  end  of  the  second  session,  when  I  expressed  my

satisfaction at the result, Dora replied in a depreciatory tone: ‘Why,

has anything so very remarkable come out?’ These words prepared

me for the advent of fresh revelations.

 

   She opened the third session with these words: ‘Do you know that I

am here for the last time to-day?’ - ‘How can I know, as you have said

nothing to me about it?’ - ‘Yes. I made up my mind to put up with it till

the New Year.¹ But I shall wait no longer than that to be cured.’ - ‘You

know that you are free to stop the treatment at any time. But for to-day

we will go on with our work. When did you come to this decision?’ - ‘A

fortnight  ago,  I  think.’  -  ‘That  sounds  just  like  a  maidservant  or  a

governess - a fortnight’s notice.’ - ‘There was a governess who gave

notice with the K.’s, when I was on my visit to them that time at L--, by

the lake.’ - ‘Really? You have never told me about her. Tell me.’

   ‘Well, there was a young girl in the house, who was the children’s

governess; and she behaved in the most extraordinary way to Herr K.

She never said good morning to him, never answered his remarks,never handed him anything at table when he asked for it, and in short

treated him like thin air. For that matter he was hardly any politer to

her. A day or two before the scene by the lake, the girl took me aside

and said she had something to tell me. She then told me that Herr K.

had  made  advances  to  her  at  a  time  when  his  wife  was  away  for

several weeks; he had made violent love to her and had implored her

to yield to his entreaties, saying that he got nothing from his wife, and

so on.’ - ‘Why, those are the very words he used afterwards, when he

made his proposal to you and you gave him the slap in his face’. -

‘Yes. She had given way to him, but after a little while he had ceased

to care for her, and since then she hated him.’ - ‘And this governess

had given notice?’ - ‘No. She meant to give notice. She told me that as

soon as she felt she was thrown over she had told her parents what

had  happened.  They  were  respectable  people  living  in  Germany

somewhere. Her parents said that she must leave the house instantly;

and, as she failed to do so, they wrote to her saying that they would

have nothing more to do with her, and that she was never to come

home again.’ - ‘And why had she not gone away?’ - ‘She said she

meant to wait a little longer, to see if there might not be some change

in Herr K. She could not bear living like that any more, she said, and if

she saw no change she should give notice and go away.’ - ‘And what

became of the girl?’ - ‘I only know that she went away.’ - ‘And she did

not have a child as a result of the adventure? ‘ - ‘No.’

 

   ¹ It was December 31st.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1441

 

   Here, therefore (and quite in accordance with the rules), was a piece

of material information coming to light in the middle of the analysis and

helping to solve problems which had previously been raised. I was

able to say to Dora: ‘Now I know your motive for the slap in the face

with which you answered Herr K.’s proposal. It was not that you were

offended  at  his  suggestions;  you  were  actuated  by  jealousy  and

revenge. At the time when the governess was telling you her story you

were  still  able  to  make  use  of  your  gift  for  putting  on  one  sideeverything that is not agreeable to your feelings. But at the moment

when Herr K. used the words "I get nothing out of my wife" - which

were the same words he had used to the governess - fresh emotions

were aroused in you and tipped the balance. "Does he dare", you said

to yourself, "to treat me like a governess, like a servant?" Wounded

pride  added  to  jealousy  and  to  the  conscious  motives  of  common

sense - it was too much.¹ To prove to you how deeply impressed you

were  by  the  governess’s  story,  let  me  draw  your  attention  to  the

repeated occasions upon which you have identified yourself with her

both in your dream and in your conduct. You told your parents what

happened - a fact which we have hitherto been unable to account for -

just  as  the  governess  wrote  and  told her  parents.  You  give  me  a

fortnight’s notice, just like a governess. The letter in the dream which

gave you leave to go home is the counterpart of the governess’s letter

from her parents forbidding her to do so.’

 

   ¹ It is not a matter of indifference, perhaps, that Dora may have heard her father make the

same complaint about his wife, just as I myself did from his own lips. She was perfectly well
aware of its meaning.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1442

 

   ‘Then why did I not tell my parents at once?’

   ‘How much time did you allow to elapse? ‘

   ‘The scene took place on the last day of June; I told my mother

about it on July 14th.’

      ‘Again  a  fortnight,  then  -  the  time  characteristic  for  a  person  in

service. Now I can answer your question. You understood the poor girl

very well. She did not want to go away at once, because she still had

hopes, because she expected that Herr K.’s affections would return to

her again. So that must have been your motive too. You waited for

that  length  of  time  so  as  to  see  whether  he  would  repeat  his

proposals;  if  he  had,  you  would  have  concluded  that  he  was  in

earnest, and did not mean to play with you as he had done with the

governess.’

   ‘A few days after I had left he sent me a picture post-card.’¹   ‘Yes, but when after that nothing more came, you gave free rein to

your feelings of revenge. I can even imagine that at that time you were

still able to find room for a subsidiary intention, and thought that your

accusation might be a means of inducing him to travel to the place

where you were living. - ‘As he actually offered to do at first,’ Dora

threw  in.  -  ‘In  that  way  your  longing  for  him  would  have  been

appeased’ - here she nodded assent, a thing which I had not expected

- ‘and he might have made you the amends you desired.’

   ‘What amends?’

   ‘The fact is, I am beginning to suspect that you took the affair with

Herr K. much more seriously than you have been willing to admit so

far. Had not the K.’s often talked of getting a divorce?’

      ‘Yes,  certainly.  At  first  she  did  not  want  to,  on  account  of  the

children. And now she wants to, but he no longer does.’

 

   ¹ Here is the point of contact with the engineer, who was concealed behind the figure of

Dora herself in the first situation in the dream.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1443

 

   ‘May you not have thought that he wanted to get divorced from his

wife so as to marry you? And that now he no longer wants to because

he has no one to replace her? It is true that two years ago you were

very young. But you told me yourself that your mother was engaged at

seventeen and then waited two years for her husband. A daughter

usually takes her mother’s love-story as her model. So you too wanted

to wait for him, and you took it that he was only waiting till you were

grown up enough to be his wife.¹ I imagine that this was a perfectly

serious plan for the future in your eyes. You have not even got the

right to assert that it was out of the question for Herr K. to have had

any such intention; you have told me enough about him that points

directly towards his having such an intention.² Nor does his behaviour

at  L--  contradict  this  view.  After  all,  you  did  not  let  him  finish  his

speech and do not know what he meant to say to you. Incidentally, the

scheme would by no means have been so impracticable. Your father’s

relations with Frau K.- and it was probably only for this reason that youlent them your support for so long - made it certain that her consent to

a divorce could be obtained; and you can get anything you like out of

your  father.  Indeed,  if  your  temptation  at  L--  had  had  a  different

upshot,  this  would  have  been  the  only  possible  solution  for  all  the

parties concerned. And I think that is why you regretted the actual

event  so  deeply  and  emended  it  in  the  phantasy  which  made  its

appearance in the shape of the appendicitis. So it must have been a

bitter piece of disillusionment for you when the effect of your charges

against Herr K. was not that he renewed his proposals but that he

replied instead with denials and slanders. You will agree that nothing

makes you so angry as having it thought that you merely fancied the

scene by the lake. I know now - and this is what you do not want to be

reminded of - that you did fancy that Herr K.’s proposals were serious,

and that he would not leave off until you had married him.’

 

   ¹ The theme of waiting till the goal is reached occurs in the content of the first situation in

the  dream.  I  recognize  in  this  phantasy  of  waiting  for  a  fiancée  a  portion  of  the  third
component of that situation. I have already alluded to the existence of this third component.

   ² In particular there was a speech which he had made in presenting Dora with a letter-case

for Christmas in the last year in which they lived together at B.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1444

 

 

   Dora had listened to me without any of her usual contradictions. She

seemed to be moved; she said good-bye to me very warmly, with the

heartiest wishes for the New Year, and - came no more. Her father,

who called on me two or three times afterwards, assured me that she

would come back again, and said it was easy to see that she was

eager  for  the  treatment  to  continue.  But  it  must  be  confessed  that

Dora’s  father  was  never  entirely  straightforward.  He  had  given  his

support to the treatment so long as he could hope that I should ‘talk’

Dora out of her belief that there was something more than a friendship

between him and Frau K. His interest faded when he observed that it

was not my intention to bring about that result. I knew Dora would not

come  back  again.  Her  breaking  off  so  unexpectedly,  just  when  myhopes  of  a  successful  termination  of  the  treatment  were  at  their

highest, and her thus bringing those hopes to nothing - this was an

unmistakable act of vengeance on her part. Her purpose of self-injury

also profited by this action. No one who, like me, conjures up the most

evil of those half-tamed demons that inhabit the human breast, and

seeks to wrestle with them, can expect to come through the struggle

unscathed. Might I perhaps have kept the girl under my treatment if I

myself had acted a part, if I had exaggerated the importance to me of

her staying on, and had shown a warm personal interest in her - a

course which, even after allowing for my position as her physician,

would have been tantamount to providing her with a substitute for the

affection she longed for? I do not know. Since in every case a portion

of  the  factors  that  are  encountered  under  the  form  of  resistance

remains  unknown,  I  have  always  avoided  acting  a  part,  and  have

contented myself with practising the humbler arts of psychology. In

spite  of  every  theoretical  interest  and  of  every  endeavour  to  be  of

assistance as a physician, I keep the fact in mind that there must be

some limits set to the extent to which psychological influence may be

used, and I respect as one of these limits the patient’s own will and

understanding.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1445

 

   Nor do I know whether Herr K. would have done any better if it had

been  revealed  to  him  that  the  slap  Dora  gave  him  by  no  means

signified a final ‘No’ on her part, but that it expressed the jealousy

which had lately been roused in her, while her strongest feelings were

still on his side. If he had disregarded that first ‘No’, and had continued

to press his suit with a passion which left room for no doubts, the

result might very well have been a triumph of the girl’s affection for

him over all her internal difficulties. But I think she might just as well

have  been  merely  provoked  into  satisfying  her  craving  for  revenge

upon  him  all  the  more  thoroughly.  It  is  never  possible  to  calculate

towards  which  side  the  decision  will  incline  in  such  a  conflict  of

motives: whether towards the removal of the repression or towards itsreinforcement. Incapacity for meeting a real erotic demand is one of

the most essential features of a neurosis. Neurotics are dominated by

the opposition between reality and phantasy. If what they long for the

most intensely in their phantasies is presented to them in reality, they

none  the  less  flee  from  it;  and  they  abandon  themselves  to  their

phantasies the most readily where they need no longer fear to see

them realized. Nevertheless, the barrier erected by repression can fall

before the onslaught of a violent emotional excitement produced by a

real cause; it is possible for a neurosis to be overcome by reality. But

we have no general means of calculating through what person or what

event such a cure can be effected.¹

 

   ¹ I will add a few remarks on the structure of this dream, though it is not possible to

understand it thoroughly enough to allow of a synthesis being attempted. A prominent piece of
the dream is to be seen in the phantasy of revenge against her father, which stands out like a
façade in front of the rest. (She had gone away from home by her own choice; her father was
ill, and then dead. . . Then she went home; all the others were already at the cemetery. She
went to her room, not the least sadly, and calmly began reading the encyclopaedia.) This part
of  the  material  also  contained  two  allusions  to  her  other  act  of  revenge,  which  she  had
actually carried out, when she let her parents discover a farewell letter from her. (The letter -
from her mother, in the dream and the mention of the funeral of the aunt who had always
been her model.) Behind this phantasy lie concealed her thoughts of revenge against Herr K.,
for which she found an outlet in her behaviour to me. (The maidservant, the invitation, the
wood, the two and a half hours - all these came from material connected with the events at L-
-.) Her recollection of the governess, and of the latter’s exchange of letters with her parents, is
related, no less than her farewell letter, to the letter in the dream allowing her to come home.
Her  refusal  to  let  herself  be  accompanied  and  her  decision  to  go  alone  may  perhaps  be
translated into these words: ‘Since you have treated me like a servant, I shall take no more
notice of you, I shall go my own way by myself, and not marry.’ - Screened by these thoughts
of revenge, glimpses can be caught in other places of material derived from tender phantasies
based upon the love for Herr K. which still persisted unconsciously in Dora. (‘I would have
waited for you till I could be your wife’ - defloration - childbirth.) -Finally, we can see the action
of the fourth and most deeply buried group of thoughts - those relating to her love for Frau K. -
in the fact that the phantasy of defloration is represented from the man’s point of view (her
identification of herself with her admirer who lived abroad) and in the fact that in two places
there are the clearest allusions to ambiguous speeches (‘Does Herr -- live here?’) and to that
source of her sexual knowledge which had not been oral (the encyclopaedia). - Cruel and
sadistic tendencies find satisfaction in this dream.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1446

 

                                            IV 

                                    POSTSCRIPT

 

It is true that I have introduced this paper as a fragment of an analysis;

but the reader will have discovered that it is incomplete to a far greater

degree than its title might have led him to expect. It is therefore only

proper that I should attempt to give a reason for the omissions - which

are by no means accidental.

   A number of the results of the analysis have been omitted, because

at  the  time  when  work  was  broken  off  they  had  either  not  been

established  with  sufficient  certainty  or  they  required  further  study

before any general statement could be made about them. At other

points,  where  it  seemed  to  be  permissible,  I  have  indicated  the

direction along which some particular solution would probably have

been found to lie. I have in this paper left entirely out of account the

technique, which does not at all follow as a matter of course, but by

whose means alone the pure metal of valuable unconscious thoughts

can be extracted from the raw material of the patient’s associations.

This  brings  with  it  the  disadvantage  of  the  reader  being  given  no

opportunity of testing the correctness of my procedure in the course of

this exposition of the case. I found it quite impracticable, however, to

deal  simultaneously  with  the  technique  of  analysis  and  with  the

internal  structure  of  a  case  of  hysteria:  I  could  scarcely  have

accomplished such a task, and if I had, the result would have been

almost  unreadable.  The  technique  of  analysis  demands  an  entirely

separate exposition, which would have to be illustrated by numerous

examples chosen from a very great variety of cases and which would

not  have  to  take  the  results  obtained  in  each  particular  case  into

account.  Nor  have  I  attempted  in  this  paper  to  substantiate  the

psychological  postulates  which  will  be  seen  to  underlie  my

descriptions of mental phenomena. A cursory attempt to do so would

have effected nothing; an exhaustive one would have been a volume

in itself. I can only assure the reader that I approached the study of

the  phenomena  revealed  by  observation  of  the  psychoneuroses

without being pledged to any particular psychological system, and that

I then proceeded to adjust my views until they seemed adapted for

giving an account of the collection of facts which had been observed. Itake  no  pride  in  having  avoided  speculation;  the  material  for  my

hypotheses was collected by the most extensive and laborious series

of observations. The decidedness of my attitude on the subject of the

unconscious is perhaps specially likely to cause offence, for I handle

unconscious ideas, unconscious trains of thought, and unconscious

impulses  as  though  they  were  no  less  valid  and  unimpeachable

psychological data than conscious ones. But of this I am certain - that

any one who sets out to investigate the same region of phenomena

and employs the same method will find himself compelled to take up

the same position, however much philosophers may expostulate.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1447

 

   Some of my medical colleagues have looked upon my theory of

hysteria  as  a  purely  psychological  one,  and  have  for  that  reason

pronounced it ipso facto incapable of solving a pathological problem.

They may perhaps discover from this paper that their objection was

based  upon  their  having  unjustifiably  transferred  what  is  a

characteristic  of  the  technique  on  to  the  theory  itself.  It  is  the

therapeutic  technique  alone  that  is  purely  psychological;  the  theory

does not by any means fail to point out that neuroses have an organic

basis  -  though  it  is  true  that  it  does  not  look  for  that  basis  in  any

pathological  anatomical  changes,  and  provisionally  substitutes  the

conception of organic functions for the chemical changes which we

should  expect  to  find  but  which  we  are  at  present  unable  to

apprehend.  No  one,  probably,  will  be  inclined  to  deny  the  sexual

function the character of an organic factor, and it is the sexual function

that  I  look  upon  as  the  foundation  of  hysteria  and  of  the

psychoneuroses in general. No theory of sexual life will, I suspect, be

able  to  avoid  assuming  the  existence  of  some  definite  sexual

substances  having  an  excitant  action.  Indeed,  of  all  the  clinical

pictures which we meet with in clinical medicine, it is the phenomena

of intoxication and abstinence in connection with the use of certain

chronic  poisons  that  most  closely  resemble  the  genuine

psychoneuroses.   But, once again, in the present paper I have not gone fully into all

that  might  be  said  to-day  about  ‘somatic  compliance’,  about  the

infantile germs of perversion, about the erotogenic zones, and about

our predisposition towards bisexuality; I have merely drawn attention

to  the  points  at  which  the  analysis  comes  into  contact  with  these

organic bases of the symptoms. More than this could not be done with

a  single  case.  And  I  had  the  same  reasons  that  I  have  already

mentioned for wishing to avoid a cursory discussion of these factors.

There  is  a  rich  opportunity  here  for  further  works,  based  upon  the

study of a large number of analyses.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1448

 

   Nevertheless, in publishing this paper, incomplete though it is, I had

two objects in view. In the first place, I wished to supplement my book

on the interpretation of dreams by showing how an art, which would

otherwise be useless, can be turned to account for the discovery of

the  hidden  and  repressed  parts  of  mental  life.  (Incidentally,  in  the

process  of  analysing  the  two  dreams  dealt  with  in  the  paper,  the

technique of dream-interpretation, which is similar to that of psycho-

analysis,  has  come  under  consideration.)  In  the  second  place,  I

wished to stimulate interest in a whole group of phenomena of which

science is still in complete ignorance to-day because they can only be

brought to light by the use of this particular method. No one, I believe,

can  have  had  any  true  conception  of  the  complexity  of  the

psychological events in a case of hysteria - the juxtaposition of the

most dissimilar tendencies, the mutual dependence of contrary ideas,

the repressions and displacements, and so on. The emphasis laid by

Janet upon the ‘idée fixe’ which becomes transformed into a symptom

amounts  to  no  more  than  an  extremely  meagre  attempt  at

schematization. Moreover, it is impossible to avoid the suspicion that,

when  the  ideas  attaching  to  certain  excitations  are  incapable  of

becoming  conscious,  those  excitations  must  act  upon  one  another

differently, run a different course, and manifest themselves differently

from those other excitations which we describe as ‘normal’ and whichhave ideas attaching to them of which we become conscious. When

once things have been made clear up to this point, no obstacle can

remain in the way of an understanding of a therapeutic method which

removes neurotic symptoms by transforming ideas of the former kind

into normal ones.

      I  was  further  anxious  to  show  that  sexuality  does  not  simply

intervene, like a deus ex machina, on one single occasion, at some

point in the working of the processes which characterize hysteria, but

that it provides the motive power for every single symptom, and for

every  single  manifestation  of  a  symptom.  The  symptoms  of  the

disease are nothing else than the patient’s sexual activity. A single

case can never be capable of proving a theorem so general as this

one; but I can only repeat over and over again - for I never find it

otherwise  -  that  sexuality  is  the  key  to  the  problem  of  the

psychoneuroses and of the neuroses in general. No one who disdains

the key will ever be able to unlock the door. I still await news of the

investigations which are to make it possible to contradict this theorem

or to limit its scope. What I have hitherto heard against it have been

expressions of personal dislike or disbelief. To these it is enough to

reply in the words of Charcot: ‘Ça n’empêche pas d’exister.’

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1449

 

   Nor is the case of whose history and treatment I have published a

fragment in these pages well calculated to put the value of psycho-

analytic therapy in its true light. Not only the briefness of the treatment

(which hardly lasted three months) but another factor inherent in the

nature of the case prevented results being brought about such as are

attainable in other instances, where the improvement will be admitted

by  the  patient  and  his  relatives  and  will  approximate  more  or  less

closely to a complete recovery. Satisfactory results of this kind are

reached  when  the  symptoms  are  maintained  solely  by  the  internal

conflict between the impulses concerned with sexuality. In such cases

the patient’s condition will be seen improving in proportion as he is

helped towards a solution of his mental problems by the translation ofpathogenic into normal material. The course of events is very different

when the symptoms have become enlisted in the service of external

motives, as had happened with Dora during the two preceding years.

It  is  surprising,  and  might  easily  be  misleading,  to  find  that  the

patient’s  condition  shows  no  noticeable  alteration  even  though

considerable progress has been made with the work of analysis. But

in  reality  things  are  not  as  bad  as  they  seem.  It  is  true  that  the

symptoms do not disappear while the work is proceeding; but they

disappear a little while later, when the relations between patient and

physician  have  been  dissolved.  The  postponement  of  recovery  or

improvement is really only caused by the physician’s own person.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1450

 

   I must go back a little, in order to make the matter intelligible. It may

be safely said that during psycho-analytic treatment the formation of

new symptoms is invariably stopped. But the productive powers of the

neurosis  are  by  no  means  extinguished;  they  are  occupied  in  the

creation  of  a  special  class  of  mental  structures,  for  the  most  part

unconscious, to which the name of ‘transferences’ may be given.

   What are transferences? They are new editions or facsimiles of the

impulses  and  phantasies  which  are  aroused  and  made  conscious

during  the  progress  of  the  analysis;  but  they  have  this  peculiarity,

which is characteristic for their species, that they replace some earlier

person by the person of the physician. To put it another way: a whole

series of psychological experiences are revived, not as belonging to

the past, but as applying to the person of the physician at the present

moment. Some of these transferences have a content which differs

from  that  of  their  model  in  no  respect  whatever  except  for  the

substitution. These then - to keep to the same metaphor - are merely

new impressions or reprints. Others are more ingeniously constructed;

their  content  has  been  subjected  to  a  moderating  influence  -  to

sublimation, as I call it - and they may even become conscious, by

cleverly taking advantage of some real peculiarity in the physician’s

person  or  circumstances  and  attaching  themselves  to  that.  These,then, will no longer be new impressions, but revised editions.

   If the theory of analytic technique is gone into, it become, evident

that transference is an inevitable necessity. Practical experience, at all

events, shows conclusively that there is no means of avoiding it, and

that this latest creation of the disease must be combated like all the

earlier ones. This happens, however, to be by far the hardest part of

the whole task. It is easy to learn how to interpret dreams, to extract

from  the  patient’s  associations  his  unconscious  thoughts  and

memories,  and  to  practise  similar  explanatory  arts:  for  these  the

patient himself will always provide the text. Transference is the one

thing  the  presence  of  which  has  to  be  detected  almost  without

assistance and with only the slightest clues to go upon, while at the

same time the risk of making arbitrary inferences has to be avoided.

Nevertheless, transference cannot be evaded, since use is made of it

in setting up all the obstacles that make the material inaccessible to

treatment, and since it is only after the transference has been resolved

that a patient arrives at a sense of conviction of the validity of the

connections which have been constructed during the analysis.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1451

 

   Some people may feel inclined to look upon it as a serious objection

to a method which is in any case troublesome enough that it itself

should multiply the labours of the physician by creating a new species

of pathological mental products. They may even be tempted to infer

from the existence of transferences that the patient will be injured by

analytic treatment. Both these suppositions would be mistaken. The

physician’s labours are not multiplied by transference; it need make no

difference to him whether he has to overcome any particular impulse

of the patient’s in connection with himself or with some one else. Nor

does  the  treatment  force  upon  the  patient,  in  the  shape  of

transference,  any  new  task  which  he  would  not  other  wise  have

performed. It is true that neuroses may be cured in institutions from

which psycho-analytic treatment is excluded, that hysteria may be said

to be cured not by the method but by the physician, and that there isusually a sort of blind dependence and a permanent bond between a

patient and the physician who has removed his symptoms by hypnotic

suggestion;  but  the  scientific  explanation  of  all  these  facts  is  to  be

found in the existence of ‘transferences’ such as are regularly directed

by patients on to their physicians. Psycho-analytic treatment does not

create transferences, it merely brings them to light, like so many other

hidden  psychical  factors.  The  only  difference  is  this  -  that

spontaneously  a  patient  will  only  call  up  affectionate  and  friendly

transferences to help towards his recovery; if they cannot be called

up, he feels the physician is ‘antipathetic’ to him, and breaks away

from him as fast as possible and without having been influenced by

him. In psycho-analysis, on the other hand, since the play of motives

is  different,  all  the  patient’s  tendencies,  including  hostile  ones,  are

aroused;  they  are  then  turned  to  account  for  the  purposes  of  the

analysis by being made conscious, and in this way the transference is

constantly being destroyed. Transference, which seems ordained to

be  the  greatest  obstacle  to  psycho-analysis,  becomes  its  most

powerful ally, if its presence can be detected each time and explained

to the patient.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1923:] A continuation of these remarks upon transference is contained in

my technical paper on ‘transference-love’ (Freud, 1915a).
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1452

 

   I have been obliged to speak of transference, for it is only by means

of this factor that I can elucidate the peculiarities of Dora’s analysis. Its

great  merit,  namely,  the  unusual  clarity  which  makes  it  seem  so

suitable as a first introductory publication, is closely bound up with its

great defect, which led to its being broken off prematurely. I did not

succeed  in  mastering  the  transference  in  good  time.  Owing  to  the

readiness with which Dora put one part of the pathogenic material at

my disposal during the treatment, I neglected the precaution of looking

out for the first signs of transference, which was being prepared in

connection with another part of the same material a part of which I

was in ignorance. At the beginning it was clear that I was replacing herfather  in  her  imagination,  which  was  not  unlikely,  in  view  of  the

difference between our ages. She was even constantly comparing me

with him consciously, and kept anxiously trying to make sure whether I

was  being  quite  straightforward  with  her,  for  her  father  ‘always

preferred  secrecy  and  roundabout  ways’.  But  when  the  first  dream

came, in which she gave herself the warning that she had better leave

my treatment just as she had formerly left Herr K.’s house, I ought to

have listened to the warning myself. ‘Now,’ I ought to have said to her,

‘it is from Herr K. that you have made a transference on to me. Have

you noticed anything that leads you to suspect me of evil intentions

similar (whether openly or in some sublimated form) to Herr K.’s? Or

have you been struck by anything about me or got to know anything

about me which has caught your fancy, as happened previously with

Herr K.’ Her attention would then have been turned to some detail in

our relations, or in my person or circumstances, behind which there

lay concealed something analogous but immeasurably more important

concerning Herr K. And when this transference had been cleared up,

the analysis would have obtained access to new memories, dealing,

probably,  with  actual  events.  But  I  was  deaf  to  this  first  note  of

warning, thinking I had ample time before me, since no further stages

of transference developed and the material for the analysis had not

yet  run  dry.  In  this  way  the  transference  took  me  unawares,  and,

because of the unknown quantity in me which reminded Dora of Herr

K., she took her revenge on me as she wanted to take her revenge on

him, and deserted me as she believed herself to have been deceived

and  deserted  by  him.  Thus  she acted out  an  essential  part  of  her

recollections and phantasies instead of reproducing it in the treatment.

What this unknown quantity was I naturally cannot tell. I suspect that it

had to do with money, or with jealousy of another patient who had

kept up relations with my family after her recovery. When it is possible

to work transferences into the analysis at an early stage, the course of

the  analysis  is  retarded  and  obscured,  but  its  existence  is  better

guaranteed against sudden and overwhelming resistances.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1453 

      In  Dora’s  second  dream  there  are  several  clear  allusions  to

transference.  At  the  time  she  was  telling  me  the  dream  I  was  still

unaware (and did not learn until two days later) that we had only two

hours more work before us. This was the same length of time which

she had spent in front of the Sistine Madonna, and which (by making a

correction and putting ‘two hours’ instead of ‘two and a half hours’)

she  had  taken  as  the  length  of  the  walk  which  she  had  not  made

round the lake. The striving and waiting in the dream, which related to

the young man in Germany, and had their origin in her waiting till Herr

K. could marry her, had been expressed in the transference a few

days before. The treatment, she had thought, was too long for her;

she would never have the patience to wait so long. And yet in the first

few weeks she had had discernment enough to listen without making

any such objections when I informed her that her complete recovery

would  require  perhaps  a  year.  Her  refusing  in  the  dream  to  be

accompanied, and preferring to go alone, also originated from her visit

to the gallery at Dresden, and I was myself to experience them on the

appointed  day.  What  they  meant  was,  no  doubt:  ‘Men  are  all  so

detestable that I would rather not marry. This is my revenge.’¹

 

   ¹ The longer the interval of time that separates me from the end of this analysis, the more

probable it seems to me that the fault in my technique lay in this omission: I failed to discover
in time and to inform the patient that her homosexual (gynaecophilic) love for Frau K. was the
strongest unconscious current in her mental life. I ought to have guessed that the main source
of her knowledge of sexual matters could have been no one but Frau K. - the very person who
later on charged her with being interested in those same subjects. Her knowing all about such
things and, at the same time, her always pretending not to know where her knowledge came
from was really too remarkable. I ought to have attacked this riddle and looked for the motive
of such an extraordinary piece of repression. If I had done this, the second dream would have
given me my answer. The remorseless craving for revenge expressed in that dream was
suited  as  nothing  else  was  to  conceal  the  current  of  feeling  that  ran  contrary  to  it  -  the
magnanimity with which she forgave the treachery of the friend she loved and concealed from
every one the fact that it was this friend who had herself revealed to her the knowledge which
had later been the ground of the accusations against her. Before I had learnt the importance
of the homosexual current of feeling in psychoneurotics, I was often brought to a standstill in
the treatment of my cases or found myself in complete perplexity.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1454 

   If cruel impulses and revengeful motives, which have already been

used  in  the  patient’s  ordinary  life  for  maintaining  her  symptoms,

become transferred on to the physician during treatment, before he

has had time to detach them from himself by tracing them back to their

sources, then it is not to be wondered at if the patient’s condition is

unaffected by his therapeutic efforts. For how could the patient take a

more effective revenge than by demonstrating upon her own person

the helplessness and incapacity of the physician? Nevertheless, I am

not inclined to put too low a value on the therapeutic results even of

such a fragmentary treatment as Dora’s.

 

   It was not until fifteen months after the case was over and this paper

composed that I had news of my patient’s condition and the effects of

my  treatment.  On  a  date  which  is  not  a  matter  of  complete

indifference, on the first of April (times and dates, as we know, were

never without significance for her), Dora came to see me again: to

finish her story and to ask for help once more. One glance at her face,

however, was enough to tell me that she was not in earnest over her

request. For four or five weeks after stopping the treatment she had

been ‘all in a muddle’, as she said. A great improvement had then set

in; her attacks had become less frequent and her spirits had risen. In

the May of that year one of the K.’s two children (it had always been

delicate) had died. She took the opportunity of their loss to pay them a

visit  of  condolence,  and  they  received  her  as  though  nothing  had

happened in the last three years. She made it up with them, she took

her  revenge  on  them  and  she  brought  her  own  business  to  a

satisfactory  conclusion.  To  the  wife  she  said:  ‘I  know  you  have  an

affair with my father’; and the other did not deny it. From the husband

she  drew  an  admission  of  the  scene  by  the  lake  which  he  had

disputed, and brought the news of her vindication home to her father.

Since then she had not resumed her relations with the family.

 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1455

    After this she had gone on quite well till the middle of October, when

she had had another attack of aphonia which had lasted for six weeks.

I was surprised at this news, and, on my asking her whether there had

been  any  exciting  cause,  she  told  me  that  the  attack  had  followed

upon a violent fright. She had seen some one run over by a carriage.

Finally she came out with the fact that the accident had occurred to no

less a person than Herr K. himself. She had come across him in the

street one day; they had met in a place where there was a great deal

of traffic; he had stopped in front of her as though in bewilderment,

and in his abstraction he had allowed himself to be knocked down by

a carriage.¹ She had been able to convince herself, however, that he

escaped without serious injury. She still felt some slight emotion if she

heard any one speak of her father’s affair with Frau K., but otherwise

she had no further concern with the matter. She was absorbed in her

work, and had no thoughts of marrying.

   She went on to tell me that she had come for help on account of a

right-sided facial neuralgia, from which she was now suffering day and

night. ‘How long has it been going on?’ ‘Exactly a fortnight.’² I could

not help smiling; for I was able to show her that exactly a fortnight

earlier  she  had  read  a  piece  of  news  that  concerned  me  in  the

newspaper. (This was in 1902.) And this she confirmed.

 

   ¹ We have here an interesting contribution to the problem of indirect attempts at suicide,

which I have discussed in my Psychopathology of Everyday Life.

   ² For the significance of this period of time and its relation to the theme of revenge, see the

analysis of the second dream.
 


                Fragment Of An Analysis Of A Case Of Hysteria

                                                                                      1456

 

   Her alleged facial neuralgia was thus a self-punishment -  remorse

at  having  once  given  Herr  K.  a  box  on  the  ear,  and  at  having

transferred her feelings of revenge on to me. I do not know what kind

of help she wanted from me, but I promised to forgive her for having

deprived me of the satisfaction of affording her a far more radical cure

for her troubles.

   Years have again gone by since her visit. In the meantime the girlhas married, and indeed - unless all the signs mislead me - she has

married  the  young  man  who  came  into  her  associations  at  the

beginning of the analysis of the second dream. Just as the first dream

represented her turning away from the man she loved to her father -

that is to say, her flight from life into disease - so the second dream

announced that she was about to tear herself free from her father and

had been reclaimed once more by the realities of life.

                                                                                       1457

 

            THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY

                                        (1905)

 


                                                                                      1458

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1459

 

                  PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

 

The author is under no illusion as to the deficiencies and obscurities of

this  little  work.  Nevertheless  he  has  resisted  the  temptation  of

introducing into it the results of the researches of the last five years,

since this would have destroyed its unity and documentary character.

He is, therefore, reprinting the original text with only slight alterations,

and  has  contented  himself  with  adding  a  few  footnotes  which  are

distinguished from the older ones by an asterisk.¹ It is, moreover, his

earnest wish that the book may age rapidly - that what was once new

in it may become generally accepted, and that what is imperfect in it

may be replaced by something better.

 

   VIENNA, December 1909

 

   ¹ [The distinction was dropped in all subsequent editions.]

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1460

 

                    PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION

 I  have  now  been  watching  for  more  than  ten  years  the  effects

produced by this work and the reception accorded to it; and I take the

opportunity offered by the publication of its third edition to preface it

with  a  few  remarks  intended  to  prevent  misunderstandings  and

expectations that cannot be fulfilled. It must above all be emphasized

that the exposition to be found in the following pages is based entirely

upon everyday medical observation, to which the findings of psycho-

analytic  research  should  lend  additional  depth  and  scientific

significance. It is impossible that these Three Essays on the Theory of

Sexuality should contain anything but what psycho-analysis makes it

necessary to assume or possible to establish. It is, therefore, out of

the question that they could ever be extended into a complete ‘theory

of  sexuality’,  and  it  is  natural  that  there  should  be  a  number  of

important problems of sexual life with which they do not deal at all. But

the  reader  should  not  conclude  from  this  that  the  branches  of  this

large subject which have been thus passed over are unknown to the

author or have been neglected by him as of small importance.

      The  fact  that  this  book  is  based  upon  the  psycho-analytic

observations which led to its composition is shown, however, not only

in the choice of the topics dealt with, but also in their arrangement.

Throughout  the  entire  work  the  various  factors  are  placed  in  a

particular order of precedence: preference is given to the accidental

factors while disposition is left in the background, and more weight is

attached to ontogenesis than to phylogenesis. For it is the accidental

factors that play the principal part in analysis: they are almost entirely

subject to its influence. The dispositional ones only come to light after

them,  as  something  stirred  into  activity  by  experience:  adequate

consideration of them would lead far beyond the sphere of psycho-

analysis.

   The relation between ontogenesis and phylogenesis is a similar one.

Ontogenesis may be regarded as a recapitulation of phylogenesis, in

so far as the latter has not been modified by more recent experience.

The  phylogenetic  disposition  can  be  seen  at  work  behind  the

ontogenetic  process.  But  disposition  is  ultimately  the  precipitate  of

earlier experience of the species to which the more recent experience

of the individual, as the sum of the accidental factors, is super-added.

                     Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1461

 

   I must, however, emphasize that the present work is characterized

not only by being completely based upon psycho-analytic research,

but also by being deliberately independent of the findings of biology. I

have  carefully  avoided  introducing  my  preconceptions,  whether

derived from general sexual biology or from that of particular animal

species, into this study - a study which is concerned with the sexual

functions of human beings and which is made possible through the

technique  of  psycho-analysis.  Indeed,  my  aim  has  rather  been  to

discover how far psychological investigation can throw light upon the

biology of the sexual life of man. It was legitimate for me to indicate

points  of  contact  and  agreement  which  came  to  light  during  my

investigation, but there was no need for me to be diverted from my

course  if  the  psycho-analytic  method  led  in  a  number  of  important

respects  to  opinions  and  findings  which  differed  largely  from  those

based on biological considerations.

   In this third edition I have introduced a considerable amount of fresh

matter, but have not indicated it in any special way, as I did in the

previous edition. Progress in our field of scientific work is at present

less rapid; nevertheless it was essential to make a certain number of

additions  to  this  volume  if  it  was  to  be  kept  in  touch  with  recent

psycho-analytic literature.

 

   VIENNA, October 1914

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1462

 

                    PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION

 

Now that the flood-waters of war have subsided, it is satisfactory to be

able  to  record  the  fact  that  interest  in  psycho-analytic  research

remains unimpaired in the world at large. But the different parts of the

theory have not all had the same history. The purely psychologicaltheses  and  findings  of  psycho-analysis  on  the  unconscious,

repression, conflict as a cause of illness, the advantage accruing from

illness,  the  mechanisms  of  the  formation  of  symptoms,  etc.,  have

come to enjoy increasing recognition and have won notice even from

those  who  are  in  general  opposed  to  our  views.  That  part  of  the

theory,  however,  which  lies  on  the  frontiers  of  biology  and  the

foundations of which are contained in this little work is still faced with

undiminished contradiction. It has even led some who for a time took a

very active interest in psycho-analysis to abandon it and to adopt fresh

views which were intended to restrict once more the part played by the

factor of sexuality in normal and pathological mental life.

   Nevertheless I cannot bring myself to accept the idea that this part

of psycho-analytic theory can be very much more distant than the rest

from the reality which it is its business to discover. My recollections, as

well as a constant re-examination of the material, assure me that this

part  of  the  theory  is  based  upon  equally  careful  and  impartial

observation. There is, moreover, no difficulty in finding an explanation

of this discrepancy in the general acceptance of my views. In the first

place, the beginnings of human sexual life which are here described

can only be confirmed by investigators who have enough patience and

technical skill to trace back an analysis to the first years of a patient’s

childhood. And there is often no possibility of doing this, since medical

treatment demands that an illness should, at least in appearance, be

dealt with more rapidly. None, however, but physicians who practise

psycho-analysis  can  have  any  access  whatever  to  this  sphere  of

knowledge  or  any  possibility  of  forming  a  judgement  that  is

uninfluenced  by  their  own  dislikes  and  prejudices.  If  mankind  had

been able to learn from a direct observation of children, these three

essays could have remained unwritten.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1463

 

   It must also be remembered, however, that some of what this book

contains - its insistence on the importance of sexuality in all human

achievements and the attempt that it makes at enlarging the conceptof sexuality - has from the first provided the strongest motives for the

resistance against psycho-analysis. People have gone so far in their

search for high-sounding catch words as to talk of the ‘pan-sexualism’

of  psycho-analysis  and  to  raise  the  senseless  charge  against  it  of

explaining ‘everything’ by sex. We might be astonished at this, if we

ourselves  could  forget  the  way  in  which  emotional  factors  make

people  confused  and  forgetful.  For  it  is  some  time  since  Arthur

Schopenhauer, the philosopher, showed mankind the extent to which

their  activities  are  determined  by  sexual  impulses  -  in  the  ordinary

sense of the word. It should surely have been impossible for a whole

world  of  readers  to  banish  such  a  startling  piece  of  information  so

completely from their minds. And as for the ‘stretching’ of the concept

of sexuality which has been necessitated by the analysis of children

and what are called perverts, anyone who looks down with contempt

upon psycho-analysis from a superior vantage-point should remember

how closely the enlarged sexuality of psycho-analysis coincides with

the Eros of the divine Plato. (Cf. Nachmansohn, 1915.)

 

   VIENNA, May 1920

 


                                                                                      1464

 

            THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY

 

                                            I

 

                        THE SEXUAL ABERRATIONS¹

 

The  fact  of  the  existence  of  sexual  needs  in  human  beings  and

animals  is  expressed  in  biology  by  the  assumption  of  a  ‘sexual

instinct’, on the analogy of the instinct of nutrition, that is of hunger.

Everyday language possesses no counterpart to the word ‘hunger’,

but science makes use of the word ‘libido’ for that purpose.²

      Popular  opinion  has  quite  definite  ideas  about  the  nature  and

characteristics of this sexual instinct. It is generally understood to be

absent in childhood, to set in at the time of puberty in connection withthe  process  of  coming  to  maturity  and  to  be  revealed  in  the

manifestations of an irresistible attraction exercised by one sex upon

the other; while its aim is presumed to be sexual union, or at all events

actions  leading  in  that  direction.  We  have  every  reason  to  believe,

however,  that  these  views  give  a  very  false  picture  of  the  true

situation.  If  we  look  into  them  more  closely  we  shall  find  that  they

contain a number of errors, inaccuracies and hasty conclusions flaws.

   I shall at this point introduce two technical terms. Let up call the

person from whom sexual attraction proceeds the sexual object and

the act towards which the instinct tends the sexual aim. Scientifically

sifted  observation,  then,  shows  that  numerous  deviations  occur  in

respect of both of these - the sexual object and the sexual aim. The

relation between these deviations and what is assumed to be normal

requires thorough investigation.

 

   ¹ The information contained in this first essay is derived from the well-known writings of

Krafft-Ebing, Moll, Moebius, Havelock Ellis, Schrenck-Notzing, Löwenfeld, Eulenburg, Bloch
and  Hirschfeld,  and  from  the Jahrbuch  für  sexuelle  Zwischenstufen,  published  under  the
direction of the last-named author. Since full bibliographies of the remaining literature of the
subject will be found in the works of these writers, I have been able to spare myself the
necessity for giving detailed references. [Added 1910:] The data obtained from the psycho-
analytic investigation of inverts are based upon material supplied to me by I Sadger and upon
my own findings.

   ² [Footnote added 1910:] The only appropriate word in the German language, ‘Lust’, is

unfortunately  ambiguous,  and  is  used  to  denote  the  experience  both  of  a  need  and  of  a
gratification.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1465

 

    (1)  DEVIATIONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL OBJECT

 

                                    (A)  INVERSION

 

   The popular view of the sexual instinct is beautifully reflected in the

poetic fable which tells how the original human beings were cut up into

two halves - man and woman - and how these are always striving to

unite again in love. It comes as a great surprise therefore to learn that

there are men whose sexual object is a man and not a woman, andwomen whose sexual object is a woman and not a man. People of this

kind are described as having ‘contrary sexual feelings’, or better, as

being ‘inverts’, and the fact is described as ‘inversion’. The number of

such  people  is  very  considerable,  though  there  are  difficulties  in

establishing it precisely.¹

 

BEHAVIOUR OF INVERTS   Such people vary greatly in their behaviour in

several respects.

                                          ( a) They may be absolute inverts. In that

case their sexual objects are exclusively of their own sex. Persons of

the opposite sex are never the object of their sexual desire, but leave

them cold, or even arouse sexual aversion in them. As a consequence

of this aversion, they are incapable, if they are men, of carrying out the

sexual act, or else they derive no enjoyment from it.

      (b)  They  may  be amphigenic  inverts,  that  is  psychosexual

hermaphrodites. In that case their sexual objects may equally well be

of their own or of the opposite sex. This kind of inversion thus lacks

the characteristic of exclusiveness.

      (c)  They  may  be contingent  inverts.  In  that  case,  under  certain

external  conditions  -  of  which  inaccessibility  of  any  normal  sexual

object and imitation are the chief - they are capable of taking as their

sexual object someone of their own sex and of deriving satisfaction

from sexual intercourse with him.

 

   ¹ On these difficulties and on the attempts which have been made to

arrive at the proportional number of inverts, see Hirschfeld (1904).

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1466

 

   Again, inverts vary in their views as to the peculiarity of their sexual

instinct.  Some  of  them  accept  their  inversion  as  something  in  the

natural course of things, just as a normal person accepts the direction

of his libido, and insist energetically that inversion is as legitimate as

the normal attitude; others rebel against their inversion and feel it as a

pathological compulsion.¹   Other variations occur which relate to questions of time. The trait of

inversion may either date back to the very beginning, as far back as

the subject’s memory reaches, or it may not have become noticeable

till some particular time before or after puberty.² It may either persist

throughout life, or it may go into temporary abeyance, or again it may

constitute an episode on the way to a normal development. It may

even make its first appearance late in life after a long period of normal

sexual  activity.  A  periodic  oscillation  between  a  normal  and  an

inverted  sexual  object  has  also  sometimes  been  observed.  Those

cases are of particular interest in which the libido changes over to an

inverted  sexual  object  after  a  distressing  experience  with  a  normal

one.

   As a rule these different kinds of variations are found side by side

independently of one another. It is, however, safe to assume that the

most extreme form of inversion will have been present from a very

early  age  and  that  the  person  concerned  will  feel  at  one  with  his

peculiarity.

   Many authorities would be unwilling to class together all the various

cases which I have enumerated and would prefer to lay stress upon

their differences rather than their resemblances, in accordance with

their  own  preferred  view  of  inversion.  Nevertheless,  though  the

distinctions  cannot  be  disputed,  it  is  impossible  to  overlook  the

existence of numerous intermediate examples of every type, so that

we are driven to conclude that we are dealing with a connected series.

 

   ¹ The fact of a person struggling in this way against a compulsion towards inversion may

perhaps  determine  the  possibility  of  his  being  influenced  by  suggestion  [Added  1910:]  or
psycho-analysis.

   ² Many writers have insisted with justice that the dates assigned by inverts themselves for

the  appearance  of  their  tendency  to  inversion  are  untrustworthy,  since  they  may  have
repressed  the  evidence  of  their  heterosexual  feelings  from  their  memory.  [Added  1910:]
These suspicions have been confirmed by psycho-analysis in those cases of inversion to
which it has had access; it has produced decisive alterations in their anamnesis by filling in
their infantile amnesia.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1467

 NATURE OF INVERSION   The earliest assessments regarded inversion as

an innate indication of

                                         nervous degeneracy. This corresponded to

the fact that medical

observers first came across it in persons suffering, or appearing to

suffer,  from  nervous  diseases.  This  characterization  of  inversion

involves two suppositions, which must be considered separately: that

it is innate and that it is degenerate.

 

DEGENERACY   The attribution of degeneracy in this connection is open

to the objections which

                          can be raised against the indiscriminate use of the

word in general. It has become the fashion to regard any symptom

which  is  not  obviously  due  to  trauma  or  infection  as  a  sign  of

degeneracy. Magnan’s classification of degenerates is indeed of such

a kind as not to exclude the possibility of the concept of degeneracy

being  applied  to  a  nervous  system  whose  general  functioning  is

excellent. This being so, it may well be asked whether an attribution of

‘degeneracy’ is of any value or adds anything to our knowledge. It

seems wiser only to speak of it where

   (1) several serious deviations from the normal are found together,

and

   (2) the capacity for efficient functioning and survival seem to be

severely impaired.¹

 

   ¹ Moebius (1900) confirms the view that we should be chary in making a diagnosis of

degeneracy and that it has very little practical value: ‘If we survey the wide field of degeneracy
upon which some glimpses of revealing light have been thrown in these pages, it will at once
be clear that there is small value in ever making a diagnosis of degeneracy.’
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1468

 

   Several facts go to show that in this legitimate sense of the word

inverts cannot be regarded as degenerate:

      (1)  Inversion  is  found  in  people  who  exhibit  no  other  serious

deviations from the normal.   (2) It is similarly found in people whose efficiency is unimpaired, and

who  are  indeed  distinguished  by  specially  high  intellectual

development and ethical culture.¹

      (3)  If  we  disregard  the  patients  we  come  across  in  our  medical

practice, and cast our eyes round a wider horizon, we shall come in

two directions upon facts which make it impossible to regard inversion

as a sign of degeneracy:

   (a) Account must be taken of the fact that inversion was a frequent

phenomenon  -  one  might  almost  say  an  institution  charged  with

important functions - among the peoples of antiquity at the height of

their civilization.

   (b) It is remarkably widespread among many savage and primitive

races,  whereas  the  concept  of  degeneracy  is  usually  restricted  to

states of high civilization (cf. Bloch); and, even amongst the civilized

peoples  of  Europe,  climate  and  race  exercise  the  most  powerful

influence on the prevalence of inversion and upon the attitude adopted

towards it.²

 

INNATE CHARACTER   As may be supposed, innateness is only attributed

to the first, most

                                   extreme, class of inverts, and the evidence for it

rests upon assurances given by them that at no time in their lives has

their sexual instinct shown any sign of taking another course. The very

existence of the two other classes, and especially the third, is difficult

to reconcile with the hypothesis of the innateness of inversion. This

explains why those who support this view tend to separate out the

group  of  absolute  inverts  from  all  the  rest,  thus  abandoning  any

attempt at giving an account of inversion which shall have universal

application. In the view of these authorities inversion is innate in one

group of cases, while in others it may have come about in other ways.

 

   ¹ It must be allowed that the spokesmen of ‘Uranism’ are justified in asserting that some of

the  most  prominent  men  in  all  recorded  history  were  inverts  and  perhaps  even  absolute
inverts.

     ² The  pathological  approach  to  the  study  of  inversion  has  been  displaced  by  the

anthropological. The merit for bringing about this change is due to Bloch (1902-3), who has
also laid stress on the occurrence of inversion among the civilizations of antiquity.
                     Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1469

 

   The reverse of this view is represented by the alternative one that

inversion is an acquired character of the sexual instinct. This second

view is based on the following considerations:

   (1) In the case of many inverts, even absolute ones, it is possible to

show that very early in their lives a sexual impression occurred which

left  a  permanent  after-effect  in  the  shape  of  a  tendency  to

homosexuality.

   (2) In the case of many others, it is possible to point to external

influences in their lives, whether of a favourable or inhibiting character,

which have led sooner or later to a fixation of their inversion. (Such

influences  are  exclusive  relations  with  persons  of  their  own  sex,

comradeship in war, detention in prison, the dangers of heterosexual

intercourse, celibacy, sexual weakness, etc.)

   (3) Inversion can be removed by hypnotic suggestion, which would

be astonishing in an innate characteristic.

   In view of these considerations it is even possible to doubt the very

existence of such a thing as innate inversion. It can be argued (cf.

Havelock Ellis ) that, if the cases of allegedly innate inversion were

more  closely  examined,  some  experience  of  their  early  childhood

would probably come to light which had a determining effect upon the

direction  taken  by  their  libido.  This  experience  would  simply  have

passed  out  of  the  subject’s  conscious  recollection,  but  could  be

recalled to his memory under appropriate influence. In the opinion of

these writers inversion can only be described as a frequent variation

of  the  sexual  instinct,  which  can  be  determined  by  a  number  of

external circumstances in the subject’s life.

   The apparent certainty of this conclusion is, however, completely

countered  by  the  reflection  that  many  people  are  subjected  to  the

same  sexual  influences  (e.g.  to  seduction  or  mutual  masturbation,

which may occur in early youth) without becoming inverted or without

remaining so permanently. We are therefore forced to a suspicion that

the choice between ‘innate’ and ‘acquired’ is not an exclusive one or

that it does not cover all the issues involved in inversion.

 EXPLANATION OF INVERSION   The nature of inversion is explained neither

by the hypothesis

                                                  that it is innate nor by the alternative

hypothesis that it is acquired. In the former case we must ask in what

respect it is innate, unless we are to accept the crude explanation that

everyone is born with his sexual instinct attached to a particular sexual

object. In the latter case it may be questioned whether the various

accidental influences would be sufficient to explain the acquisition of

inversion without the co-operation of something in the subject himself.

As we have already shown, the existence of this last factor is not to be

denied.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1470

 

 

BISEXUALITY   A fresh contradiction of popular views is involved in the

considerations put

                        forward by Lydston, Kiernan and Chevalier in an

endeavour  to  account  for  the  possibility  of  sexual  inversion.  It  is

popularly believed that a human being is either a man or a woman.

Science, however, knows of cases in which the sexual characters are

obscured, and in which it is consequently difficult to determine the sex.

This arises in the first instance in the field of anatomy. The genitals of

the individuals concerned combine male and female characteristics.

(This  condition  is  known  as  hermaphroditism.)  In  rare  cases  both

kinds of sexual apparatus are found side by side fully developed (true

hermaphroditism);  but  far  more  frequently  both  sets  of  organs  are

found in an atrophied condition.¹

   The importance of these abnormalities lies in the unexpected fact

that they facilitate our understanding of normal development. For it

appears that a certain degree of anatomical hermaphroditism occurs

normally. In every normal male or female individual, traces are found

of  the  apparatus  of  the  opposite  sex.  These  either  persist  without

function as rudimentary organs or become modified and take on other

functions.

   These long-familiar facts of anatomy lead us to suppose that anoriginally bisexual physical disposition has, in the course of evolution,

become  modified  into  a  unisexual  one,  leaving  behind  only  a  few

traces of the sex that has become atrophied.

   It was tempting to extend this hypothesis to the mental sphere and

to explain inversion in all its varieties as the expression of a psychical

hermaphroditism. All that was required further in order to settle the

question was that inversion should be regularly accompanied by the

mental and somatic signs of hermaphroditism.

 

   ¹ For the most recent descriptions of somatic hermaphroditism, see Taruffi (1903), and

numerous  papers  by  Neugebauer  in  various  volumes  of  the Jahrbuch  für  sexuelle
Zwischenstufen.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1471

 

      But  this  expectation  was  disappointed.  It  is  impossible  to

demonstrate so close a connection between the hypothetical psychical

hermaphroditism  and  the  established  anatomical  one.  A  general

lowering of the sexual instinct and a slight anatomical atrophy of the

organs  is  found  frequently  in  inverts  (cf.  Havelock  Ellis,  1915).

Frequently, but by no means regularly or even usually. The truth must

therefore be recognized that inversion and somatic hermaphroditism

are on the whole independent of each other.

   A great deal of importance, too, has been attached to what are

called the secondary and tertiary sexual characters and to the great

frequency of the occurrence of those of the opposite sex in inverts (cf.

Havelock  Ellis,  1915).  Much  of  this,  again,  is  correct;  but  it  should

never be forgotten that in general the secondary and tertiary sexual

characters of one sex occur very frequently in the opposite one. They

are  indications  of  hermaphroditism,  but  are  not  attended  by  any

change of sexual object in the direction of inversion.

   Psychical hermaphroditism would gain substance if the inversion of

the sexual object were at least accompanied by a parallel change-over

of the subject’s other mental qualities, instincts and character traits

into those marking the opposite sex. But it is only in inverted women

that  character-inversion  of  this  kind  can  be  looked  for  with  anyregularity.  In  men  the  most  complete  mental  masculinity  can  be

combined with inversion. If the belief in psychical hermaphroditism is

to be persisted in, it will be necessary to add that its manifestations in

various spheres show only slight signs of being mutually determined.

Moreover the same is true of somatic hermaphroditism: according to

Halban  (1903),¹  occurrences  of  individual  atrophied  organs  and  of

secondary sexual characters are to a considerable extent independent

of one another.

 

   ¹ His paper includes a bibliography of the subject.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1472

 

   The theory of bisexuality has been expressed in its crudest form by

a  spokesman  of  the  male  inverts:  ‘a  feminine  brain  in  a  masculine

body’.  But  we  are  ignorant  of  what  characterizes  a  feminine  brain.

There is neither need nor justification for replacing the psychological

problem by the anatomical one. Krafft-Ebing’s attempted explanation

seems to be more exactly framed than that of Ulrichs but does not

differ from it in essentials. According to Krafft-Ebing (1895, 5), every

individual’s  bisexual  disposition  endows  him  with  masculine  and

feminine brain centres as well as with somatic organs of sex: these

centres develop only at puberty, for the most part under the influence

of  the  sex-gland,  which  is  independent  of  them  in  the  original

disposition. But what has just been said of masculine and feminine

brains  applies  equally  to  masculine  and  feminine  ‘centres’;  and

incidentally we have not even any grounds for assuming that certain

areas of the brain (‘centres’) are set aside for the functions of sex, as

is the case, for instance with those of speech.¹

   Nevertheless, two things emerge from these discussions. In the first

place,  a  bisexual  disposition  is  somehow  concerned  in  inversion,

though  we  do  not  know  in  what  that  disposition  consists,  beyond

anatomical structure. And secondly, we have to deal with disturbances

that affect the sexual instinct in the course of its development.

 

   ¹ It appears (from a bibliography given in the sixth volume of the Jahrbuch für sexuelleZwischenstufen) that E. Gley was the first writer to suggest bisexuality as an explanation of
inversion. As long ago as in January, 1884, he published a paper, ‘Les aberrations de l’instinct
sexuel’, in the Revue Philosophique. It is, moreover, noteworthy that the majority of authors
who derive inversion from bisexuality bring forward that factor not only in the case of inverts,
but also for all those who have grown up to be normal, and that, as a logical consequence,
they regard inversion as the result of a disturbance in development. Chevalier (1893) already
writes  in  this  sense.  Krafft-Ebing  (1895,  10)  remarks  that  there  are  a  great  number  of
observations ‘which prove at least the virtual persistence of this second centre (that of the
subordinated  sex).’  A  Dr.  Arduin  (1900)  asserts  that  ‘there  are  masculine  and  feminine
elements in every human being (cf. Hirschfeld, 1899); but one set of these - according to the
sex of the person in question - is incomparably more strongly developed than the other, so far
as heterosexual individuals are concerned. . . .’ Herman (1903) is convinced that ‘masculine
elements and characteristics are present in every woman and feminine ones in every man’,
etc. [Added 1910:] Fliess (1906) subsequently claimed the idea of bisexuality (in the sense of
duality of sex) as his own. [Added 1924:] In lay circles the hypothesis of human bisexuality is
regarded as being due to O. Weininger, the philosopher, who died at an early age, and who
made the idea the basis of a somewhat unbalanced book (1903). The particulars which I have
enumerated above will be sufficient to show how little justification there is for the claim.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1473

 

 

SEXUAL OBJECT OF INVERTS   The theory of psychical hermaphroditism

presupposes that

                                                  the sexual object of an invert is the

opposite of that of a normal person. An inverted man, it holds, is like a

woman in being subject to the charm that proceeds from masculine

attributes both physical and mental: he feels he is a woman in search

of a man.

   But however well this applies to quite a number of inverts, it is,

nevertheless, far from revealing a universal characteristic of inversion.

There can be no doubt that a large proportion of male inverts retain

the mental quality of masculinity, that they possess relatively few of

the secondary characters of the opposite sex and that what they look

for in their sexual object are in fact feminine mental traits. If this were

not  so,  how  would  it  be  possible  to  explain  the  fact  that  male

prostitutes who offer themselves to inverts - to-day just as they did in

ancient times imitate women in all the externals of their clothing and

behaviour? Such imitation would otherwise inevitably clash with the

ideal  of  the  inverts.  It  is  clear  that  in  Greece,  where  the  most

masculine  men  were  numbered  among  the  inverts,  what  excited  aman’s love was not the masculine character of a boy, but his physical

resemblance to a woman as well as his feminine mental qualities - his

shyness, his modesty and his need for instruction and assistance. As

soon as the boy became a man he ceased to be a sexual object for

men and himself, perhaps, became a lover of boys. In this instance,

therefore, as in many others, the sexual object is not someone of the

same sex but someone who combines the characters of both sexes;

there is as, it were, a compromise between an impulse that seeks for

a man and one that seeks for a woman, while it remains a paramount

condition that the object’s body (i.e. genitals) shall be masculine. Thus

the sexual object is a kind of reflection of the subject’s own bisexual

nature.¹

   The position in the case of women is less ambiguous; for among

them the active inverts exhibit masculine characteristics, both physical

and  mental,  with  peculiar  frequency  and  look  for  femininity  in  their

sexual objects - though here again a closer knowledge of the facts

might reveal greater variety.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1910:] It is true that psycho-analysis has not yet produced a complete

explanation  of  the  origin  of  inversion;  nevertheless,  it  has  discovered  the  psychical
mechanism of its development, and has made essential contributions to the statement of the
problems involved. In all the cases we have examined we have established the fact that the
future inverts, in the earliest years of their childhood, pass through a phase of very intense but
short lived fixation to a woman (usually their mother), and that, after leaving this behind, they
identify themselves with a woman and take themselves as their sexual object. That is to say,
they proceed from a narcissistic basis, and look for a young man who resembles themselves
and whom they may love as their mother loved them. Moreover, we have frequently found that
alleged inverts have been by no means insusceptible to the charms of women, but have
continually transposed the excitation aroused by women on to a male object. They have thus
repeated  all  through  their  lives  the  mechanism  by  which  their  inversion  arose.  Their
compulsive longing for men has turned out to be determined by their ceaseless flight from
women.
      [Added  1915:]  Psycho-analytic  research  is  most  decidedly  opposed  to  any  attempt  at
separating off homosexuals from the rest of mankind as a group of a special character. By
studying sexual excitations other than those that are manifestly displayed, it has found that all
human beings are capable of making a homosexual object-choice and have in fact made one
in their unconscious. Indeed, libidinal attachments to persons of the same sex play no less a
part as factors in normal mental life, and a greater part as a motive force for illness, than do
similar attachments to the opposite sex. On the contrary, psycho-analysis considers that a
choice of an object independently of its sex - freedom to range equally over male and female
objects - as it is found in childhood, in primitive states of society and early periods of history, is
the original basis from which, as a result of restriction in one direction or the other, both the
normal and the inverted types develop. Thus from the point of view of psycho-analysis the
exclusive sexual interest felt by men for women is also a problem that needs elucidating andis not a self-evident fact based upon an attraction that is ultimately of a chemical nature. A
person’s final sexual attitude is not decided until after puberty and is the result of a number of
factors, not all of which are yet known; some are of a constitutional nature but others are
accidental. No doubt a few of these factors may happen to carry so much weight that they
influence the result in their sense. But in general the multiplicity of determining factors is
reflected in the variety of manifest sexual attitudes in which they find their issue in mankind. In
inverted types, a predominance of archaic constitutions and primitive psychical mechanisms is
regularly to be found. Their most essential characteristics seem to be a coming into operation
of narcissistic object-choice and a retention of the erotic significance of the anal zone. There
is nothing to be gained, however, by separating the most extreme types of inversion from the
rest on the basis of constitutional peculiarities of that kind. What we find as an apparently
sufficient explanation of these types can be equally shown to be present, though less strongly,
in the constitution of transitional types and of those whose manifest attitude is normal. The
differences in the end-products may be of a qualitative nature, but analysis shows that the
differences between their determinants are only quantitative. Among the accidental factors
that influence object-choice we have found that frustration (in the form of an early deterrence,
by fear, from sexual activity) deserves attention, and we have observed that the presence of
both  parents  plays  an  important  part.  The  absence  of  a  strong  father  in  childhood  not
infrequently favours the occurrence of inversion. Finally, it may be insisted that the concept of
inversion  in  respect  of  the  sexual  object  should  be  sharply  distinguished  from  that  of  the
occurrence in the subject of a mixture of sexual characters. In the relation between these two
factors, too, a certain degree of reciprocal independence is unmistakably present.
   [Added 1920:] Ferenczi (1914) has brought forward a number of interesting points on the
subject of inversion. He rightly protests that, because they have in common the symptom of
inversion, a large number of conditions, which are very different from one another and which
are of unequal importance both in organic and psychical respects, have been thrown together
under  the  name  of  ‘homosexuality’  (or,  to  follow  him  in  giving  it  a  better  name,  ‘homo-
erotism’).  He  insists  that  a  sharp  distinction  should  at  least  be  made  between  two  types:
‘subject homo-erotics’, who feel and behave like women, and ‘object homo-erotics’, who are
completely masculine and who have merely exchanged a female for a male object. The first of
these two types he recognizes as true ‘sexual intermediates’ in Hirschfeld’s sense of the word;
the second he describes, less happily, as obsessional neurotics. According to him, it is only in
the case of object homo-erotics that there is any question of their struggling against their
inclination to inversion or of the possibility of their being influenced psychologically. While
granting the existence of these two types, we may add that there are many people in whom a
certain quantity of subject homo-erotism is found in combination with a proportion of object
homo-erotism.
   During the last few years work carried out by biologists, notably by Steinach, has thrown a
strong light on the organic determinants of homo-erotism and of sexual characters in general.
By  carrying  out  experimental  castration  and  subsequently  grafting  the  sex-glands  of  the
opposite sex, it was possible in the case of various species of mammals to transform a male
into a female and vice versa. The transformation affected more or less completely both the
somatic  sexual  characters  and  the  psychosexual  attitude  (that  is,  both  subject  and  object
erotism). It appeared that the vehicle of the force which thus acted as a sex-determinant was
not the part of the sex-gland which forms the sex-cells but what is known as its interstitial
tissue (the ‘puberty-gland’). In one case this transformation of sex was actually effected in a
man who had lost his testes owing to tuberculosis. In his sexual life he behaved in a feminine
manner,  as  a  passive  homosexual,  and  exhibited  very  clearly  marked  feminine  sexual
characters of a secondary kind (e.g. in regard to growth of hair and beard and deposits of fat
on the breasts and hips). After an undescended testis from another male patient had beengrafted into him, he began to behave in a masculine manner and to direct his libido towards
women  in  a  normal  way.  Simultaneously  his  somatic  feminine  characters  disappeared.
(Lipschütz, 1919, 356-7.)
      It  would  be  unjustifiable  to  assert  that  these  interesting  experiments  put  the  theory  of
inversion on a new basis, and it would be hasty to expect them to offer a universal means of
‘curing’  homosexuality.  Fliess  has  rightly  insisted  that  these  experimental  findings  do  not
invalidate the theory of the general bisexual disposition of the higher animals. On the contrary,
it  seems  to  me  probable  that  further  research  of  a  similar  kind  will  produce  a  direct
confirmation of this presumption of bisexuality.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1474

 

 

SEXUAL AIM OF INVERTS   The important fact to bear in mind is that no

one single aim can be

                                           laid down as applying in cases of inversion.

Among  men,  intercourse per  annum  by  no  means  coincides  with

inversion; masturbation is quite as frequently their exclusive aim, and

it is even true that restrictions of sexual aim - to the point of its being

limited to simple outpourings of emotion - are commoner among them

than among heterosexual lovers. Among women, too, the sexual aims

of  inverts  are  various:  there  seems  to  be  a  special  preference  for

contact with the mucous membrane of the mouth.

 

CONCLUSION   It will be seen that we are not in a position to base a

satisfactory explanation of

                         the origin of inversion upon the material at present

before us. Nevertheless our investigation has put us in possession of

a piece of knowledge which may turn out to be of greater importance

to us than the solution of that problem. It has been brought to our

notice  that  we  have  been  in  the  habit  of  regarding  the  connection

between the sexual instinct and the sexual object as more intimate

than it in fact is. Experience of the cases that are considered abnormal

has shown us that in them the sexual instinct and the sexual object

are merely soldered together - a fact which we have been in danger of

overlooking in consequence of the uniformity of the normal picture,

where the object appears to form part and parcel of the instinct. We

are  thus  warned  to  loosen  the  bond  that  exists  in  our  thoughtsbetween instinct and object. It seems probable that the sexual instinct

is in the first instance independent of its object; nor is its origin likely to

be due to its object’s attractions.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1475

 

    (B)  SEXUALLY IMMATURE PERSONS AND ANIMALS AS SEXUAL OBJECTS

 

   People whose sexual objects belong to the normally inappropriate

sex - that is, inverts - strike the observer as a collection of individuals

who may be quite sound in other respects. On the other hand, cases

in which sexually immature persons (children) are chosen as sexual

objects  are  instantly  judged  as  sporadic  aberrations.  It  is  only

exceptionally that children are the exclusive sexual objects in such a

case.  They  usually  come  to  play  that  part  when  someone  who  is

cowardly  or  has  become  impotent  adopts  them  as  a  substitute,  or

when an urgent instinct (one which will not allow of postponement)

cannot at the moment get possession of any more appropriate object.

Nevertheless, a light is thrown on the nature of the sexual instinct by

the fact that it permits of so much variation in its objects and such a

cheapening  of  them  -  which  hunger,  with  its  far  more  energetic

retention  of  its  objects,  would  only  permit  in  the  most  extreme

instances. A similar consideration applies to sexual intercourse with

animals, which is by no means rare, especially among country people,

and  in  which  sexual  attraction  seems  to  override  the  barriers  of

species.

   One would be glad on aesthetic grounds to be able to ascribe these

and other severe aberrations of the sexual instinct to insanity; but that

cannot be done. Experience shows that disturbances of the sexual

instinct among the insane do not differ from those that occur among

the healthy and in whole races or occupations. Thus the sexual abuse

of children is found with uncanny frequency among school teachers

and child attendants, simply because they have the best opportunity

for it. The insane merely exhibit any such aberration to an intensified

degree; or, what is particularly significant, it may become exclusive

and replace normal sexual satisfaction entirely.      The  very  remarkable  relation  which  thus  holds  between  sexual

variations and the descending scale from health to insanity gives us

plenty of material for thought. I am inclined to believe that it may be

explained by the fact that the impulses of sexual life are among those

which, even normally, are the least controlled by the higher activities

of the mind. In my experience anyone who is in any way, whether

socially or ethically, abnormal mentally is invariably abnormal also in

his sexual life. But many people are abnormal in their sexual life who

in every other respect approximate to the average, and have, along

with  the  rest,  passed  through  the  process  of  human  cultural

development, in which sexuality remains the weak spot.

 

   The most general conclusion that follows from all these discussions

seems, however, to be this. Under a great number of conditions and in

surprisingly numerous individuals, the nature and importance of the

sexual  object  recedes  into  the  background.  What  is  essential  and

constant in the sexual instinct is something else.¹

 

¹ [Footnote added 1910:] The most striking distinction between the erotic life of antiquity and

our own no doubt lies in the fact that the ancients laid the stress upon the instinct itself,
whereas we emphasize its object. The ancients glorified the instinct and were prepared on its
account to honour even an inferior object; while we despise the instinctual activity in itself, and
find excuses for it only in the merits of the object.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1476

 

        (2) DEVIATIONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL AIM

 

   The normal sexual aim is regarded as being the union of the genitals

in the act known as copulation, which leads to a release of the sexual

tension  and  a  temporary  extinction  of  the  sexual  instinct  -  a

satisfaction analogous to the sating of hunger. But even in the most

normal sexual process we may detect rudiments which, if they had

developed,  would  have  led  to  the  deviations  described  as

‘perversions’. For there are certain intermediate relations to the sexual

object,  such  as  touching  and  looking  at  it,  which  lie  on  the  road

towards  copulation  and  are  recognized  as  being  preliminary  sexualaims. On the one hand these activities are themselves accompanied

by pleasure, and on the other hand they intensify the excitation, which

should persist until the final sexual aim is attained. Moreover, the kiss,

one particular contact of this kind, between the mucous membrane of

the lips of the two people concerned, is held in high sexual esteem

among many nations (including the most highly civilized ones), in spite

of the fact that the parts of the body involved do not form part of the

sexual  apparatus  but  constitute  the  entrance  to  the  digestive  tract.

Here, then, are factors which provide a point of contact between the

perversions  and  normal  sexual  life  and  which  can  also  serve  as  a

basis for their classification. Perversions are sexual activities which

either (a) extend, in an anatomical sense, beyond the regions of the

body  that  are  designed  for  sexual  union,  or  (b)  linger  over  the

intermediate relations to the sexual object which should normally be

traversed rapidly on the path towards the final sexual aim.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1477

 

                            (A)  ANATOMICAL EXTENSIONS

 

OVERVALUATION OF THE SEXUAL OBJECT   It is only in the rarest instances

that the psychical

                                                                      valuation that is set on the

sexual object, as being the goal of the sexual instinct, stops short at its

genitals. The appreciation extends to the whole body of the sexual

object and tends to involve every sensation derived from it. The same

overvaluation spreads over into the psychological sphere: the subject

becomes, as it were, intellectually infatuated (that is, his powers of

judgement  are  weakened)  by  the  mental  achievements  and

perfections  of  the  sexual  object  and  he  submits  to  the  latter’s

judgements  with  credulity.  Thus  the  credulity  of  love  becomes  in

important, if not the most fundamental, source of authority.¹

      This  sexual  overvaluation  is  something  that  cannot  be  easily

reconciled with a restriction of the sexual aim to union of the actual

genitals and it helps to turn activities connected with other parts of the

body into sexual aims.²   The significance of the factor of sexual overvaluation can be best

studied in men, for their erotic life alone has become accessible to

research.  That  of  women  -  partly  owing  to  the  stunting  effect  of

civilized  conditions  and  partly  owing  to  their  conventional

secretiveness  and  insincerity  -  is  still  veiled  in  an  impenetrable

obscurity.³

 

   ¹ In this connection I cannot help recalling the credulous submissive less shown by a

hypnotized  subject  towards  his  hypnotist.  This  leads  one  to  suspect  that  the  essence  of
hypnosis lies in an unconscious fixation of the subject’s libido to the figure of the hypnotist,
through  the  medium  of  the  masochistic  components  of  the  sexual  instinct.  [Added 1910:]
Ferenczi (1909) has brought this characteristic of suggestibility into relation with the ‘parental
complex’.

   ² It must be pointed out, however, that sexual overvaluation is not developed in the case of

every mechanism of object-choice. We shall become acquainted later on with another and
more direct explanation of the sexual role assumed by the other parts of the body. The factor
of ‘craving for stimulation’ has been put forward by Noche and Bloch as an explanation of the
extension of sexual interest to parts of the body other than the genitals; but it does not seem
to  me  to  deserve  such  an  important  place.  The  various  channels  along  which  the  libido
passes are related to each other from the very first like inter-communicating pipes, and we
must take the phenomenon of collateral flow into account.

   ³ [Footnote added 1920:] In typical cases women fail to exhibit any sexual overvaluation

towards men; but they scarcely ever fail to do so towards their own children.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1478

 

 

SEXUAL USE OF THE MUCOUS MEMBRANE OF THE LIPS AND MOUTH   The use of

the mouth as a

                                                                                        

                     sexual organ is regarded as a perversion if the lips (or

tongue) of one person are brought into contact with the genitals of

another, but not if the mucous membranes of the lips of both of them

come  together.  This  exception  is  the  point  of  contact  with  what  is

normal. Those who condemn the other practices (which have no doubt

been  common  among  mankind  from  primaeval  times)  as  being

perversions,  are  giving  way  to  an  unmistakable  feeling  of disgust,

which protects them from accepting sexual aims of the kind. The limits

of such disgust are, however, often purely conventional: a man whowill kiss a pretty girl’s lips passionately, may perhaps be disgusted at

the idea of using her tooth-brush, though there are no grounds for

supposing that his own oral cavity, for which he feels no disgust, is

any cleaner than the girl’s. Here, then, our attention is drawn to the

factor of disgust, which interferes with the libidinal overvaluation of the

sexual object but can in turn be overridden by libido. Disgust seems to

be one of the forces which have led to a restriction of the sexual aim.

These forces do not as a rule extend to the genitals themselves. But

there  is  no  doubt  that  the  genitals  of  the  opposite  sex  can  in

themselves be an object of disgust and that such an attitude is one of

the characteristics of all hysterics, and especially of hysterical women.

The sexual instinct in its strength enjoys overriding this disgust. (See

below.)

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1479

 

 

SEXUAL  USE  OF  THE  ANAL  ORIFICE      Where  the  anus  is  concerned  it

becomes still clearer that it

                                                           is disgust which stamps that

sexual aim as a perversion. I hope, however, I shall not be accused of

partisanship  when  I  assert  that  people  who  try  to  account  for  this

disgust by saying that the organ in question serves the function of

excretion  and  comes  in  contact  with  excrement  -  a  thing  which  is

disgusting in itself - are not much more to the point than hysterical

girls who account for their disgust at the male genital by saying that it

serves to void urine.

   The playing of a sexual part by the mucous membrane of the anus is

by no means limited to intercourse between men: preference for it is in

no way characteristic of inverted feeling. On the contrary, it seems that

paedecatio with a male owes its origin to an analogy with a similar act

performed with a woman; while mutual masturbation is the sexual aim

most often found in intercourse between inverts.

 

SIGNIFICANCE OF OTHER REGIONS OF THE BODY   The extension of sexual

interest to other                                                                                  regions of the

body, with all its variations, offers us nothing that is new in principle; it

adds nothing to our knowledge of the sexual instinct, which merely

proclaims its intention in this way of getting possession of the sexual

object  in  every  possible  direction.  But  these  anatomical  extensions

inform us that, besides sexual overvaluation, there is a second factor

at work which is strange to popular knowledge. Certain regions of the

body, such as the mucous membrane of the mouth and anus, which

are constantly appearing in these practices, seem, as it were, to be

claiming  that  they  should  themselves  be  regarded  and  treated  as

genitals. We shall learn later that this claim is justified by the history of

the  development  of  the  sexual  instinct  and  that  it  is  fulfilled  in  the

symptomatology of certain pathological states.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1480

 

 

UNSUITABLE SUBSTITUTES FOR THE SEXUAL OBJECT - FETISHISM   There are

some cases

                                                                                                          

which  are  quite  specially  remarkable  -  those  in  which  the  normal

sexual object is replaced by another which bears some relation to it,

but is entirely unsuited to serve the normal sexual aim. From the point

of view of classification, we should no doubt have done better to have

mentioned this highly interesting group of aberrations of the sexual

instinct among the deviations in respect of the sexual object. But we

have postponed their mention till we could become acquainted with

the factor of sexual overvaluation, on which these phenomena, being

connected with an abandonment of the sexual aim, are dependent.

   What is substituted for the sexual object is some part of the body

(such as the foot or hair) which is in general very inappropriate for

sexual purposes, or some inanimate object which bears an assignable

relation to the person whom it replaces and preferably to that person’s

sexuality (e.g. a piece of clothing or underlinen ). Such substitutes are

with some justice likened to the fetishes in which savages believe that

their gods are embodied.   A transition to those cases of fetishism in which the sexual aim,

whether normal or perverse, is entirely abandoned is afforded by other

cases  in  which  the  sexual  object  is  required  to  fulfil  a  fetishistic

condition - such as the possession of some particular hair-colouring or

clothing, or even some bodily defect if the sexual aim is to be attained.

No  other  variation  of  the  sexual  instinct  that  borders  on  the

pathological can lay so much claim to our interest as this one, such is

the peculiarity of the phenomena to which it gives rise. Some degree

of diminution in the urge towards the normal sexual aim (an executive

weakness  of  the  sexual  apparatus)  seems  to  be  a  necessary

precondition in every case.¹ The point of contact with the normal is

provided by the psychologically essential overvaluation of the sexual

object, which inevitably extends to everything that is associated with it.

A certain degree of fetishism is thus habitually present in normal love,

especially in those stages of it in which the normal sexual aim seems

unattainable or its fulfilment prevented:

 

                                                                Schaff’ mir ein Halstuch von ihrer Brust,

                                                                Ein Strumpfband meiner Liebeslust!²

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1915:] This weakness would represent the constitutional precondition.

Psycho-analysis has found that the phenomenon can also be accidentally determined, by the
occurrence of an early deterrence from sexual activity owing to fear, which may divert the
subject from the normal sexual aim and encourage him to seek a substitute for it.

   ² [ Get me a kerchief from her breast,

       A garter that her knee has pressed.]
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1481

 

   The situation only becomes pathological when the longing for the

fetish passes beyond the point of being merely a necessary condition

attached  to  the  sexual  object  and  actually takes  the  place  of  the

normal aim, and, further, when the fetish becomes detached from a

particular individual and becomes the sole sexual object. These are,

indeed,  the  general  conditions  under  which  mere  variations  of  the

sexual instinct pass over into pathological aberrations.

      Binet  (1888)  was  the  first  to  maintain  (what  has  since  beenconfirmed by a quantity of evidence) that the choice of a fetish is an

after-effect  of  some  sexual  impression  received  as  a  rule  in  early

childhood. (This may be brought into line with the proverbial durability

of  first  loves: on  revient  toujours  à  ses  premiers  amours.)  This

derivation  is  particularly  obvious  in  cases  where  there  is  merely  a

fetishistic  condition  attached  to  the  sexual  object.  We  shall  come

across the importance of early sexual impressions again in another

connection.¹

 

¹ [Footnote added 1920:] Deeper-going psycho-analytic research has raised a just criticism of

Binet’s assertion. All the observations dealing with this point have recorded a first meeting
with the fetish at which it already aroused sexual interest without there being anything in the
accompanying  circumstances  to  explain  the  fact.  Moreover,  all  of  these  ‘early’  sexual
impressions relate to a time after the age of five or six, whereas psycho-analysis makes it
doubtful whether fresh pathological fixations can occur so late as this. The true explanation is
that  behind  the  first  recollection  of  the  fetish’s  appearance  there  lies  a  submerged  and
forgotten phase of sexual development. The fetish, like a ‘screen memory’, represents this
phase and is thus a remnant and precipitate of it. The fact that this early infantile phase turns
in  the  direction  of  fetishism,  as  well  as  the  choice  of  the  fetish  itself,  are  constitutionally
determined.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1482

 

      In  other  cases  the  replacement  of  the  object  by  a  fetish  is

determined by a symbolic connection of thought, of which the person

concerned is usually not conscious. It is not always possible to trace

the course of these connections with certainty (The foot, for instance,

is  an  age-old  sexual  symbol  which  occurs  even  in  mythology;¹  no

doubt  the  part  played  by  fur  as  a  fetish  owes  its  origin  to  an

association with the hair of the mons Veneris.) None the less even

symbolism such as this is not always unrelated to sexual experiences

in childhood.²

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1910:] The shoe or slipper is a corresponding symbol of the female

genitals.

   ²  Psycho-analysis has cleared up one of the remaining gaps in our understanding of

fetishism. It has shown the importance, as regards the choice of a fetish, of a coprophilic
pleasure in smelling which has disappeared owing to repression. Both the feet and the hair
are  objects  with  a  strong  smell  which  have  been  exalted  into  fetishes  after  the  olfactorysensation has become unpleasurable and been abandoned. Accordingly, in the perversion
that corresponds to foot fetishism, it is only dirty and evil-smelling feet that become sexual
objects. Another factor that helps towards explaining the fetishistic preference for the foot is to
be found among the sexual theories of children (see below p. 1514): the foot represents a
woman’s penis, the absence of which is deeply felt. [Added 1915:] In a number of cases of
foot-fetishism it has been possible to show that the scopophilic instinct, seeking to reach its
object  (originally  the  genitals)  from  underneath,  was  brought  to  a  halt  in  its  pathway  by
prohibition and repression. For that reason it became attached to a fetish in the form of a foot
or shoe, the female genitals (in accordance with the expectations of childhood/children) being
imagined as male ones.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1483

 

                  (B)  FIXATIONS OF PRELIMINARY SEXUAL AIMS
 

APPEARANCE OF NEW AIMS   Every external or internal factor that hinders

or postpones the

                                                attainment of the normal sexual aim

(such as impotence, the high price of the sexual object or the danger

of the sexual act) will evidently lend support to the tendency to linger

over the preparatory activities and to turn them into new sexual aims

that  can  take  the  place  of  the  normal  one.  Attentive  examination

always shows that even what seem to be the strangest of these new

aims are already hinted at in the normal sexual process.

 

TOUCHING AND LOOKING   A certain amount of touching is indispensable

(at all events among

                                           human beings) before the normal sexual

aim can be attained. And everyone knows what a source of pleasure

on the one hand and what an influx of fresh excitation on the other is

afforded by tactile sensations of the skin of the sexual object. So that

lingering  over  the  stage  of  touching  can  scarcely  be  counted  a

perversion,  provided  that  in  the  long  run  the  sexual  act  is  carried

further.

   The same holds true of seeing - an activity that is ultimately derived

from touching. Visual impressions remain the most frequent pathway

along which libidinal excitation is aroused; indeed, natural selection

counts upon the accessibility of this pathway - if such a teleological

form  of  statement  is  permissible  -  when  it  encourages  thedevelopment  of  beauty  in  the  sexual  object.  The  progressive

concealment  of  the  body  which  goes  along  with  civilization  keeps

sexual curiosity awake. This curiosity seeks to complete the sexual

object  by  revealing  its  hidden  parts.  It  can,  however,  be  diverted

(‘sublimated’) in the direction of art, if its interest can be shifted away

from the genitals on to the shape of the body as a whole.¹ It is usual

for most normal people to linger to some extent over the intermediate

sexual aim of a looking that has a sexual tinge to it; indeed, this offers

them  a  possibility  of  directing  some  proportion  of  their  libido  on  to

higher  artistic  aims.  On  the  other  hand,  this  pleasure  in  looking

becomes a perversion (a) if it is restricted exclusively to the genitals,

or (b) if it is connected with the overriding of disgust (as in the case of

voyeurs or people who look on at excretory functions), or (c) if, instead

of being preparatory to the normal sexual aim, it supplants it. This last

is markedly true of exhibitionists, who, if I may trust the findings of

several  analyses,  exhibit  their  own  genitals  in  order  to  obtain  a

reciprocal view of the genitals of the other person.²

    In  the  perversions  which  are  directed  towards  looking  and  being

looked at, we come across a very remarkable characteristic with which

we shall be still more intensely concerned in the aberration that we

shall consider next: in these perversions the sexual aim occurs in two

forms, an active and a passive one.

   The force which opposes scopophilia, but which may be overridden

by it (in a manner parallel to what we have previously seen in the case

of disgust), is shame.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1915:] There is to my mind no doubt that the concept of ‘beautiful’ has its

roots  in  sexual  excitation  and  that  its  original  meaning  was  ‘sexually  stimulating’.  This  is
related to the fact that we never regard the genitals themselves, which produce the strongest
sexual excitation, as really ‘beautiful’.

   ² [Footnote added 1920:] Under analysis, these perversions - and indeed most others -

reveal  a  surprising  variety  of  motives  and  determinants.  The  compulsion  to  exhibit,  for
instance, is also closely dependent on the castration complex: it is a means of constantly
insisting upon the integrity of the subject’s own (male) genitals and it reiterates his infantile
satisfaction at the absence of a penis in those of women.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1484 

 

SADISM AND MASOCHISM   The most common and the most significant of

all the perversions -

                                            the desire to inflict pain upon the sexual

object,  and  its  reverse  -  received  from  Krafft-Ebing  the  names  of

‘sadism’ and ‘masochism’ for its active and passive forms respectively.

Other  writers  have  preferred  the  narrower  term  ‘algolagnia’.  This

emphasizes  the  pleasure  in pain,  the  cruelty;  whereas  the  names

chosen by Krafft-Ebing bring into prominence the pleasure in any form

of humiliation or subjection.

   As regards active algolagnia, sadism, the roots are easy to detect in

the  normal.  The  sexuality  of  most  male  human  beings  contains  an

element  of aggressiveness  -  a  desire  to  subjugate;  the  biological

significance  of  it  seems  to  lie  in  the  need  for  overcoming  the

resistance of the sexual object by means other than the process of

wooing. Thus sadism would correspond to an aggressive component

of the sexual instinct which has become independent and exaggerated

and, by displacement, has usurped the leading position.

   In ordinary speech the connotation of sadism oscillates between, on

the  one  hand,  cases  merely  characterized  by  an  active  or  violent

attitude to the sexual object, and, on the other hand, cases in which

satisfaction is entirely conditional on the humiliation and maltreatment

of the object. Strictly speaking, it is only this last extreme instance

which deserves to be described as a perversion.

      Similarly,  the  term  masochism  comprises  any  passive  attitude

towards  sexual  life  and  the  sexual  object,  the  extreme  instance  of

which  appears  to  be  that  in  which  satisfaction  is  conditional  upon

suffering physical or mental pain at the hands of the sexual object.

Masochism, in the form of a perversion, seems to be further removed

from the normal sexual aim than its counterpart; it may be doubted at

first whether it can ever occur as a primary phenomenon or whether,

on the contrary, it may not invariably arise from a transformation of

sadism.¹  It can often be shown that masochism is nothing more than

an  extension  of  sadism  turned  round  upon  the  subject’s  own  self,

which thus, to begin with, takes the place of the sexual object. Clinical

analysis of extreme cases of masochistic perversion show that a greatnumber of factors (such as the castration complex and the sense of

guilt)  have  combined  to  exaggerate  and  fixate  the  original  passive

sexual attitude.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] My opinion of masochism has been to a large extent altered by

later reflection, based upon certain hypotheses as to the structure of the apparatus of the
mind and the classes of instincts operating in it. I have been led to distinguish a primary or
erotogenic masochism, out of which two later forms, feminine and moral masochism, have
developed.  Sadism  which  cannot  find  employment  in  actual  life  is  turned  round  upon  the
subject’s own self and so produces a secondary masochism, which is superadded to the
primary kind. (Cf. Freud, 1924c.)
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1485

 

   Pain, which is overridden in such cases, thus falls into line with

disgust and shame as a force that stands in opposition and resistance

to the libido.

      Sadism  and  masochism  occupy  a  special  position  among  the

perversions, since the contrast between activity and passivity which

lies behind them is among the universal characteristics of sexual life.

   The history of human civilization shows beyond any doubt that there

is an intimate connection between cruelty and the sexual instinct; but

nothing has been done towards explaining the connection, apart from

laying emphasis on the aggressive factor in the libido. According to

some authorities this aggressive element of the sexual instinct is in

reality  a  relic  of  cannibalistic  desires  -  that  is,  it  is  a  contribution

derived from the apparatus for obtaining mastery, which is concerned

with the satisfaction of the other and, ontogenetically, the older of the

great instinctual needs.¹ It has also been maintained that every pain

contains in itself the possibility of a feeling of pleasure. All that need

be said is that no satisfactory explanation of this perversion has been

put  forward  and  that  it  seems  possible  that  a  number  of  mental

impulses are combined in it to produce a single resultant.²

   But the most remarkable feature of this perversion is that its active

and passive forms are habitually found to occur together in the same

individual. A person who feels pleasure in producing pain in someone

else in a sexual relationship is also capable of enjoying as pleasureany pain which he may himself derive from sexual relations. A sadist

is always at the same time a masochist, although the active or the

passive aspect of the perversion may be the more strongly developed

in him and may represent his predominant sexual activity.³

   We find, then, that certain among the impulses to perversion occur

regularly  as  pairs  of  opposites;  and  this,  taken  in  conjunction  with

material  which  will  be  brought  forward  later,  has  a  high  theoretical

              4
significance. It is, moreover, a suggestive fact that the existence of

the  pair  of  opposites  formed  by  sadism  and  masochism  cannot  be

attributed merely to the element of aggressiveness. We should rather

be inclined to connect the simultaneous presence of these opposites

with the opposing masculinity and femininity which are combined in

bisexuality  -  a  contrast  which  often  has  to  be  replaced  in  psycho-

analysis by that between activity and passivity.

 

    ¹ [Footnote added  1915:]  Cf.  my  remarks  below  on  the  pregenital  phases  of  sexual

development, which confirm this view.

   ² [Footnote added 1924:] The enquiry mentioned above has led me to assign a peculiar

position, based upon the origin of the instincts, to the pair of opposites constituted by sadism
and masochism, and to place them outside the class of the remaining ‘perversions’.

    ³ Instead  of  multiplying  the  evidence  for  this  statement,  I  will  quote  a  passage  from

Havelock Ellis (1913, 119): ‘The investigation of histories of sadism and masochism, even
those  given  by  Krafft-Ebing  (as  indeed  Colin  Scott  and  Féré  have  already  pointed  out),
constantly reveals traces of both groups of phenomena in the same individual.’
4
    [Footnote added 1915:] Cf. my discussion of ‘ambivalence’ below.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1486

 

 

                  (3) THE PERVERSIONS IN GENERAL

 

VARIATION AND DISEASE   It is natural that medical men, who first studied

perversions in

                                           outstanding examples and under special

conditions, should have been inclined to regard them, like inversion,

as  indications  of  degeneracy  or  disease.  Nevertheless,  it  is  even

easier to dispose of that view in this case than in that of inversion.Everyday experience has shown that most of these extensions, or at

any rate the less severe of them, are constituents which are rarely

absent from the sexual life of healthy people, and are judged by them

no differently from other intimate events. If circumstances favour such

an occurrence, normal people too can substitute a perversion of this

kind for the normal sexual aim for quite a time, or can find place for

the one alongside the other. No healthy person, it appears, can fail to

make  some  addition  that  might  be  called  perverse  to  the  normal

sexual aim; and the universality of this finding is in itself enough to

show how inappropriate it is to use the word perversion as a term of

reproach.  In  the  sphere  of  sexual  life  we  are  brought  up  against

peculiar and, indeed, insoluble difficulties as soon as we try to draw a

sharp line to distinguish mere variations within the range of what is

physiological from pathological symptoms.

   Nevertheless, in some of these perversions the quality of the new

sexual  aim  is  of  a  kind  to  demand  special  examination.  Certain  of

them  are  so  far  removed  from  the  normal  in  their  content  that  we

cannot  avoid  pronouncing  them  ‘pathological’.  This  is  especially  so

where (as, for instance, in cases of licking excrement or of intercourse

with dead bodies ) the sexual instinct goes to astonishing lengths in

successfully  overriding  the  resistances  of  shame,  disgust,  horror  or

pain. But even in such cases we should not be too ready to assume

that people who act in this way will necessarily turn out to be insane or

subject to grave abnormalities of other kinds. Here again we cannot

escape from the fact that people whose behaviour is in other respects

normal  can,  under  the  domination  of  the  most  unruly  of  all  the

instincts, put themselves in the category of sick persons in the single

sphere of sexual life. On the other hand, manifest abnormality in the

other relations of life can invariably be shown to have a background of

abnormal sexual conduct.

      In  the  majority  of  instances  the  pathological  character  in  a

perversion is found to lie not in the content of the new sexual aim but

in  its  relation  to  the  normal.  If  a  perversion,  instead  of  appearing

merely alongside the normal sexual aim and object, and only when

circumstances  are  unfavourable  to them  and  favourable  to it  -  if,

instead of this, it ousts them completely and takes their place in all

circumstances  -  if,  in  short,  a  perversion  has  the  characteristics  ofexclusiveness  and  fixation  -  then  we  shall  usually  be  justified  in

regarding it as a pathological symptom.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1487

 

 

THE  MENTAL  FACTOR  IN  THE  PERVERSIONS   It is perhaps in connection

precisely with the most

                                                                        repulsive perversions

that the mental factor must be regarded as playing its largest part in

the transformation of the sexual instinct. It is impossible to deny that in

their case a piece of mental work has been performed which, in spite

of  its  horrifying  result,  is  the  equivalent  of  an  idealization  of  the

instinct.  The  omnipotence  of  love  is  perhaps  never  more  strongly

proved than in such of its aberrations as these. The highest and the

lowest are always closest to each other in the sphere of sexuality:

‘vom Himmel durch die Welt zur Hölle.’¹

 

TWO CONCLUSIONS   Our study of the perversions has shown us that the

sexual instinct has to

                                    struggle against certain mental forces which act

as  resistances,  and  of  which  shame  and  disgust  are  the  most

prominent. It is permissible to suppose that these forces play a part in

restraining that instinct within the limits that are regarded as normal;

and  if  they  develop  in  the  individual  before  the  sexual  instinct  has

reached  its  full  strength,  it  is  no  doubt  they  that  will  determine  the

course of its development.²

   In the second place we have found that some of the perversions

which we have examined are only made intelligible if we assume the

convergence  of  several  motive  forces.  If  such  perversions  admit  of

analysis, that is, if they can be taken to pieces, then they must be of a

composite nature. This gives us a hint that perhaps the sexual instinct

itself may be no simple thing, but put together from components which

have come apart again in the perversions. If this is so, the clinical

observation  of  these  abnormalities  will  have  drawn  our  attention  to

amalgamations which have been lost to view in the uniform behaviourof normal people.³

 

   ¹ [‘From Heaven, across the world, to Hell.’]

   ² [Footnote added 1915:] On the other hand, these forces which act like dams upon sexual

development - disgust, shame and morality - must also be regarded as historical precipitates
of  the  external  inhibitions  to  which  the  sexual  instinct  has  been  subjected  during  the
psychogenesis of the human race. We can observe the way in which, in the development of
individuals, they arise at the appropriate moment, as though spontaneously, when upbringing
and external influence give the signal.

   ³ [Footnote added 1920:] As regards the origin of the perversions, I will add a word in

anticipation  of  what  is  to  come.  There  is  reason  to  suppose  that,  just  as  in  the  case  of
fetishism, abortive beginnings of normal sexual development occur before the perversions
become fixated. Analytic investigation has already been able to show in a few cases that
perversions are a residue of development towards the Oedipus complex and that after the
repression of that complex the components of the sexual instinct which are strongest in the
disposition of the individual concerned emerge once more.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1488

 

 

              (4)  THE SEXUAL INSTINCT IN NEUROTICS

 

PSYCHO-ANALYSIS   An important addition to our knowledge of the sexual

instinct in certain

                                 people who at least approximate to the normal

can  be  obtained  from  a  source  which  can  only  be  reached  in  one

particular  way.  There  is  only  one  means  of  obtaining  exhaustive

information  that  will  not  be  misleading  about  the  sexual  life  of  the

persons  known  as  ‘psychoneurotics’  -  sufferers  from  hysteria,  from

obsessional  neurosis,  from  what  is  wrongly  described  as

neurasthenia, and, undoubtedly, from dementia praecox and paranoia

was  well.  They  must  be  subjected  to  psycho-analytic  investigation,

which is employed in the therapeutic procedure introduced by Josef

Breuer and myself in 1893 and known at that time as ’catharsis’.

   I must first explain - as I have already done in other writings - that all

my experience shows that these psychoneuroses are based on sexual

instinctual forces. By this I do not merely mean that the energy of the

sexual instinct makes a contribution to the forces that maintain thepathological  manifestations  (the  symptoms).  I  mean  expressly  to

assert that that contribution is the most important and only constant

source of energy of the neurosis and that in consequence the sexual

life of the persons in question is expressed - whether exclusively or

principally  or  only  partly  -  in  these  symptoms.  As  I  have  put  it

elsewhere, the symptoms constitute the sexual activity of the patient.

The  evidence  for  this  assertion  is  derived  from  the  ever-increasing

number of psycho-analyses of hysterical and other neurotics which I

have carried out during the last 25 years and of whose findings I have

given  (and  shall  continue  to  give)  a  detailed  account  in  other

publications.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1920:] It implies no qualification of the above assertion, but rather an

amplification of it, if I restate it as follows: neurotic symptoms are based on the one hand on
the demands of the libidinal instincts and on the other hand on those made by the ego by way
of reaction to them.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1489

 

      The  removal  of  the  symptoms  of  hysterical  patients  by  psycho-

analysis  proceeds  on  the  supposition  that  those  symptoms  are

substitutes - transcriptions as it were - for a number of emotionally

cathected  mental  processes,  wishes  and  desires,  which,  by  the

operation  of  a  special  psychical  procedure  (repression),  have  been

prevented  from  obtaining  discharge  in  psychical  activity  that  is

admissible  to  consciousness.  These  mental  processes,  therefore,

being  held  back  in  a  state  of  unconsciousness,  strive  to  obtain  an

expression that shall be appropriate to their emotional importance - to

obtain  discharge;  and  in  the  case  of  hysteria  they  find  such  an

expression  (by  means  of  the  process  of  ‘conversion’)  in  somatic

phenomena, that is, in hysterical symptoms. By systematically turning

these  symptoms  back  (with  the  help  of  a  special  technique  )  into

emotionally  cathected  ideas  -  ideas  that  will  now  have  become

conscious - it is possible to obtain the most accurate knowledge of the

nature and origin of these formerly unconscious psychical structures.

 FINDINGS OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS   In this manner the fact has emerged that

symptoms represent

                                                       a substitute for impulses the source

of whose strength is derived from the sexual instinct. What we know

about the nature of hysterics before they fall ill - and they may be

regarded as typical of all psychoneurotics - and about the occasions

which precipitate their falling ill, is in complete harmony with this view.

The  character  of  hysterics  shows  a  degree  of  sexual  repression  in

excess of the normal quantity, an intensification of resistance against

the sexual instinct (which we have already met with in the form of

shame,  disgust  and  morality),  and  what  seems  like  an  instinctive

aversion  on  their  part  to  any  intellectual  consideration  of  sexual

problems. As a result of this, in especially marked cases, the patients

remain in complete ignorance of sexual matters right into the period of

sexual maturity.¹

   On a cursory view, this trait, which is so characteristic of hysteria, is

not uncommonly screened by the existence of a second constitutional

character present in hysteria, namely the predominant development of

the sexual instinct. Psycho-analysis, however, can invariably bring the

first of these factors to light and clear up the enigmatic contradiction

which hysteria presents, by revealing the pair of opposites by which it

is characterized - exaggerated sexual craving and excessive aversion

to sexuality.

 

   ¹ Breuer writes of the patient in connection with whom he first adopted the cathartic method:

‘The factor of sexuality was astonishingly undeveloped in her.’
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1490

 

   In the case of anyone who is predisposed to hysteria, the onset of

his  illness  is  precipitated  when,  either  as  a  result  of  his  own

progressive maturity or of the external circumstances of his life, he

finds himself faced by the demands of a real sexual situation. Between

the pressure of the instinct and his antagonism to sexuality, illness

offers him a way of escape. It does not solve his conflict, but seeks to

evade  it  by  transforming  his  libidinal  impulses  into  symptoms.  Theexception is only an apparent one when a hysteric - a male patient it

may  be  -  falls  ill  as  a  result  of  some  trivial  emotion,  some  conflict

which  does  not  centre  around  any  sexual  interest.  In  such  cases

psycho-analysis is regularly able to show that the illness has been

made  possible  by  the  sexual  component  of  the  conflict,  which  has

prevented the mental processes from reaching a normal issue.

 

NEUROSIS AND PERVERSION   There is no doubt that a large part of the

opposition to these

                                                 views of mine is due to the fact that

sexuality,  to  which  I  trace  back  psycho-neurotic  symptoms,  is

regarded as though it coincided with the normal sexual instinct. But

psycho-analytic teaching goes further than this. It shows that it is by

no means only at the cost of the so-called normal sexual instinct that

these  symptoms  originate  -  at  any  rate  such  is  not  exclusively  or

mainly the case; they also give expression (by conversion) to instincts

which would be described as perverse in the widest sense of the word

if  they  could  be  expressed  directly  in  phantasy  and  action  without

being diverted from consciousness. Thus symptoms are formed in part

at  the  cost  of abnormal  sexuality; neuroses  are,  so  to  say,  the

negative of the perversions.¹

 

    ¹ The  contents  of  the  clearly  conscious  phantasies  of  perverts  (which  in  favourable

circumstances  can  be  transformed  into  manifest  behaviour),  of  the  delusional  fears  of
paranoics (which are projected in a hostile sense on to other people) and of the unconscious
phantasies of hysterics (which psycho-analysis reveals behind their symptoms) - all of these
coincide with one another even down to their details.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1491

 

   The sexual instinct of psychoneurotics exhibits all the aberrations

which we have studied as variations of normal, and as manifestations

of abnormal, sexual life.

   (a) The unconscious mental life of all neurotics (without exception)

shows inverted impulses, fixation of their libido upon persons of their

own sex. It would be impossible without deep discussion to give any

adequate appreciation of the importance of this factor in determiningthe form taken by the symptoms of the illness. I can only insist that an

unconscious tendency to inversion is never absent and is of particular

value in throwing light upon hysteria in men.¹

   (b) It is possible to trace in the unconscious of psychoneurotics

tendencies to every kind of anatomical extension of sexual activity and

to  show  that  those  tendencies  are  factors  in  the  formation  of

symptoms. Among them we find occurring with particular frequency

those  in  which  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  mouth  and  anus  are

assigned the role of genitals.

   (c) An especially prominent part is played as factors in the formation

of  symptoms  in  psychoneuroses  by  the  component  instincts,  which

emerge for the most part as pairs of opposites and which we have met

with  as  introducing  new  sexual  aims  -  the  scopophilic  instinct  and

exhibitionism  and  the  active  and  passive  forms  of  the  instinct  for

cruelty. The contribution made by the last of these is essential to the

understanding  of  the  fact  that  symptoms  involve suffering,  and  it

almost invariably dominates a part of the patient’s social behaviour. It

is  also  through  the  medium  of  this  connection  between  libido  and

cruelty  that  the  transformation  of  love  into  hate  takes  place,  the

transformation  of  affectionate  into  hostile  impulses,  which  is

characteristic of a great number of cases of neurosis, and indeed, it

would seem, of paranoia in general.

   The interest of these findings is still further increased by certain

special facts.

   (α) Whenever we find in the unconscious an instinct of this sort

which is capable of being paired off with an opposite one, this second

instinct  will  regularly  be  found  in  operation  as  well.  Every  active

perversion  is  thus  accompanied  by  its  passive  counterpart:  anyone

who  is  an  exhibitionist  in  his  unconscious  is  at  the  same  time  a

voyeur; in anyone who suffers from the consequences of repressed

sadistic  impulses  there  is  sure  to  be  another  determinant  of  his

symptoms  which  has  its  source  in  masochistic  inclinations.  The

complete agreement which is here shown with what we have found to

exist in the corresponding ‘positive’ perversions is most remarkable,

though  in  the  actual  symptoms  one  or  other  of  the  opposing

tendencies plays the predominant part.

   (β) In any fairly marked case of psychoneurosis it is unusual for onlya single one of these perverse instincts to be developed. We usually

find  a  considerable  number  and  as  a  rule  traces  of  them  all.  The

degree  of  development  of  each  particular  instinct  is,  however,

independent of that of the others. Here, too, the study of the ‘positive’

perversions provides an exact counterpart.

 

   ¹ Psychoneuroses are also very often associated with manifest inversion. In such cases the

heterosexual current of feeling has undergone complete suppression. It is only fair to say that
my attention was first drawn to the necessary universality of the tendency to inversion in
psychoneurotics by Wilhelm Fliess of Berlin, after I had discussed its presence in individual
cases. - [Added 1920:] This fact, which has not been sufficiently appreciated, cannot fail to
have a decisive influence on any theory of homosexuality.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1492

 

 

    (5)  COMPONENT INSTINCTS AND EROTOGENIC ZONES

 

   If we put together what we have learned from our investigation of

positive and negative perversions, it seems plausible to trace them

back to a number of ‘component instincts’, which, however, are not of

a  primary  nature,  but  are  susceptible  to  further  analysis.  By  an

‘instinct’ is provisionally to be understood the psychical representative

of  an  endosomatic,  continuously  flowing  source  of  stimulation,  as

contrasted  with  a  ‘stimulus’,  which  is  set  up  by single  excitations

coming from without. The concept of instinct is thus one of those lying

on the frontier between the mental and the physical. The simplest and

likeliest assumption as to the nature of instincts would seem to be that

in  itself  an  instinct  is  without  quality,  and,  so  far  as  mental  life  is

concerned, is only to be regarded as a measure of the demand made

upon  the  mind  for  work.  What  distinguishes  the  instincts  from  one

another  and  endows  them  with  specific  qualities  is  their  relation  to

their somatic sources and to their aims. The source of an instinct is a

process of excitation occurring in an organ and the immediate aim of

the instinct lies in the removal of this organic stimulus.¹

   There is a further provisional assumption that we cannot escape in

the theory of the instincts. It is to the effect that excitations of twokinds  arise  from  the  somatic  organs,  based  upon  differences  of  a

chemical  nature.  One  of  these  kinds  of  excitation  we  describe  as

being specifically sexual, and we speak of the organ concerned as the

‘erotogenic zone’ of the sexual component instinct arising from it.²

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] The theory of the instincts is the most important but at the same

time the least complete portion of psycho-analytic theory. I have made further contributions to
it in my later works Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920g) and The Ego and the Id (1923b).

   ² [Footnote added 1915:] It is not easy in the present place to justify these assumptions,

derived as they are from the study of a particular class of neurotic illness. But on the other
hand, if I omitted all mention of them, it would be impossible to say anything of substance
about the instincts.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1493

 

   The part played by the erotogenic zones is immediately obvious in

the case of those perversions which assign a sexual significance to

the oral and anal orifices. These behave in every respect like a portion

of the sexual apparatus. In hysteria these parts of the body and the

neighbouring  tracts  of  mucous  membrane  become  the  seat  of  new

sensations and of changes in innervation - indeed, of processes that

can be compared to erection - in just the same way as do the actual

genitalia under the excitations of the normal sexual processes.

      The  significance  of  the  erotogenic  zones  as  apparatuses

subordinate to the genitals and as substitutes for them is, among all

the psychoneuroses, most clearly to be seen in hysteria; but this does

not imply that that significance is any the less in the other forms of

illness. It is only that in them it is less recognizable, because in their

case  (obsessional  neurosis  and  paranoia)  the  formation  of  the

symptoms takes place in regions of the mental apparatus which are

more  remote  from  the  particular  centres  concerned  with  somatic

control.  In  obsessional  neurosis  what  is  more  striking  is  the

significance  of  those  impulses  which  create  new  sexual  aims  and

seem independent of erotogenic zones. Nevertheless, in scopophilia

and exhibitionism the eye corresponds to an erotogenic zone; while in

the case of those components of the sexual instinct which involve pain

and cruelty the same role is assumed by the skin - the skin, which inparticular  parts  of  the  body  has  become  differentiated  into  sense

organs or modified into mucous membrane, and is thus the erotogenic

zone par excellence.¹

 

   ¹ We are reminded at this point of Moll’s analysis of the sexual instinct into an instinct of

‘contrectation’ and an instinct of ‘detumescence’. Contrectation represents a need for contact
with the skin.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1494

 

 

    (6) REASONS FOR THE APPARENT PREPONDERANCE OF

        PERVERSE SEXUALITY IN THE PSYCHONEUROSES

 

   The preceding discussion may perhaps have placed the sexuality of

psychoneurotics in a false light. It may have given the impression that,

owing  to  their  disposition,  psychoneurotics  approximate  closely  to

perverts in their sexual behaviour and are proportionately remote from

normal  people.  It  may  indeed  very  well  be  that  the  constitutional

disposition of these patients (apart from their exaggerated degree of

sexual repression and the excessive intensity of their sexual instinct) 

includes  an  unusual  tendency  to  perversion,  using  that  word  in  its

widest  sense.  Nevertheless,  investigation  of  comparatively  slight

cases shows that this last assumption is not absolutely necessary, or

at  least  that  in  forming  a  judgement  on  these  pathological

developments there is a factor to be considered which weighs in the

other  direction.  Most  psychoneurotics  only  fall  ill  after  the  age  of

puberty as a result of the demands made upon them by normal sexual

life.  (It  is  most  particularly  against  the  latter  that  repression  is

directed.) Or else illnesses of this kind set in later, when the libido fails

to obtain satisfaction along normal lines. In both these cases the libido

behaves  like  a  stream  whose  main  bed  has  become  blocked.  It

proceeds to fill up collateral channels which may hitherto have been

empty.  Thus,  in  the  same  way,  what  appears  to  be  the  strong

tendency  (though,  it  is  true,  a  negative  one)  of  psychoneurotics  to

perversion may be collaterally determined, and must, in any case, becollaterally intensified. The fact is that we must put sexual repression

as an internal factor alongside such external factors as limitation of

freedom, inaccessibility of a normal sexual object, the dangers of the

normal sexual act, etc., which bring about perversions in persons who

might perhaps otherwise have remained normal.

   In this respect different cases of neurosis may behave differently: in

one case the preponderating factor may be the innate strength of the

tendency to perversion, in another it may be the collateral increase of

that tendency owing to the libido being forced away from a normal

sexual  aim  and  sexual  object.  It  would  be  wrong  to  represent  as

opposition what is in fact a co-operative relation. Neurosis will always

produce  its  greatest  effects  when  constitution  and  experience  work

together in the same direction. Where the constitution is a marked one

it will perhaps not require the support of actual experiences; while a

great shock in real life will perhaps bring about a neurosis even in an

average constitution. (Incidentally, this view of the relative aetiological

importance  of  what  is  innate  and  what  is  accidentally  experienced

applies equally in other fields.)

   If we prefer to suppose, nevertheless, that a particularly strongly

developed  tendency  to  perversion  is  among  the  characteristics  of

psychoneurotic constitutions, we have before us the prospect of being

able to distinguish a number of such constitutions according to the

innate preponderance of one or the other of the erotogenic zones or of

one or the other of the component instincts. The question whether a

special  relation  holds  between  the  perverse  disposition  and  the

particular form of illness adopted, has, like so much else in this field,

not yet been investigated.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1495

 

 

(7) INTIMATION OF THE INFANTILE CHARACTER OF SEXUALITY

 

      By  demonstrating  the  part  played  by  perverse  impulses  in  the

formation  of  symptoms  in  the  psychoneuroses,  we  have  quiteremarkably increased the number of people who might be regarded as

perverts. It is not only that neurotics in themselves constitute a very

numerous  class,  but  it  must  also  be  considered  that  an  unbroken

chain bridges the gap between the neuroses in all their manifestations

and normality. After all, Moebius could say with justice that we are all

to some extent hysterics. Thus the extraordinarily wide dissemination

of  the  perversions  forces  us  to  suppose  that  the  disposition  to

perversions is itself of no great rarity but must form a part of what

passes as the normal constitution.

   It is, as we have seen, debatable whether the perversions go back

to innate determinants or arise, as Binet assumed was the case with

fetishism, owing to chance experiences. The conclusion now presents

itself  to  us  that  there  is  indeed  something  innate  lying  behind  the

perversions but that it is something innate in everyone, though as a

disposition it may vary in its intensity and may be increased by the

influences  of  actual  life.  What  is  in  question  are  the  innate

constitutional roots of the sexual instinct. In one class of cases (the

perversions) these roots may grow into the actual vehicles of sexual

activity; in others they may be submitted to an insufficient suppression

(repression)  and  thus  be  able  in  a  roundabout  way  to  attract  a

considerable proportion of sexual energy to themselves as symptoms;

while  in  the  most  favourable  cases,  which  lie  between  these  two

extremes, they may by means of effective restriction and other kinds

of modification bring about what is known as normal sexual life.

   We have, however, a further reflection to make. This postulated

constitution, containing the germs of all the perversions, will only be

demonstrable in children, even though in them it is only with modest

degrees of intensity that any of the instincts can emerge. A formula

begins to take shape which lays it down that the sexuality of neurotics

has remained in, or been brought back to, an infantile state. Thus our

interest turns to the sexual life of children, and we will now proceed to

trace  the  play  of  influences  which  govern  the  evolution  of  infantile

sexuality till its outcome in perversion, neurosis or normal sexual life.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1496 

                                            II

 

                              INFANTILE SEXUALITY

 

NEGLECT OF THE INFANTILE FACTOR   One feature of the popular view of

the sexual instinct is

                                                              that it is absent in childhood

and  only  awakens  in  the  period  of  life  described  as  puberty.  This,

however,  is  not  merely  a  simple  error  but  one  that  has  had  grave

consequences, for it is mainly to this idea that we owe our present

ignorance  of  the  fundamental  conditions  of  sexual  life.  A  thorough

study of the sexual manifestations of childhood would probably reveal

the essential characters of the sexual instinct and would show us the

course of its development and the way in which it is put together from

various sources.

   It is noticeable that writers who concern themselves with explaining

the characteristics and reactions of the adult have devoted much more

attention to the primaeval period which is comprised in the life of the

individual’s ancestors - have, that is, ascribed much more influence to

heredity - than to the other primaeval period, which falls within the

lifetime  of  the  individual  himself  -  that  is,  to  childhood.  One  would

surely have supposed that the influence of this latter period would be

easier to understand and could claim to be considered before that of

heredity.¹ It is true that in the literature of the subject one occasionally

comes  across  remarks  upon  precocious  sexual  activity  in  small

children - upon erections, masturbation and even activities resembling

coitus. But these are always quoted only as exceptional events, as

oddities or as horrifying instances of precocious depravity. So far as I

know, not a single author has clearly recognized the regular existence

of a sexual instinct in childhood; and in the writings that have become

so numerous on the development of children, the chapter on ‘Sexual

Development’ is as a rule omitted.²

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1915:] Nor is it possible to estimate correctly the part played by heredity

until the part played by childhood has been assessed.

   ² The assertion made in the text has since struck me myself as being so bold that I have

undertaken the task of testing its validity by looking through the literature once more. Theoutcome  of  this  is  that  I  have  allowed  my  statement  to  stand  unaltered.  The  scientific
examination of both the physical and mental phenomena of sexuality in childhood is still in its
earliest beginnings. One writer, Bell (1902, 327), remarks: ‘I know of no scientist who has
given  a  careful  analysis  of  the  emotion  as  it  is  seen  in  the  adolescent.’  Somatic  sexual
manifestations from the period before puberty have only attracted attention in connection with
phenomena of degeneracy and as indications of degeneracy. In none of the accounts which I
have read of the psychology of this period of life is a chapter to be found on the erotic life of
children; and this applies to the well-known works of Preyer, Baldwin (1898), Perez (1886),
Strümpell (1899), Groos (1904), Heller (1904), Sully (1895) and others. We can obtain the
clearest  impression  of  the  state  of  things  in  this  field  to-day  from  the  periodical Die
Kinderfehler from 1896 onwards. Nevertheless the conviction is borne in upon us that the
existence of love in childhood stands in no need of discovery. Perez (1886, 272 ff.) argues in
favour of its existence. Groos (1899, 326) mentions as a generally recognized fact that ‘some
children are already accessible to sexual impulses at a very early age and feel an urge to
have contact with the opposite sex’. The earliest instance of the appearance of ‘sex-love’
recorded by Bell (1902, 330) concerns a child in the middle of his third year. On this point
compare further Havelock Ellis (1913, Appendix B).
   [Added 1910:] This judgement upon the literature of infantile sexuality need no longer be
maintained  since  the  appearance  of  Stanley  Hall’s  exhaustive  work  (1904).  No  such
modification is necessitated by Moll’s recent book (1909). See, on the other hand, Bleuler
(1908). [Added 1915:] Since this was written, a book by Hug-Hellmuth (1913) has taken the
neglected sexual factor fully into account.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1497

 

 

INFANTILE AMNESIA   The reason for this strange neglect is to be sought,

I think, partly in

                                   considerations of propriety, which the authors

obey as a result of their own upbringing, and partly in a psychological

phenomenon which has itself hitherto eluded explanation. What I have

in mind is the peculiar amnesia which, in the case of most people,

though by to means all, hides the earliest beginnings of their childhood

up to their sixth or eighth year. Hitherto it has not occurred to us to feel

any astonishment at the fact of this amnesia, though we might have

had good grounds for doing so. For we learn from other people that

during these years, of which at a later date we retain nothing in our

memory  but  a  few  unintelligible  and  fragmentary  recollections,  we

reacted in a lively manner to impressions, that we were capable of

expressing pain and joy in a human fashion, that we gave evidence of

love,  jealousy  and  other  passionate  feelings  by  which  we  were

strongly  moved  at  the  time,  and  even  that  we  gave  utterance  toremarks  which  were  regarded  by  adults  as  good  evidence  of  our

possessing insight and the beginnings of a capacity for judgement.

And of all this we, when we are grown up, have no knowledge of our

own! Why should our memory lag so far behind the other activities of

our minds? We have, on the contrary, good reason to believe that

there is no period at which the capacity for receiving and reproducing

impressions is greater than precisely during the years of childhood.¹

 

   ¹ I have attempted to solve one of the problems connected with the earliest memories of

childhood in a paper on ‘ Screen Memories’ (1899a). [Added 1924:] See also Chapter IV of
my Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901b).
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1498

 

   On the other hand we must assume, or we can convince ourselves

by a psychological examination of other people, that the very same

impressions  that  we  have  forgotten  have  none  the  less  left  the

deepest traces on our minds and have had a determining effect upon

the  whole  of  our  later  development.  There  can,  therefore,  be  no

question  of  any  real  abolition  of  the  impressions  of  childhood,  but

rather of an amnesia similar to that which neurotics exhibit for later

events, and of which the essence consists in a simple withholding of

these impressions from consciousness, viz., in their repression. But

what  are  the  forces  which  bring  about  this  repression  of  the

impressions of childhood? Whoever could solve this riddle would, I

think, have explained hysterical amnesia as well.

   Meanwhile we must not fail to observe that the existence of infantile

amnesia  provides  a  new  point  of  comparison  between  the  mental

states of children and psychoneurotics. We have already come across

another such point in the formula to which we were led, to the effect

that the sexuality of psychoneurotics has remained at, or been carried

back to, an infantile stage. Can it be, after all, that infantile amnesia,

too,  is  to  be  brought  into  relation  with  the  sexual  impulses  of

childhood?

   Moreover, the connection between infantile and hysterical amnesia

is  more  than  a  mere  play  upon  words.  Hysterical  amnesia,  whichoccurs at the bidding of repression, is only explicable by the fact that

the subject is already in possession of a store of memory-traces which

have been withdrawn from conscious disposal, and which are now, by

an  associative  link,  attracting  to  themselves  the  material  which  the

forces of repression are engaged in repelling from consciousness.¹ It

may  be  said  that  without  infantile  amnesia  there  would  be  no

hysterical amnesia.

      I  believe,  then,  that  infantile  amnesia,  which  turns  everyone’s

childhood into something like a prehistoric epoch and conceals from

him the beginnings of his own sexual life, is responsible for the fact

that  in  general  no  importance  is  attached  to  childhood  in  the

development of sexual life. The gaps in our knowledge which have

arisen in this way cannot be bridged by a single observer. As long ago

as  in  the  year  1896  I  insisted  on  the  significance  of  the  years  of

childhood in the origin of certain important phenomena connected with

sexual life, and since then I have never ceased to emphasize the part

played in sexuality, by the infantile factor.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added  1915:]  The  mechanism  of  repression  cannot  be  understood  unless

account is taken of both of these two concurrent processes. They may be compared with the
manner in which tourists are conducted to the top of the Great Pyramid of Giza by being
pushed from one direction and pulled from the other.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1499

 

 

  THE PERIOD OF SEXUAL LATENCY IN CHILDHOOD AND ITS

                                  INTERRUPTIONS

 

   The remarkably frequent reports of what are described as irregular

and  exceptional  sexual  impulses  in  childhood,  as  well  as  the

uncovering  in  neurotics  of  what  have  hitherto  been  unconscious

memories of childhood, allow us to sketch out the sexual occurrences

of that period in some such way as this.¹

   There seems no doubt that germs of sexual impulses are already

present in the new-born child and that these continue to develop for atime, but are then overtaken by a progressive process of suppression;

this  in  turn  is  itself  interrupted  by  periodical  advances  in  sexual

development or may be held up by individual peculiarities. Nothing is

known  for  certain  concerning  the  regularity  and  periodicity  of  this

oscillating course of development. It seems, however, that the sexual

life of children usually emerges in a form accessible to observation

round about the third or fourth year of life.²

 

   ¹ We are able to make use of the second of these two sources material since we are

justified in expecting that the early years of children who are later to become neurotic are not
likely in this respect to differ essentially from those of children who are to grow up into normal
adults, [added 1915:] but only in the intensity and clarity of the phenomena involved.

   ² There is a possible anatomical analogy to what I believe to be the course of development

of the infantile sexual function in Bayer’s discovery (1902) that the internal sexual organs (i.e.
the uterus) are as a rule larger in new-born children than in older ones. It is not certain,
however, what view we should take of this involution that occurs after birth (which has been
shown  by  Halban  to  apply  also  to  other  portions  of  the  genital  apparatus).  According  to
Halban (1904) the process of involution comes to an end after a few weeks of extra-uterine
life. [Added 1920:] Those authorities who regard the interstitial portion of the sex-gland as the
organ that determines sex have on their side been led by anatomical researches to speak of
infantile sexuality and a period of sexual latency. I quote a passage from Lipschütz’s book
(1919, 168), which I mentioned on p. 1473 n.: ‘We shall be doing more justice to the facts if
we say that the maturation of the sexual characters which is accomplished at puberty is only
due to a great acceleration which occurs at that time of processes which began much earlier -
in  my  view  as  early  as  during  intra-uterine  life.’  ‘What  has  hitherto  been  described  in  a
summary way as puberty is probably only a second major phase of puberty which sets in
about the middle of the second decade of life . . . Childhood, from birth until the beginning of
this second major phase, might be described as "the intermediate phase of puberty"' (ibid.,
170). Attention was drawn to this coincidence between anatomical findings and psychological
observation in a review by Ferenczi (1920). The agreement is marred only by the fact that the
‘first peak’ in the development of the sexual organ occurs during the early intra-uterine period,
whereas the early efflorescence of infantile sexual life must be ascribed to the third and fourth
years of life. There is, of course, no need to expect that anatomical growth and psychical
development must be exactly simultaneous. The researches in question were made on the
sex-glands of human beings. Since a period of latency in the psychological sense does not
occur in animals, it would be very interesting to know whether the anatomical findings which
have led these writers to assume the occurrence of two peaks in sexual development are also
demonstrable in the higher animals.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1500

 

 

SEXUAL INHIBITIONS   It is during this period of total or only partial latencythat are built up the

                                    mental forces which are later to impede the

course of the sexual instinct and, like dams, restrict its flow - disgust,

feelings of shame and the claims of aesthetic and moral ideals. One

gets  an  impression  from  civilized  children  that  the  construction  of

these dams is a product of education, and no doubt education has

much  to  do  with  it.  But  in  reality  this  development  is  organically

determined  and  fixed  by  heredity,  and  it  can  occasionally  occur

without  any  help  at  all  from  education.  Education  will  not  be

trespassing beyond its appropriate domain if it limits itself to following

the  lines  which  have  already  been  laid  down  organically  and  to

impressing them somewhat more clearly and deeply.

 

  REACTION-FORMATION  AND  SUBLIMATION      What  is  it  that  goes  to  the

making of these

                                                                      constructions which are so

important  for  the  growth  of  a  civilized  and  normal  individual?  They

probably  emerge  at  the  cost  of  the  infantile  sexual  impulses

themselves. Thus the activity of those impulses does not cease even

during this period of latency, though their energy is diverted, wholly or

in  great  part,  from  their  sexual  use  and  directed  to  other  ends.

Historians of civilization appear to be at one in assuming that powerful

components are acquired for every kind of cultural achievement by

this diversion of sexual instinctual forces from sexual aims and their

direction  to  new  ones  -  a  process  which  deserves  the  name  of

‘sublimation’.  To  this  we  would  add,  accordingly,  that  the  same

process  plays  a  part  in  the  development  of  the  individual  and  we

would place its beginning in the period of sexual latency of childhood.¹

   It is possible further to form some idea of the mechanism of this

process of sublimation. On the one hand, it would seem, the sexual

impulses cannot be utilized during these years of childhood, since the

reproductive functions have been deferred - a fact which constitutes

the main feature of the period of latency. On the other hand, these

impulses would seem in themselves to be perverse - that is, to arise

from erotogenic zones and to derive their activity from instincts which,

in view of the direction of the subject’s development, can only arouse

unpleasurable  feelings.  They  consequently  evoke  opposing  mentalforces (reacting impulses) which, in order to suppress this unpleasure

effectively, build up the mental dams that have already mentioned -

disgust, shame and morality.²

 

   ¹ Once again, it is from Fliess that I have borrowed the term ‘period of sexual latency’.

   ² [Footnote added 1915:] In the case which I am here discussing, the sublimation of sexual

instinctual forces takes place along the path of reaction-formation. But in general it is possible
to  distinguish  the  concepts  of  sublimation  and  reaction-formation  from  each  other  as  two
different processes. Sublimation can also take place by other and simpler mechanisms.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1501

 

 

INTERRUPTIONS OF THE LATENCY PERIOD   We must not deceive ourselves

as to the

                                                                       hypothetical nature and

insufficient clarity of our knowledge concerning the processes of the

infantile  period  of  latency  or  deferment;  but  we  shall  be  on  firmer

ground in pointing out that such an application of infantile sexuality

represents  an  educational  ideal  from  which  individual  development

usually diverges at some point and often to a considerable degree.

From time to time a fragmentary manifestation of sexuality which has

evaded sublimation may break through; or some sexual activity may

persist  through  the  whole  duration  of  the  latency  period  until  the

sexual instinct emerges with greater intensity at puberty. In so far as

educators pay any attention at all to infantile sexuality, they behave

exactly as though they shared our views as to the construction of the

moral defensive forces at the cost of sexuality, and as though they

knew that sexual activity makes a child ineducable: for they stigmatize

every sexual manifestation by children as a ‘vice’, without being able

to do much against it. We, on the other hand, have every reason for

turning our attention to these phenomena which are so much dreaded

by  education,  for  we  may  expect  them  to  help  us  to  discover  the

original configuration of the sexual instincts.

 

          THE MANIFESTATIONS OF INFANTILE SEXUALITY

 THUMB-SUCKING      For  reasons  which  will  appear  later,  I  shall  take

thumb-sucking (or sensual

                              sucking) as a sample of the sexual manifestations

of childhood. (An excellent study of this subject has been made by the

Hungarian paediatrician, Lindner, 1879.)

   Thumb-sucking appears already in early infancy and may continue

into maturity, or even persist all through life. It consists in the rhythmic

repetition  of  a  sucking  contact  by  the  mouth  (or  lips).  There  is  no

question  of  the  purpose  of  this  procedure  being  the  taking  of

nourishment. A portion of the lip itself, the tongue, or any other part of

the skin within reach - even the big toe - may be taken as the object

upon which this sucking is carried out. In this connection a grasping-

instinct  may  appear  and  may  manifest  itself  as  a  simultaneous

rhythmic tugging at the lobes of the ears or a catching hold of some

part  of  another  person  (as  a  rule  the  ear)  for  the  same  purpose.

Sensual sucking involves a complete absorption of the attention and

leads either to sleep or even to a motor reaction in the nature of an

orgasm.¹ It is not infrequently combined with rubbing some sensitive

part of the body such as the breast or the external genitalia. Many

children proceed by this path from sucking to masturbation.

 

   ¹ Thus we find at this early stage, what holds good all through life, that sexual satisfaction is

the  best  soporific.  Most  cases  of  nervous  insomnia  can  be  traced  back  to  lack  of  sexual
satisfaction. It is well known that unscrupulous nurses put crying children to sleep by stroking
their genitals.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1502

 

   Lindner himself clearly recognized the sexual nature of this activity

and  emphasized  it  without  qualification.  In  the  nursery,  sucking  is

often  classed  along  with  the  other  kinds  of  sexual  ‘naughtiness’  of

children.  This  view  has  been  most  energetically  repudiated  by

numbers  of  paediatricians  and  nerve-specialists,  though  this  is  no

doubt partly due to a confusion between ‘sexual’ and ‘genital’. Their

objection raises a difficult question and one which cannot be evaded:

what is the general characteristic which enables us to recognize thesexual manifestations of children? The concatenation of phenomena

into  which  we  have  been  given  an  insight  by  psycho-analytic

investigation justifies us, in my opinion, in regarding thumb-sucking as

a sexual manifestation and in choosing it for our study of the essential

features of infantile sexual activity.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1920:] In 1919, a Dr. Galant published, under the title of ‘Das Lutscherli’,

the confession of a grown-up girl who had never given up this infantile sexual activity and who
represents the satisfaction to be gained from sucking as something completely analogous to
sexual satisfaction, particularly when this is obtained from a lover’s kiss: ‘Not every kiss is
equal to a "Lutscherli" - no, no, not by any means! It is impossible to describe what a lovely
feeling goes through your whole body when you suck; you are right away from this world. You
are  absolutely  satisfied,  and  happy  beyond  desire.  It  is  a  wonderful  feeling;  you  long  for
nothing but peace - uninterrupted peace. It is just unspeakably lovely: you feel no pain and no
sorrow, and ah! you are carried into another world.’
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1503

 

 

AUTO-EROTISM   We are in duty bound to make a thorough examination

of this example. It must

                            be insisted that the most striking feature of this

sexual activity is that the instinct is not directed towards other people,

but obtains satisfaction from the subject’s own body. It is ‘auto-erotic’,

to  call  it  by  a  happily  chosen  term  introduced  by  Havelock  Ellis

(1910).¹

   Furthermore, it is clear that the behaviour of a child who indulges in

thumb-sucking  is  determined  by  a  search  for  some  pleasure  which

has  already  been  experienced  and  is  now  remembered.  In  the

simplest  case  he  proceeds  to  find  this  satisfaction  by  sucking

rhythmically at some part of the skin or mucous membrane. It is also

easy  to  guess  the  occasions  on  which  the  child  had  his  first

experiences of the pleasure which he is now striving to renew. It was

the  child’s  first  and  most  vital  activity,  his  sucking  at  his  mother’s

breast, or at substitutes for it, that must have familiarized him with this

pleasure. The child’s lips, in our view, behave like an erotogenic zone,

and no doubt stimulation by the warm flow of milk is the cause of the

pleasurable  sensation.  The  satisfaction  of  the  erotogenic  zone  isassociated, in the first instance, with the satisfaction of the need for

nourishment. To begin with, sexual activity attaches itself to functions

serving  the  purpose  of  self-preservation  and  does  not  become

independent of them until later. No one who has seen a baby sinking

back satiated from the breast and falling asleep with flushed cheeks

and a blissful smile can escape the reflection that this picture persists

as a prototype of the expression of sexual satisfaction in later life. The

need  for  repeating  the  sexual  satisfaction  now  becomes  detached

from the need for taking nourishment - a separation which becomes

inevitable when the teeth appear and food is no longer taken in only

by sucking, but is also chewed up. The child does not make use of an

extraneous body for his sucking, but prefers a part of his own skin

because it is more convenient, because it mikes him independent of

the external world, which he is not yet able to control, and because in

that way he provides himself, as it were, with a second erotogenic

zone,  though  one  of  an  inferior  kind.  The  inferiority  of  this  second

region  is  among  the  reasons  why  at  a  later  date  he  seeks  the

corresponding part - the lips - of another person. (‘It’s a pity I can’t kiss

myself’, he seems to be saying.)

   It is not every child who sucks in this way. It may be assumed that

those children do so in whom there is a constitutional intensification of

the  erotogenic  significance  of  the  labial  region.  If  that  significance

persists, these same children when they are grown up will become

epicures in kissing, will be inclined to perverse kissing, or, if males, will

have  a  powerful  motive  for  drinking  and  smoking.  If,  however,

repression  ensues,  they  will  feel  disgust  at  food  and  will  produce

hysterical vomiting. The repression extends to the nutritional instinct

owing  to  the  dual  purpose  served  by  the  labial  zone.  Many  of  my

women  patients  who  suffer  from  disturbances  of  eating, globus

hystericus,  constriction  of  the  throat  and  vomiting,  have  indulged

energetically in sucking during their childhood.

   Our study of thumb-sucking or sensual sucking has already given us

the three essential characteristics of an infantile sexual manifestation.

At its origin it attaches itself to one of the vital somatic functions; it has

as yet no sexual object, and is thus auto-erotic; and its sexual aim is

dominated by an erotogenic zone. It is to be anticipated that these

characteristics  will  be  found  to  apply  equally  to  most  of  the  otheractivities of the infantile sexual instincts.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1920:] Havelock Ellis, it is true, uses the word ‘auto-erotic’ in a somewhat

different  sense,  to  describe  an  excitation  which  is  not  provoked  from  outside  but  arises
internally.  What  psycho-analysis  regards  as  the  essential  point  is  not  the  genesis  of  the
excitation, but the question of its relation to an object.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1504

 

 

              THE SEXUAL AIM OF INFANTILE SEXUALITY

 

CHARACTERISTICS OF EROTOGENIC ZONES   The example of thumb-sucking

shows us still

                                                                         more about what

constitutes  an  erotogenic  zone.  It  is  a  part  of  the  skin  or  mucous

membrane in which stimuli of a certain sort evoke a feeling of pleasure

possessing a particular quality. There can be no doubt that the stimuli

which  produce  the  pleasure  are  governed  by  special  conditions,

though we do not know what those are. A rhythmic character must

play a part among them and the analogy of tickling is forced upon our

notice. It seems less certain whether the character of the pleasurable

feeling evoked by the stimulus should be described as a ‘specific’ one

-  a  ‘specific’  quality  in  which  the  sexual  factor  would  precisely  lie.

Psychology is still so much in the dark in questions of pleasure and

unpleasure that the most cautious assumption is the one most to be

recommended.  We  may  later  come  upon  reasons  which  seem  to

support the idea that the pleasurable feeling does in fact possess a

specific quality.

   The character of erotogenicity can be attached to some parts of the

body in a particularly marked way. There are predestined erotogenic

zones, as is shown by the example of sucking. The same example,

however, also shows us that any other part of the skin or mucous

membrane  can  take  over  the  functions  of  an  erotogenic  zone,  and

must therefore have some aptitude in that direction. Thus the quality

of the stimulus has more to do with producing the pleasurable feelingthan has the nature of the part of the body concerned. A child who is

indulging in sensual sucking searches about his body and chooses

some part of it to suck - a part which is afterwards preferred by him

from force of habit; if he happens to hit upon one of the predestined

regions  (such  as  the  nipples  or  genitals)  no  doubt  it  retains  the

preference. A precisely analogous tendency to displacement is also

found in the symptomatology of hysteria. In that neurosis repression

affects most of all the actual genital zones and these transmit their

susceptibility  to  stimulation  to  other  erotogenic  zones  (normally

neglected in adult life), which then behave exactly like genitals. But

besides this, precisely as in the case of sucking, any other part of the

body  can  acquire  the  same  susceptibility  to  stimulation  as  is

possessed  by  the  genitals  and  can  become  an  erotogenic  zone.

Erotogenic and hysterogenic zones show the same characteristics.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1915:] After further reflection and after taking other observations into

account, I have been led to ascribe the quality of erotogenicity to all parts of the body and to
all the internal organs. Cf. also in this connection what is said below on narcissism.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1505

 

 

THE  INFANTILE  SEXUAL  AIM      The  sexual  aim  of  the  infantile  instinct

consists in obtaining

                                               satisfaction by means of an appropriate

stimulation of the erotogenic zone which has been selected in one

way  or  another.  This  satisfaction  must  have  been  previously

experienced in order to have left behind a need for its repetition; and

we may expect that Nature will have made safe provisions so that this

experience  of  satisfaction  shall  not  be  left  to  chance.¹  We  have

already learnt what the contrivance is that fulfils this purpose in the

case of the labial zone: it is the simultaneous connection which links

this part of the body with the taking in of food. We shall come across

other, similar contrivances as sources of sexuality. The state of being

in need of a repetition of the satisfaction reveals itself in two ways: by

a  peculiar  feeling  of  tension,  possessing,  rather,  the  character  ofunpleasure,  and  by  a  sensation  of  itching  or  stimulation  which  is

centrally  conditioned  and  projected  on  to  the  peripheral  erotogenic

zone.  We  can  therefore  formulate  a  sexual  aim  in  another  way:  it

consists  in  replacing  the  projected  sensation  of  stimulation  in  the

erotogenic zone by an external stimulus which removes that sensation

by  producing  a  feeling  of  satisfaction.  This  external  stimulus  will

usually consist in some kind of manipulation that is analogous to the

sucking.

   The fact that the need can also be evoked peripherally, by a real

modification of the erotogenic zone, is in complete harmony with our

physiological knowledge. This strikes us as somewhat strange only

because,  in  order  to  remove  one  stimulus,  it  seems  necessary  to

adduce a second one at the same spot.

 

   ¹  [Footnote  added  1920:]  In  biological  discussions  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  avoid  a

teleological way of thinking, even though one is aware that in any particular instance one is
not secure against error.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1506

 

 

              MASTURBATORY SEXUAL MANIFESTATIONS¹

 

   It must come as a great relief to find that, when once we have

understood the nature of the instinct arising from a single one of the

erotogenic zones, we shall have very little more to learn of the sexual

activity of children. The clearest distinctions as between one zone and

another concern the nature of the contrivance necessary for satisfying

the instinct; in the case of the labial zone it consisted of sucking, and

this has to be replaced by other muscular actions according to the

position and nature of the other zones.

 

ACTIVITY OF THE ANAL ZONE   Like the labial zone, the anal zone is well

suited by its position to

                                                 act as a medium through which

sexuality  may  attach  itself  to  other  somatic  functions.  It  is  to  bepresumed that the erotogenic significance of this part of the body is

very  great  from  the  first.  We  learn  with  some  astonishment  from

psycho-analysis  of  the  transmutations  normally  undergone  by  the

sexual  excitations  arising  from  this  zone  and  of  the  frequency  with

which  it  retains  a  considerable  amount  of  susceptibility  to  genital

stimulation throughout life.² The intestinal disturbances which are so

common in childhood see to it that the zone shall not lack intense

excitations.  Intestinal  catarrhs  at  the  tenderest  age  make  children

‘nervy’, as people say, and in cases of later neurotic illness they have

a  determining  influence  on  the  symptoms  in  which  the  neurosis  is

expressed, and they put at its disposal the whole range of intestinal

disturbances.  If  we  bear  in  mind  the  erotogenic  significance  of  the

outlet of the intestinal canal, which persists, at all events in a modified

form,  we  shall  not  be  inclined  to  scoff  at  the  influence  of

haemorrhoids,  to  which  old-fashioned  medicine  used  to  attach  so

much importance in explaining neurotic conditions.

 

   ¹ Cf. the very copious literature on the subject of masturbation, which for the most part,

however, is at sea upon the main issues, e.g. Rohleder (1899). [Added 1915:] See also the
report of the discussion on the subject in the Vienna Psycho-Analytical Society (Diskussionen,
1912).

   ² [Footnote added 1910:] Cf. my papers on ‘Character and Anal Erotism’ (1908b) [added

1920:] and ‘On Transformations of Instinct as Exemplified in Anal Erotism’ (1917c).
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1507

 

      Children  who  are  making  use  of  the  susceptibility  to  erotogenic

stimulation of the anal zone betray themselves by holding back their

stool till its accumulation brings about violent muscular contractions

and,  as  it  passes  through  the  anus,  is  able  to  produce  powerful

stimulation of the mucous membrane. In so doing it must no doubt

cause not only painful but also highly pleasurable sensations. One of

the clearest signs of subsequent eccentricity or nervousness is to be

seen when a baby obstinately refuses to empty his bowels when he is

put on the pot - that is, when his nurse wants him to - and holds back

that function till he himself chooses to exercise it. He is naturally not

concerned with dirtying the bed, he is only anxious not to miss thesubsidiary pleasure attached to defaecating. Educators are once more

right  when  they  describe  children  who  keep  the  process  back  as

‘naughty’.

   The contents of the bowels, which act as a stimulating mass upon a

sexually  sensitive  portion  of  mucous  membrane,  behave  like

forerunners of another organ, which is destined to come into action

after the phase of childhood. But they have other important meanings

for the infant. They are clearly treated as a part of the infant’s own

body and represent his first ‘gift’: by producing them he can express

his active compliance with his environment and, by withholding them,

his disobedience. From being a ‘gift’ they later come to acquire the

meaning of ‘baby’ - for babies, according to one of the sexual theories

of children, are acquired by eating and are born through the bowels.

      The  retention  of  the  faecal  mass,  which  is  thus  carried  out

intentionally by the child to begin with, in order to serve, as it were, as

a masturbatory stimulus upon the anal zone or to be employed in his

relation to the people looking after him, is also one of the roots of the

constipation  which  is  so  common  among  neuropaths.  Further,  the

whole significance of the anal zone is reflected in the fact that few

neurotics are to be found without their special scatological practices,

ceremonies, and so on, which they carefully keep secret.¹

   Actual masturbatory stimulation of the anal zone by means of the

finger, provoked by a centrally determined or peripherally maintained

sensation of itching, is by no means rare among older children.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1920:] Lou Andreas-Salomé (1916), in a paper which has given us a very

much deeper understanding of the significance of anal erotism, has shown how the history of
the first prohibition which a child comes across - the prohibition against getting pleasure from
anal activity and its products - has a decisive effect on his whole development. This must be
the first occasion on which the infant has a glimpse of an environment hostile to his instinctual
impulses, on which he learns to separate his own entity from this alien one and on which he
carries out the first ‘repression’ of his possibilities for pleasure. From that time on, what is
‘anal’ remains the symbol of everything that is to be repudiated and excluded from life. The
clear-cut  distinction  between  anal  and  genital  processes  which  is  later  insisted  upon  is
contradicted  by  the  close  anatomical  and  functional  analogies  and  relations  which  hold
between them. The genital apparatus remains the neighbour of the cloaca, and actually ‘in the
case of women is only taken from it on lease’.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality                                                                                      1508

 

 

ACTIVITY OF THE GENITAL ZONES   Among the erotogenic zones that form

part of the child’s

                                                        body there is one which certainly

does not play the opening part, and which cannot be the vehicle of the

oldest sexual impulses, but which is destined to great things in the

future. In both male and female children it is brought into connection

with micturition (in the glans and clitoris) and in the former is enclosed

in  a  pouch  of  mucous  membrane,  so  that  there  can  be  no  lack  of

stimulation of it by secretions which may give an early start to sexual

excitation. The sexual activities of this erotogenic zone, which forms

part of the sexual organs proper, are the beginning of what is later to

become ‘normal’ sexual life. The anatomical situation of this region,

the secretions in which it is bathed, the washing and rubbing to which

it is subjected in the course of a child’s toilet, as well as accidental

stimulation (such as the movement of intestinal worms in the case of

girls), make it inevitable that the pleasurable feeling which this part of

the body is capable of producing should be noticed by children even

during  their  earliest  infancy,  and  should  give  rise  to  a  need  for  its

repetition. If we consider this whole range of contrivances and bear in

mind that both making a mess and measures for keeping clean are

bound to operate in much the same way, it is scarcely possible to

avoid the conclusion that the foundations for the future primacy over

sexual activity exercised by this erotogenic zone are established by

early  infantile  masturbation,  which  scarcely  a  single  individual

escapes. The action which disposes of the stimulus and brings about

satisfaction consists in a rubbing movement with the hand or in the

application of pressure (no doubt on the lines of a pre-existing reflex)

either  from  the  hand  or  by  bringing  the  thighs  together.  This  last

method is by far the more common in the case of girls. The preference

for  the  hand  which  is  shown  by  boys  is  already  evidence  of  the

important  contribution  which  the  instinct  for  mastery  is  destined  to

make to masculine sexual activity.¹

   It will be in the interests of clarity if I say at once that three phases of

infantile  masturbation  are  to  be  distinguished.  The  first  of  these

belongs to early infancy, and the second to the brief efflorescence ofsexual  activity  about  the  fourth  year  of  life;  only  the  third  phase

corresponds  to  pubertal  masturbation,  which  is  often  the  only  kind

taken into account.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1915:] Unusual techniques in carrying out masturbation in later years

seem to point to the influence of a prohibition against masturbation which has been overcome.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1509

 

 

SECOND  PHASE  OF  INFANTILE  MASTURBATION   The masturbation of early

infancy seems to

                                                                             disappear after a

short  time;  but  it  may  persist  uninterruptedly  until  puberty,  and  this

would  constitute  the  first  great  deviation  from  the  course  of

development laid down for civilized men. At some point of childhood

after early infancy, as a rule before the fourth year, the sexual instinct

belonging to the genital zone usually revives and persists again for a

time  until  it  is  once  more  suppressed,  or  it  may  continue  without

interruption.  This  second  phase  of  infantile  sexual  activity  may

assume a variety of different forms which can only be determined by a

precise analysis of individual cases. But all its details leave behind the

deepest  (unconscious)  impressions  in  the  subject’s  memory,

determine the development of his character, if he is to remain healthy,

and the symptomatology of his neurosis, if he is to fall ill after puberty.¹

In the latter case we find that this sexual period has been forgotten

and that the conscious memories that bear witness to it have been

displaced. (I have already mentioned that I am also inclined to relate

normal  infantile  amnesia  to  this  infantile  sexual  activity.)  Psycho-

analytic  investigation  enables  us  to  make  what  has  been  forgotten

conscious and thus do away with a compulsion that arises from the

unconscious psychical material.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1915:] The problem of why the sense of guilt of neurotics is, as Bleuler

recently recognized, regularly attached to the memory of some masturbatory activity, usually
at puberty, still awaits an exhaustive analytic explanation. [Added 1920:] The most general
and  most  important  factor  concerned  must  no  doubt  be  that  masturbation  represents  theexecutive agency of the whole of infantile sexuality and is, therefore, able to take over the
sense of guilt attaching to it.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1510

 

 

RETURN OF EARLY INFANTILE MASTURBATION   During the years of childhood

with which I am

                                                                            now dealing, the

sexual  excitation  of  early  infancy  returns,  either  as  a  centrally

determined tickling stimulus which seeks satisfaction in masturbation,

or as a process in the nature of a nocturnal emission which, like the

nocturnal emissions of adult years, achieves satisfaction without the

help of any action by the subject. The latter case is the more frequent

with girls and in the second half of childhood; its determinants are not

entirely  intelligible  and  often,  though  not  invariably,  it  seems  to  be

conditioned by a period of earlier active masturbation. The symptoms

of these sexual manifestations are scanty; they are mostly displayed

on  behalf  of  the  still  undeveloped  sexual  apparatus  by  the urinary

apparatus, which thus acts, as it were, as the former’s trustee. Most of

the so-called bladder disorders of this period are sexual disturbances:

nocturnal enuresis, unless it represents an epileptic fit, corresponds to

a nocturnal emission.

      The  reappearance  of  sexual  activity  is  determined  by  internal

causes and external contingencies, both of which can be guessed in

cases of neurotic illness from the form taken by their symptoms and

can  be  discovered  with  certainty  by  psycho-analytic  investigation.  I

shall have to speak presently of the internal causes; great and lasting

importance  attaches  at  this  period  to  the  accidental external

contingencies.  In  the  foreground  we  find  the  effects  of  seduction,

which treats a child as a sexual object prematurely and teaches him,

in highly emotional circumstances, how to obtain satisfaction from his

genital zones, a satisfaction which he is then usually obliged to repeat

again  and  again  by  masturbation.  An  influence  of  this  kind  may

originate either from adults or from other children. I cannot admit that

in my paper on ‘The Aetiology of Hysteria’ (1896c) I exaggerated thefrequency or importance of that influence, though I did not then know

that persons who remain normal may have had the same experiences

in  their  childhood,  and  though  I  consequently  overrated  the

importance  of  seduction  in  comparison  with  the  factors  of  sexual

constitution and development.¹ Obviously seduction is not required in

order  to  arouse  a  child’s  sexual  life;  that  can  also  come  about

spontaneously from internal causes.

 

POLYMORPHOUSLY  PERVERSE  DISPOSITION      It  is  an  instructive  fact  that

under the influence of

                                                                         seduction children can

become  polymorphously  perverse,  and  can  be  led  into  all  possible

kinds of sexual irregularities. This shows that an aptitude for them is

innately  present  in  their  disposition.  There  is  consequently  little

resistance towards carrying them out, since the mental dams against

sexual excesses - shame, disgust and morality - have either not yet

been constructed at all or are only in course of construction, according

to the age of the child. In this respect children behave in the same

kind of way as an average uncultivated woman in whom the same

polymorphously  perverse  disposition  persists.  Under  ordinary

conditions she may remain normal sexually, but if she is led on by a

clever seducer she will find every sort of perversion to her taste, and

will retain them as part of her own sexual activities. Prostitutes exploit

the same polymorphous, that is, infantile, disposition for the purposes

of their profession; and, considering the immense number of women

who are prostitutes or who must be supposed to have an aptitude for

prostitution without becoming engaged in it, it becomes impossible not

to recognize that this same disposition to perversions of every kind is

a general and fundamental human characteristic.

 

   ¹ Havelock Ellis has published a number of autobiographical narratives written by people

who remained predominantly normal in later life and describing the first sexual impulses of
their childhood and the occasions which gave rise to them. These reports naturally suffer from
the fact that they omit the prehistoric period of the writers' sexual lives, which is veiled by
infantile  amnesia  and  which  can  only  be  filled  in  by  psycho-analysis  in  the  case  of  an
individual  who  has  developed  a  neurosis.  In  more  than  one  respect,  nevertheless,  the
statements are valuable, and similar narratives were what led me to make the modification in
my aetiological hypotheses which I have mentioned in the text.
                     Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1511

 

 

COMPONENT INSTINCTS   Moreover, the effects of seduction do not help

to reveal the early

                                          history of the sexual instinct; they rather

confuse our view of it by presenting children prematurely with a sexual

object for which the infantile sexual instinct at first shows no need. It

must, however, be admitted that infantile sexual life, in spite of the

preponderating dominance of erotogenic zones, exhibits components

which from the very first involve other people as sexual objects. Such

are  the  instincts  of  scopophilia,  exhibitionism  and  cruelty,  which

appear in a sense independently of erotogenic zones; these instincts

do not enter into intimate relations with genital life until later, but are

already to be observed in childhood as independent impulses, distinct

in the first instance from erotogenic sexual activity. Small children are

essentially without shame, and at some periods of their earliest years

show  an  unmistakable  satisfaction  in  exposing  their  bodies,  with

especial  emphasis  on  the  sexual  parts.  The  counterpart  of  this

supposedly  perverse  inclination,  curiosity  to  see  other  people’s

genitals, probably, does not become manifest until somewhat later in

childhood, when the obstacle set up by a sense of shame has already

reached  a  certain  degree  of  development.  Under  the  influence  of

seduction  the  scopophilic  perversion  can  attain  great  importance  in

the sexual life of a child. But my researches into the early years of

normal  people,  as  well  as  of  neurotic  patients,  force  me  to  the

conclusion  that  scopophilia  can  also  appear  in  children  as  a

spontaneous manifestation. Small children whose attention has once

been drawn - as a rule by masturbation - to their own genitals usually

take the further step without help from outside and develop a lively

interest  in  the  genitals  of  their  playmates.  Since  opportunities  for

satisfying  curiosity  of  this  kind  usually  occur  only  in  the  course  of

satisfying the two kinds of need for excretion, children of this kind turn

into voyeurs,  eager  spectators  of  the  processes  of  micturition  and

defaecation. When repression of these inclinations sets in, the desire

to see other people’s genitals (whether of their own or the opposite

sex)  persists  as  a  tormenting  compulsion,  which  in  some  cases  ofneurosis later affords the strongest motive force for the formation of

symptoms.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1512

 

   The cruel component of the sexual instinct develops in childhood

even more independently of the sexual activities that are attached to

erotogenic  zones.  Cruelty  in  general  comes  easily  to  the  childish

nature, since the obstacle that brings the instinct for mastery to a halt

at another person’s pain - namely a capacity for pity - is developed

relatively late. The fundamental psychological analysis of this instinct

has,  as  we  know,  not  yet  been  satisfactorily  achieved.  It  may  be

assumed  that  the  impulse  of  cruelty  arises  from  the  instinct  for

mastery and appears at a period of sexual life at which the genitals

have not yet taken over their later role. It then dominates a phase of

sexual life which we shall later describe as a pregenital organization.

Children  who  distinguish  themselves  by  special  cruelty  towards

animals  and  playmates  usually  give  rise  to  a  just  suspicion  of  an

intense and precocious sexual activity arising from erotogenic zones;

and,  though  all  the  sexual  instincts  may  display  simultaneous

precocity, erotogenic sexual activity seems, nevertheless, to be the

primary one. The absence of the barrier of pity brings with it a danger

that  the  connection  between  the  cruel  and  the  erotogenic  instincts,

thus  established  in  childhood,  may  prove  unbreakable  in  later  life.

Ever since Jean Jacques Rousseau’s Confessions, it has been well

known to all educationalists that the painful stimulation of the skin of

the buttocks is one of the erotogenic roots of the passive instinct of

cruelty (masochism). The conclusion has rightly been drawn by them

that corporal punishment, which is usually applied to this part of the

body, should not be inflicted upon any children whose libido is liable to

be  forced  into  collateral  channels  by  the  later  demands  of  cultural

education.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1910:] When the account which I have given above of infantile sexuality

was first published in 1905, it was founded for the most part on the results of psycho-analytic
research upon adults. At that time it was impossible to make full use of direct observation onchildren: only isolated hints and some valuable pieces of confirmation came from that source.
Since then it has become possible to gain direct insight into infantile psycho-sexuality by the
analysis of some cases of neurotic illness during the early years of childhood. It is gratifying to
be able to report that direct observation has fully confirmed the conclusions arrived at by
psycho-analysis - which is incidentally good evidence of the trustworthiness of that method of
research. In addition to this, the ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy’ (1909b) has
taught us much that is new for which we have not been prepared by psycho-analysis: for
instance, the fact that sexual symbolism - the representation of what is sexual by non-sexual
objects and relations - extends back into the first years of possession of the power of speech.
   I was further made aware of a defect in the account I have given in the text, which, in the
interests of lucidity, describes the conceptual distinction between the two phases of auto-
erotism and object-love as though it were also a separation in time. But the analyses that I
have just mentioned, as well as the findings of Bell quoted on p. 1496 n., above, show that
children  between  the  ages  of  three  and  five  are  capable  of  very  clear  object-choice,
accompanied by strong affects.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1513

 

 

              THE SEXUAL RESEARCHES OF CHILDHOOD

 

THE INSTINCT FOR KNOWLEDGE   At about the same time as the sexual life

of children reaches

                                                      its first peak, between the ages of

three and five, they also begin to show signs of the activity which may

be  ascribed  to  the  instinct  for  knowledge  or  research.  This  instinct

cannot be counted among the elementary instinctual components, nor

can  it  be  classed  as  exclusively  belonging  to  sexuality.  Its  activity

corresponds on the one hand to a sublimated manner of obtaining

mastery,  while  on  the  other  hand  it  makes  use  of  the  energy  of

scopophilia.  Its  relations  to  sexual  life,  however,  are  of  particular

importance,  since  we  have  learnt  from  psycho-analysis  that  the

instinct for knowledge in children is attracted unexpectedly early and

intensively to sexual problems and is in fact possibly first aroused by

them.

 

THE  RIDDLE  OF  THE  SPHINX      It  is  not  by  theoretical  interests  but  by

practical ones that activities

                                               of research are set going in children. Thethreat to the bases of a child’s existence offered by the discovery or

the suspicion of the arrival of a new baby and the fear that he may, as

a result of it, cease to be cared for and loved, make him thoughtful

and clear-sighted. And this history of the instinct’s origin is in line with

the fact that the first problem with which it deals is not the question of

the distinction between the sexes but the riddle of where babies come

from. (This, in a distorted form which can easily be rectified, is the

same  riddle  that  was  propounded  by  the  Theban  Sphinx.)  On  the

contrary, the existence of two sexes does not to begin with arouse any

difficulties or doubts in children. It is self-evident to a male child that a

genital like his own is to be attributed to everyone he knows, and he

cannot make its absence tally with his picture of these other people.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1514

 

 

CASTRATION  COMPLEX  AND  PENIS  ENVY   This conviction is energetically

maintained by boys,

                                                                    is obstinately defended

against the contradictions which soon result from observation, and is

only  abandoned  after  severe  internal  struggles  (the  castration

complex). The substitutes for this penis which they feel is missing in

women  play  a  great  part  in  determining  the  form  taken  by  many

perversions.¹

   The assumption that all human beings have the same (male) form of

genital  is  the  first  of  the  many  remarkable  and  momentous  sexual

theories  of  children.  It  is  of  little  use  to  a  child  that  the  science  of

biology justifies his prejudice and has been obliged to recognize the

female clitoris as a true substitute for the penis.

   Little girls do not resort to denial of this kind when they see that

boys’ genitals are formed differently from their own. They are ready to

recognize them immediately and are overcome by envy for the penis -

an  envy  culminating  in  the  wish,  which  is  so  important  in  its

consequences, to be boys themselves.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1920:] We are justified in speaking of a castration complex in women aswell. Both male and female children form a theory that women no less than men originally had
a penis, but that they have lost it by castration. The conviction which is finally reached by
males that women have no penis often leads them to an enduringly low opinion of the other
sex.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1515

 

 

THEORIES  OF  BIRTH      Many  people  can  remember  clearly  what  an

intense interest they took

                                    during the prepubertal period in the question of

where  babies  come  from.  The  anatomical  answers  to  the  question

were at the time very various: babies come out of the breast, or are

cut out of the body, or the navel opens to let them through.¹ Outside

analysis, there are very seldom memories of any similar researches

having been carried out in the early years of childhood. These earlier

researches fell a victim to repression long since, but all their findings

were of a uniform nature: people get babies by eating some particular

thing (as they do in fairy tales) and babies are born through the bowel

like  a  discharge  of  faeces.  These  infantile  theories  remind  us  of

conditions  that  exist  in  the  animal  kingdom  -  and  especially  of  the

cloaca in types of animals lower than mammals.

 

SADISTIC  VIEW  OF  SEXUAL  INTERCOURSE      If  children  at  this  early  age

witness sexual

                                                                      intercourse between

adults  -  for  which  an  opportunity  is  provided  by  the  conviction  of

grown-up  people  that  small  children  cannot  understand  anything

sexual - they inevitably regard the sexual act as a sort of ill-treatment

or act of subjugation: they view it, that is, in a sadistic sense. Psycho-

analysis  also  shows  us  that  an  impression  of  this  kind  in  early

childhood  contributes  a  great  deal  towards  a  predisposition  to  a

subsequent  sadistic  displacement  of  the  sexual  aim.  Furthermore,

children  are  much  concerned  with  the  problem  of  what  sexual

intercourse - or, as they put it, being married - consists in: and they

usually  seek  a  solution  of  the  mystery  in  some  common  activity

concerned with the function of micturition or defaecation. 

TYPICAL FAILURE OF INFANTILE SEXUAL RESEARCHES   We can say in general

of the sexual

                                                                                          theories of

children that they are reflections of their own sexual constitution, and

that  in  spite  of  their  grotesque  errors  the  theories  show  more

understanding of sexual processes than one would have given their

creators  credit  for.  Children  also  perceive  the  alterations  that  take

place  in  their  mother  owing  to  pregnancy  and  are  able  to  interpret

them correctly. The fable of the stork is often told to an audience that

receives  it  with  deep,  though  mostly  silent,  mistrust.  There  are,

however,  two  elements  that  remain  undiscovered  by  the  sexual

researches of children: the fertilizing role of semen and the existence

of the female sexual orifice - the same elements, incidentally, in which

the infantile organization is itself undeveloped. It therefore follows that

the efforts of the childish investigator are habitually fruitless, and end

in a renunciation which not infrequently leaves behind it a permanent

injury to the instinct for knowledge. The sexual researches of these

early  years  of  childhood  are  always  carried  out  in  solitude.  They

constitute a first step towards taking an independent attitude in the

world,  and  imply  a  high  degree  of  alienation  of  the  child  from  the

people  in  his  environment  who  formerly  enjoyed  his  complete

confidence.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] In these later years of childhood there is a great wealth of sexual

theories, of which only a few examples are given in the text.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1516

 

 

          THE PHASES OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE SEXUAL

                                  ORGANIZATION

 

The  characteristics  of  infantile  sexual  life  which  we  have  hitherto

emphasized are the facts that it is essentially auto-erotic (i.e. that it

finds  its  object  in  the  infant’s  own  body)  and  that  its  individualcomponent  instincts  are  upon  the  whole  disconnected  and

independent  of  one  another  in  their  search  for  pleasure.  The  final

outcome of sexual development lies in what is known as the normal

sexual life of the adult, in which the pursuit of pleasure comes under

the  sway  of  the  reproductive  function  and  in  which  the  component

instincts, under the primacy of a single erotogenic zone, form a firm

organization  directed  towards  a  sexual  aim  attached  to  some

extraneous sexual object.

 

PREGENITAL  ORGANIZATIONS      The  study,  with  the  help  of  psycho-

analysis, of the inhibitions

                                                  and disturbances of this process of

development  enables  us  to  recognize  abortive  beginnings  and

preliminary stages of a firm organization of the component instincts

such as this - preliminary stages which themselves constitute a sexual

regime of a sort. These phases of sexual organization are normally

passed  through  smoothly,  without  giving  more  than  a  hint  of  their

existence. It is only in pathological cases that they become active and

recognizable to superficial observation.

   We shall give the name of ‘pregenital’ to organizations of sexual life

in which the genital zones have not yet taken over their predominant

part. We have hitherto identified two such organizations, which almost

seem as though they were harking back to early animal forms of life.

   The first of these is the oral or, as it might be called, cannibalistic

pregenital sexual organization. Here sexual activity has not yet been

separated from the ingestion of food; nor are opposite currents within

the activity differentiated. The object of both activities is the same; the

sexual aim consists in the incorporation of the object - the prototype of

a process which, in the form of identification, is later to play such an

important  psychological  part.  A  relic  of  this  constructed  phase  of

organization, which is forced upon our notice by pathology, may be

seen in thumb-sucking, in which the sexual activity, detached from the

nutritive activity, has substituted for the extraneous object one situated

in the subject’s own body.¹

   A second pregenital phase is that of the sadistic-anal organization.

Here  the  opposition  between  two  currents,  which  runs  through  all

sexual  life,  is  already  developed:  they  cannot  yet,  however,  bedescribed  as  ‘masculine’  and  ‘feminine’,  but  only  as  ‘active’  and

‘passive’. The activity is put into operation by the instinct for mastery

through  the  agency  of  the  somatic  musculature;  the  organ  which,

more  than  any  other,  represents  the passive  sexual  aim  is  the

erotogenic  mucous  membrane  of  the  anus.  Both  of  these  currents

have objects, which, however, are not identical. Alongside these, other

component instincts operate in an auto-erotic manner. In this phase,

therefore,  sexual  polarity  and  an  extraneous  object  are  already

observable.  But  organization  and  subordination  to  the  reproductive

function are still absent.²

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1920:] For remnants of this phase in adult neurotics, cf. Abraham (1916).

[Added 1924:] In another, later work (1924) the same writer has divided both this oral phase,
and  also  the  later  sadistic  anal  one,  into  two  sub-divisions,  which  are  characterized  by
differing attitudes towards the object.

   ² [Footnote added 1924:] Abraham, in the paper last quoted (1924), points out that the anus

is developed from the embryonic blastopore - a fact which seems like a biological prototype of
psychosexual development.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1517

 

 

AMBIVALENCE   This form of sexual organization can persist throughout

life and can permanently

                         attract a large portion of sexual activity to itself. The

predominance in it of sadism and the cloacal part played by the anal

zone  give  it  a  quite  peculiarly  archaic  colouring.  It  is  further

characterized by the fact that in it the opposing pairs of instincts are

developed  to  an  approximately  equal  extent,  a  state  of  affairs

described by Bleuler’s happily chosen term ‘ambivalence’.

      The  assumption  of  the  existence  of  pregenital  organizations  of

sexual life is based on the analysis of the neuroses, and without a

knowledge  of  them  can  scarcely  be  appreciated.  Further  analytic

investigation may be expected to provide us with far more information

on the structure and development of the normal sexual function.

   In order to complete our picture of infantile sexual life, we must also

suppose that the choice of an object, such as we have shown to becharacteristic  of  the  pubertal  phase  of  development,  has  already

frequently or habitually been effected during the years of childhood:

that is to say, the whole of the sexual currents have become directed

towards a single person in relation to whom they seek to achieve their

aims. This then is the closest approximation possible in childhood to

the final form taken by sexual life after puberty. The only difference

lies in the fact that in childhood the combination of the component

instincts  and  their  subordination  under  the  primacy  of  the  genitals

have  been  effected  only  very  incompletely  or  not  at  all.  Thus  the

establishment of that primacy in the service of reproduction is the last

phase through which the organization of sexuality passes.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] At a later date (1923), I myself modified this account by inserting a

third phase in the development of childhood, subsequent to the two pregenital organizations.
This phase, which already deserves to be described as genital, presents a sexual object and
some degree of convergence of the sexual impulses upon that object; but it is differentiated
from the final organization of sexual maturity in one essential respect. For it knows only one
kind  of  genital:  the  male  one.  For  that  reason  I  have  named  it  the  ‘phallic’  stage  of
organization.  (Freud,  1923e.)  According  to  Abraham,  it  has  a  biological  prototype  in  the
embryo’s undifferentiated genital disposition, which is the same for both sexes.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1518

 

 

DIPHASIC CHOICE OF OBJECT   It may be regarded as typical of the choice

of an object that the

                                                  process is diphasic, that is, that it

occurs in two waves. The first of these begins between the ages of

two and five, and is brought to a halt or to a retreat by the latency

period; it is characterized by the infantile nature of the sexual aims.

The  second  wave  sets  in  with  puberty  and  determines  the  final

outcome of sexual life.

      Although  the  diphasic  nature  of  object-choice  comes  down  in

essentials to no more than the operation of the latency period, it is of

the highest importance in regard to disturbances of that final outcome.

The resultants of infantile object-choice are carried over into the later

period. They either persist as such or are revived at the actual time ofpuberty. But as a consequence of the repression which has developed

between the two phases they prove unutilizable. Their sexual aims

have  become  mitigated  and  they  now  represent  what  may  be

described  as  the  ‘affectionate  current’  of  sexual  life.  Only  psycho-

analytic investigation can show that behind this affection, admiration

and respect there lie concealed the old sexual longings of the infantile

component  instincts  which  have  now  become  unserviceable.  The

object-choice of the pubertal period is obliged to dispense with the

objects of childhood and to start afresh as a ‘sensual current’. Should

these two currents fail to converge, the result is often that one of the

ideals of sexual life, the focusing of all desires upon a single object,

will be unattainable.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1519

 

 

              THE SOURCES OF INFANTILE SEXUALITY

 

   Our efforts to trace the origins of the sexual instinct have shown us

so  far  that  sexual  excitation  arises  (a)  as  a  reproduction  of  a

satisfaction experienced in connection with other organic processes,

(b)    through  appropriate  peripheral  stimulation  of  erotogenic  zones

and (c) as an expression of certain ‘instincts’ (such as the scopophilic

instinct  and  the  instinct  of  cruelty)  of  which  the  origin  is  not  yet

completely  intelligible.  Psycho-analytic  investigation,  reaching  back

into  childhood  from  a  later  time,  and  contemporary  observation  of

children combine to indicate to us still other regularly active sources of

sexual  excitation.  The  direct  observation  of  children  has  the

disadvantage  of  working  upon  data  which  are  easily

misunderstandable; psycho-analysis is made difficult by the fact that it

can only reach its data, as well as its conclusions, after long detours.

But by co-operation the two methods can attain a satisfactory degree

of certainty in their findings.

   We have already discovered in examining the erotogenic zones that

these regions of the skin merely show a special intensification of akind  of  susceptibility  to  stimulus  which  is  possessed  in  a  certain

degree by the whole cutaneous surface. We shall therefore not be

surprised to find that very definite erotogenic effects are to be ascribed

to certain kinds of general stimulation of the skin. Among these we

may especially mention thermal stimuli, whose importance may help

us to understand the therapeutic effects of warm baths.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1520

 

 

MECHANICAL  EXCITATIONS      At  this  point  we  must  also  mention  the

production of sexual

                                              excitation by rhythmic mechanical

agitation  of  the  body.  Stimuli  of  this  kind  operate  in  three  different

ways: on the sensory apparatus of the vestibular nerves, on the skin,

and on the deeper parts (e.g. the muscles and articular structures).

The  existence  of  these  pleasurable  sensations  -  and  it  is  worth

emphasizing the fact that in this connection the concepts of ‘sexual

excitation’  and  ‘satisfaction’  can  to  a  great  extent  be  used  without

distinction, a circumstance which we must later endeavour to explain -

the existence, then, of these pleasurable sensations, caused by forms

of  mechanical  agitation  of  the  body,  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that

children are so fond of games of passive movement, such as swinging

and  being  thrown  up  into  the  air,  and  insist  on  such  games  being

incessantly repeated.¹ It is well known that rocking is habitually used

to induce sleep in restless children. The shaking produced by driving

in carriages and later by railway-travel exercises such a fascinating

effect upon older children that every boy, at any rate, has at one time

or other in his life wanted to be an engine driver or a coachman. It is a

puzzling fact that boys take such an extraordinarily intense interest in

things  connected  with  railways,  and,  at  the  age  at  which  the

production of phantasies is most active (shortly before puberty), use

those things as the nucleus of a symbolism that is peculiarly sexual. A

compulsive  link  of  this  kind  between  railway-travel  and  sexuality  is

clearly  derived  from  the  pleasurable  character  of  the  sensations  of

movement. In the event of repression, which turns so many childishpreferences into their opposite, these same individuals, when they are

adolescents or adults, will react to rocking or swinging with a feeling of

nausea,  will  be  terribly  exhausted  by  a  railway  journey,  or  will  be

subject to attacks of anxiety on the journey and will protect themselves

against a repetition of the painful experience by a dread of railway-

travel.

   Here again we must mention the fact, which is not yet understood,

that the combination of fright and mechanical agitation produces the

severe, hysteriform, traumatic neurosis. It may at least be assumed

that these influences, which, when they are of small intensity, become

sources of sexual excitation, lead to a profound disorder in the sexual

mechanism or chemistry if they operate with exaggerated force.

 

   ¹ Some people can remember that in swinging they felt the impact of moving air upon their

genitals as an immediate sexual pleasure.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1521

 

 

MUSCULAR ACTIVITY   We are all familiar with the fact that children feel a

need for a large

                                     amount of active muscular exercise and derive

extraordinary pleasure from satisfying it. Whether this pleasure has

any  connection  with  sexuality,  whether  it  itself  comprises  sexual

satisfaction or whether it can become the occasion of sexual excitation

- all of this is open to critical questioning, which may indeed also be

directed against the view maintained in the previous paragraphs that

the  pleasure  derived  from  sensations  of passive  movement  is  of  a

sexual nature or may produce sexual excitation. It is, however, a fact

that a number of people report that they experienced the first signs of

excitement in their genitals while they were romping or wrestling with

playmates - a situation in which, apart from general muscular exertion,

there is a large amount of contact with the skin of the opponent. An

inclination to physical struggles with some one particular person, just

as in later years an inclination to verbal disputes,¹ is a convincing sign

that object-choice has fallen on him. One of the roots of the sadisticinstinct would seem to lie in the encouragement of sexual excitation by

muscular  activity.  In  many  people  the  infantile  connection  between

romping  and  sexual  excitation  is  among  the  determinants  of  the

direction subsequently taken by their sexual instinct.²

 

AFFECTIVE  PROCESSES      The  further  sources  of  sexual  excitation  in

children are open to less

                                         doubt. It is easy to establish, whether by

contemporary  observation  or  by  subsequent  research,  that  all

comparatively  intense  affective  processes,  including  even  terrifying

ones, trench upon sexuality - a fact which may incidentally help to

explain  the  pathogenic  effect  of  emotions  of  that  kind.  In

schoolchildren dread of going in for an examination or tension over a

difficult piece of work can be important not only in affecting the child’s

relations at school but also in bringing about an irruption of sexual

manifestations. For quite often in such circumstances a stimulus may

be felt which urges the child to touch his genitals, or something may

take  place  akin  to  a  nocturnal  emission  with  all  its  bewildering

consequences. The behaviour of children at school, which confronts a

teacher with plenty of puzzles, deserves in general to be brought into

relation  with  their  budding  sexuality.  The  sexually  exciting  effect  of

many  emotions  which  are  in  themselves  unpleasurable,  such  as

feelings of apprehension, fright or horror, persists in a great number of

people throughout their adult life. There is no doubt that this is the

explanation of why so many people seek opportunities for sensations

of  this  kind,  subject  to  the  proviso  that  the  seriousness  of  the

unpleasurable  feeling  is  damped  down  by  certain  qualifying  facts,

such as its occurring in an imaginary world, in a book or in a play.

      If  we  assume  that  a  similar  erotogenic  effect  attaches  even  to

intensely painful feelings, especially when the pain is toned down or

kept at a distance by some accompanying condition, we should here

have one of the main roots of the masochistic-sadistic instinct, into

whose  numerous  complexities  we  are  very  gradually  gaining  some

insight.³

 

INTELLECTUAL  WORK      Finally,  it  is  an  unmistakable  fact  that

concentration of the attention upon                                      an intellectual task and intellectual strain in

general  produce  a  concomitant  sexual  excitation  in  many  young

people as well as adults. This is no doubt the only justifiable basis for

what  is  in  other  respects  the  questionable  practice  of  ascribing

nervous disorders to intellectual ‘overwork’.

 

   ¹ ‘Was sich liebt, das neckt sich.’ [Lovers’ quarrels are proverbial.]

    ² [Footnote added  1910:]  The  analysis  of  cases  of  neurotic  abasia  and  agoraphobia

removes all doubt as to the sexual nature of pleasure in movement. Modern education, as we
know, makes great use of games in order to divert young people from sexual activity. It would
be more correct to say that in these young people it replaces sexual enjoyment by pleasure in
movement - and forces sexual activity back to one of its auto-erotic components.

   ³ [Footnote added 1924:] I am here referring to what is known as ‘erotogenic’ masochism.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1522

 

 

   If we now cast our eyes over the tentative suggestions which I have

made as to the sources of infantile sexual excitation, though I have not

described them completely nor enumerated them fully, the following

conclusions  emerge  with  more  or  less  certainty.  It  seems  that  the

fullest provisions are made for setting in motion the process of sexual

excitation - a process the nature of which has, it must be confessed,

become highly obscure to us. The setting in motion of this process is

first and foremost provided for in a more or less direct fashion by the

excitations of the sensory surfaces - the skin and the sense organs -

and, most directly of all, by the operation of stimuli on certain areas

known as erotogenic zones. The decisive element in these sources of

sexual  excitation  is  no  doubt  the quality  of  the  stimuli,  though  the

factor  of  intensity,  in  the  case  of  pain,  is  not  a  matter  of  complete

indifference.  But  apart  from  these  sources  there  are  present  in  the

organism contrivances which bring it about that in the case of a great

number  of  internal  processes  sexual  excitation  arises  as  a

concomitant  effect,  as  soon  as  the  intensity  of  those  processes

passes beyond certain quantitative limits. What we have called the

component instincts of sexuality are either derived directly from these

internal  sources  or  are  composed  of  elements  both  from  thosesources and from the erotogenic zones. It may well be that nothing of

considerable  importance  can  occur  in  the  organism  without

contributing some component to the excitation of the sexual instinct.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1523

 

   It does not seem to me possible at present to state these general

conclusions with any greater clarity or certainty. For this I think two

factors  are  responsible:  first,  the  novelty  of  the  whole  method  of

approach to the subject, and secondly, the fact that the whole nature

of sexual excitation is completely unknown to us. Nevertheless I am

tempted to make two observations which promise to open out wide

future prospects:

 

VARIETIES OF SEXUAL CONSTITUTION      (a) Just as we saw previously that

it was

                                                               possible to derive a multiplicity

of innate sexual constitutions from variety in the development of the

erotogenic zones, so we can now make a similar attempt by including

the indirect  sources  of  sexual  excitation.  It  may  be  assumed  that,

although contributions are made from these sources in the case of

everyone, they are not in all cases of equal strength, and that further

help towards the differentiation of sexual constitutions may be found in

the  varying  development  of  the  individual  sources  of  sexual

excitation.¹

 

PATHWAYS OF MUTUAL INFLUENCE       (b) If we now drop the figurative

expression that we

                                                             have so long adopted in

speaking  of  the  ‘sources’  of  sexual  excitation,  we  are  led  to  the

suspicion  that  all  the  connecting  pathways  that  lead  from  other

functions to sexuality must also be traversable in the reverse direction.

If, for instance, the common possession of the labial zone by the two

functions is the reason why sexual satisfaction arises during the taking

of nourishment, then the same factor also enables us to understandwhy there should be disorders of nutrition if the erotogenic functions of

the  common  zone  are  disturbed.  Or  again,  if  we  know  that

concentration of attention may give rise to sexual excitation, it seems

plausible to assume that by making use of the same path, but in a

contrary direction, the condition of sexual excitation may influence the

possibility  of  directing  the  attention.  A  good  portion  of  the

symptomatology of the neuroses, which I have traced to disturbances

of the sexual processes, is expressed in disturbances of other, non-

sexual, somatic functions; and this circumstance, which has hitherto

been unintelligible, becomes less puzzling if it is only the counterpart

of the influences which bring about the production of sexual excitation.

      The  same  pathways,  however,  along  which  sexual  disturbances

trench upon the other somatic functions must also perform another

important function in normal health. They must serve as paths for the

attraction  of  sexual  instinctual  forces  to  aims  that  are  other  than

sexual, that is to say, for the sublimation of sexuality. But we must end

with a confession that very little is as yet known with certainty of these

pathways, though they certainly exist and can probably be traversed in

both directions.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1920:] An inevitable consequence of these considerations is that we

must  regard  each  individual  as  possessing  an  oral  erotism,  an  anal  erotism,  a  urethral
erotism, etc., and that the existence of mental complexes corresponding to these implies no
judgement  of  abnormality  or  neurosis.  The  differences  separating  the  normal  from  the
abnormal  can  lie  only  in  the  relative  strength  of  the  individual  components  of  the  sexual
instinct and in the use to which they are put in the course of development.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1524

 

                                            III

 

                THE TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY

 

With the arrival of puberty, changes set in which are destined to give

infantile  sexual  life  its  final,  normal  shape.  The  sexual  instinct  has

hitherto been predominantly auto-erotic; it now finds a sexual object.

Its  activity  has  hitherto  been  derived  from  a  number  of  separateinstincts and erotogenic zones, which, independently of one another,

have pursued a certain sort of pleasure as their sole sexual aim. Now,

however, a new sexual aim appears, and all the component instincts

combine to attain it, while the erotogenic zones become subordinated

to the primacy of the genital zone.¹ Since the new sexual aim assigns

very  different  functions  to  the  two  sexes,  their  sexual  development

now diverges greatly. That of males is the more straightforward and

the more understandable, while that of females actually enters upon a

kind of involution. A normal sexual life is only assured by an exact

convergence of the two currents directed towards the sexual object

and sexual aim, the affectionate current and the sensual one. (The

former, the affectionate current, comprises what remains over of the

infantile efflorescence of sexuality.) It is like the completion of a tunnel

which has been driven through a hill from both directions.

   The new sexual aim in men consists in the discharge of the sexual

products. The earlier one, the attainment of pleasure, is by no means

alien to it; on the contrary, the highest degree of pleasure is attached

to  this  final  act  of  the  sexual  process.  The  sexual  instinct  is  now

subordinated  to  the  reproductive  function;  it  becomes,  so  to  say,

altruistic. If this transformation is to succeed, the original dispositions

and  all  the  other  characteristics  of  the  instincts  must  be  taken  into

account in the process. Just as on any other occasion on which the

organism should by rights make new combinations and adjustments

leading to complicated mechanisms, here too there are possibilities of

pathological disorders if these new arrangements are not carried out.

Every pathological disorder of sexual life is rightly to be regarded as

an inhibition in development.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1915:] The schematic picture which I have given in the text aims at

emphasizing  differences.  I  have  already  shown  on p.  1517  the  extent  to  which  infantile
sexuality, owing to its choice of object [added 1924:] and to the development of the phallic
phase, approximates to the final sexual organization.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1525

 

 THE PRIMACY OF THE GENITAL ZONES AND FORE-PLEASURE

 

   The starting-point and the final aim of the process which I have

described are clearly visible. The intermediate steps are still in many

ways obscure to us. We shall have to leave more than one of them as

an unsolved riddle.

The most striking of the processes at puberty has been picked upon

as  constituting  its  essence:  the  manifest  growth  of  the  external

genitalia.  (The  latency  period  of  childhood  is,  on  the  other  hand,

characterized by a relative cessation of their growth.) In the meantime

the development of the internal genitalia has advanced far enough for

them to be able to discharge the sexual products or, as the case may

be,  to  bring  about  the  formation  of  a  new  living  organism.  Thus  a

highly complicated apparatus has been made ready and awaits the

moment of being put into operation.

   This apparatus is to be set in motion by stimuli, and observation

shows us that stimuli can impinge on it from three directions: from the

external world by means of the excitation of the erotogenic zones with

which we are already familiar, from the organic interior by ways which

we  have  still  to  explore,  and  from  mental  life,  which  is  itself  a

storehouse for external impressions and a receiving-post for internal

excitations. All three kinds of stimuli produce the same effect, namely

a condition described as ‘sexual excitement’, which shows itself by

two sorts of indication, mental and somatic. The mental indications

consist  in  a  peculiar  feeling  of  tension  of  an  extremely  compelling

character;  and  among  the  numerous  somatic  ones  are  first  and

foremost a number of changes in the genitals, which have the obvious

sense of being preparations for the sexual act - the erection of the

male organ and the lubrication of the vagina.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1526

 

 

SEXUAL  TENSION      The  fact  that  sexual  excitement  possesses  the

character of tension raises a                               problem the solution of which is no less difficult

than  it  would  be  important  in  helping  us  to  understand  the  sexual

processes. In spite of all the differences of opinion that reign on the

subject among psychologists, I must insist that a feeling of tension

necessarily involve unpleasure. What seems to me decisive is the fact

that a feeling of this kind is accompanied by an impulsion to make a

change in the psychological situation, that it operates in an urgent way

which  is  wholly  alien  to  the  nature  of  the  feeling  of  pleasure.  If,

however,  the  tension  of  sexual  excitement  is  counted  as  an

unpleasurable feeling, we are at once brought up against the fact that

it  is  also  undoubtedly  felt  as  pleasurable.  In  every  case  in  which

tension  is  produced  by  sexual  processes  it  is  accompanied  by

pleasure; even in the preparatory changes in the genitals a feeling of

satisfaction of some kind is plainly to be observed. How, then, are this

unpleasurable tension and this feeling of pleasure to be reconciled?

      Everything  relating  to  the  problem  of  pleasure  and  unpleasure

touches upon one of the sorest spots of present-day psychology. It will

be my aim to learn as much as possible from the circumstances of the

instance with which we are at present dealing, but I shall avoid any

approach to the problem as a whole.¹

   Let us begin by casting a glance at the way in which the erotogenic

zones fit themselves into the new arrangement. They have to play an

important part in introducing sexual excitation. The eye is perhaps the

zone most remote from the sexual object, but it is the one which, in

the situation of wooing an object, is liable to be the most frequently

stimulated by the particular quality of excitation whose cause, when it

occurs  in  a  sexual  object,  we  describe  as  beauty.  (For  the  same

reason the merits of a sexual object are described as ‘attractions’.)

This stimulation is on the one hand already accompanied by pleasure,

while on the other hand it leads to an increase of sexual excitement or

produces it if it is not yet present. If the excitation now spreads to

another erotogenic zone - to the hand, for instance, through tactile

sensations - the effect is the same: a feeling of pleasure on the one

side,  which  is  quickly  intensified  by  pleasure  arising  from  the

preparatory  changes,  and  on  the  other  side  an  increase  of  sexual

tension, which soon passes over into the most obvious unpleasure if it

cannot be met by a further accession of pleasure. Another instancewill perhaps make this even clearer. If an erotogenic zone in a person

who  is  not  sexually  excited  (e.g.  the  skin  of  a  woman’s  breast)  is

stimulated by touch, the contact produces a pleasurable feeling; but it

is at the same time better calculated than anything to arouse a sexual

excitation that demands an increase of pleasure. The problem is how

it can come about that an experience of pleasure can give rise to a

need for greater pleasure.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] I have made an attempt at solving this problem in the first part of

my paper on ‘The Economic Problem of Masochism’ (1924c).
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1527

 

 

THE  MECHANISM  OF  FORE-PLEASURE      The  part  played  in  this  by  the

erotogenic zones,

                                                               however, is clear. What is true

of one of them is true of all. They are all used to provide a certain

amount  of  pleasure  by  being  stimulated  in  the  way  appropriate  to

them. This pleasure then leads to an increase in tension which in its

turn is responsible for producing the necessary motor energy for the

conclusion of the sexual act. The penultimate stage of that act is once

again the appropriate stimulation of an erotogenic zone ( the genital

zone itself, in the glans penis) by the appropriate object (the mucous

membrane  of  the  vagina);  and  from  the  pleasure  yielded  by  this

excitation  the  motor  energy  is  obtained,  this  time  by  a  reflex  path,

which brings about the discharge of the sexual substances. This last

pleasure is the highest in intensity, and its mechanism differs from that

of the earlier pleasure. It is brought about entirely by discharge: it is

wholly a pleasure of satisfaction and with it the tension of the libido is

for the time being extinguished.

      This  distinction  between  the  one  kind  of  pleasure  due  to  the

excitation of erotogenic zones and the other kind due to the discharge

of the sexual substances deserves, I think, to be made more concrete

by  a  difference  in  nomenclature.  The  former  may  be  suitably

described  as  ‘fore-pleasure’  in  contrast  to  the  ‘end-pleasure’  orpleasure of satisfaction derived from the sexual act. Fore-pleasure is

thus the same pleasure that has already been produced, although on

a  smaller  scale,  by  the  infantile  sexual  instinct;  end-pleasure  is

something  new  and  is  thus  probably  conditioned  by  circumstances

that do not arise till puberty. The formula for the new function of the

erotogenic  zones  runs  therefore:  they  are  used  to  make  possible,

through the medium of the fore-pleasure which can be derived from

them  (as  it  was  during  infantile  life),  the  production  of  the  greater

pleasure of satisfaction.

   I was able recently to throw light upon another instance, in a quite

different  department  of  mental  life,  of  a  slight  feeling  of  pleasure

similarly  making  possible  the  attainment  of  a  greater  resultant

pleasure,  and  thus  operating  as  an  ‘incentive  bonus’.  In  the  same

connection  I  was  also  able  to  go  more  deeply  into  the  nature  of

pleasure.¹

 

   ¹ See my volume on Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious which appeared in 1905.

The ‘fore-pleasure’ attained by the technique of joking is used in order to liberate a greater
pleasure derived from the removal of internal inhibitions.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1528

 

 

DANGERS  OF  FORE-PLEASURE      The  connection  between  fore-pleasure

and infantile sexual life

                                                     is, however, made clearer by the

pathogenic  part  which  it  can  come  to  play.  The  attainment  of  the

normal sexual aim can clearly be endangered by the mechanism in

which fore-pleasure is involved. This danger arises if at any point in

the preparatory sexual processes the fore-pleasure turns out to be too

great and the element of tension too small. The motive for proceeding

further with the sexual process then disappears, the whole path is cut

short,  and  the  preparatory  act  in  question  takes  the  place  of  the

normal sexual aim. Experience has shown that the precondition for

this  damaging  event  is  that  the  erotogenic  zone  concerned  or  the

corresponding component instinct shall already during childhood havecontributed  an  unusual  amount  of  pleasure.  If  further  factors  then

come into play, tending to bring about a fixation, a compulsion may

easily arise in later life which resists the incorporation of this particular

fore-pleasure into a new context. Such is in fact the mechanism of

many perversions, which consist in a lingering over the preparatory

acts of the sexual process.

   This failure of the function of the sexual mechanism owing to fore-

pleasure  is  best  avoided  if  the  primacy  of  the  genitals  too  is

adumbrated in childhood; and indeed things seem actually arranged to

bring this about in the second half of childhood (from the age of eight

to puberty). During these years the genital zones already behave in

much  the  same  way  as  in  maturity;  they  become  the  seat  of

sensations  of  excitation  and  of  preparatory  changes  whenever  any

pleasure is felt from the satisfaction of other erotogenic zones, though

this result is still without a purpose - that is to say, contributes nothing

to  a  continuation  of  the  sexual  process.  Already  in  childhood,

therefore, alongside of the pleasure of satisfaction there is a certain

amount  of  sexual  tension,  although  it  is  less  constant  and  less  in

quantity. We can now understand why, in discussing the sources of

sexuality, we were equally justified in saying of a given process that it

was sexually satisfying or sexually exciting. It will be noticed that in the

course  of  our  enquiry  we  began  by  exaggerating  the  distinction

between infantile and mature sexual life, and that we are now setting

this right. Not only the deviations from normal sexual life but its normal

form  as  well  are  determined  by  the  infantile  manifestations  of

sexuality.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1529

 

 

                THE PROBLEM OF SEXUAL EXCITATION

 

      We  remain  in  complete  ignorance  both  of  the  origin  and  of  the

nature  of  the  sexual  tension  which  arises  simultaneously  with  the

pleasure  when  erotogenic  zones  are  satisfied.¹  The  most  obviousexplanation, that this tension arises in some way out of the pleasure

itself, is not only extremely improbable in itself but becomes untenable

when we consider that in connection with the greatest pleasure of all,

that  which  accompanies  the  discharge  of  the  sexual  products,  no

tension is produced, but on the contrary all tension is removed. Thus

pleasure  and  sexual  tension  can  only  be  connected  in  an  indirect

manner.

 

PART  PLAYED  BY  THE  SEXUAL  SUBSTANCES      Apart  from  the  fact  that

normally it is only the

                                                                         discharge of the sexual

substances that brings sexual excitation to an end, there are other

points of contact between sexual tension and the sexual products. In

the  case  of  a  man  living  a  continent  life,  the  sexual  apparatus,  at

varying  intervals,  which,  however,  are  not  ungoverned  by  rules,

discharges  the  sexual  substances  during  the  night,  to  the

accompaniment of a pleasurable feeling and in the course of a dream

which  hallucinates  a  sexual  act.  And  in  regard  to  this  process

(nocturnal  emission)  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  the

sexual  tension,  which  succeeds  in  making  use  of  the  short  cut  of

hallucination  as  a  substitute  for  the  act  itself,  is  a  function  of  the

accumulation of semen in the vesicles containing the sexual products.

Our  experience  in  connection  with  the  exhaustibility  of  the  sexual

mechanism  argues  in  the  same  sense.  If  the  store  of  semen  is

exhausted, not only is it impossible to carry out the sexual act, but the

susceptibility  of  the  erotogenic  zones  to  stimulus  ceases,  and  their

appropriate excitation no longer gives rise to any pleasure. We thus

learn incidentally that a certain degree of sexual tension is required

even for the excitability of the erotogenic zones.

   This would seem to lead to what is, if I am not mistaken, the fairly

wide-spread  hypothesis  that  the  accumulation  of  the  sexual

substances  creates  and  maintains  sexual  tension;  the  pressure  of

these products upon the walls of the vesicles containing them might

be supposed to act as a stimulus upon a spinal centre, the condition of

which would be perceived by higher centres and would then give rise

in consciousness to the familiar sensation of tension. If the excitation

of  the  erotogenic  zones  increases  sexual  tension,  this  could  onlycome about on the supposition that the zones in question are in an

anatomical  connection  that  has  already  been  laid  down  with  these

centres, that they increase the tonus of the excitation in them, and, if

the sexual tension is sufficient, set the sexual act in motion or, if it is

insufficient, stimulate the production of the sexual substances.

   The weakness of this theory, which we find accepted, for instance,

in Krafft-Ebing’s account of the sexual processes, lies in the fact that,

having been designed to account for the sexual activity of adult males,

it takes too little account of three sets of conditions which it should

also  be  able  to  explain.  These  are  the  conditions  in  children,  in

females  and  in  castrated  males.  In  none  of  these  three  cases  can

there be any question of an accumulation of sexual products in the

same sense as in males, and this makes a smooth application of the

theory  difficult.  Nevertheless  it  may  at  once  be  admitted  that  it  is

possible to find means by which the theory may be made to cover

these  cases  as  well.  In  any  case  we  are  warned  not  to  lay  more

weight on the factor of the accumulation of the sexual products than it

is able to bear.

 

   ¹ It is a highly instructive fact that the German language in its use of the word ‘Lust’ takes

into  account  the  part  played  by  the  preparatory  sexual  excitations  which,  as  has  been
explained  above,  simultaneously  produce  an  element  of  satisfaction  and  a  contribution  to
sexual tension. ‘Lust’ has two meanings, and is used to describe the sensation of sexual
tension (‘Ich habe lust’ = ‘I should like to’, ‘I feel an impulse to’) as well as the feeling of
satisfaction.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1530

 

 

IMPORTANCE OF THE INTERNAL SEXUAL ORGANS   Observations on castrated

males seem to

                                                                                  show that sexual

excitation can occur to a considerable degree independently of the

production  of  the  sexual  substances.  The  operation  of  castration

occasionally fails to bring about a limitation of libido, although such

limitation,  which  provides  the  motive  for  the  operation,  is  the  usual

outcome.  Moreover,  it  has  long  been  known  that  diseases  whichabolish the production of the masculine sex-cells leave the patient,

though he is now sterile, with his libido and potency undamaged. It is

therefore by no means as astonishing as Rieger represents it to be

that the loss of the masculine sex-glands in an adult may have no

further effect upon his mental behaviour. It is true that if castration is

performed at a tender age, before puberty, it approximates in its effect

to  the  aim  of  obliterating  the  sexual  characters;  but  here  too  it  is

possible that what is in question is, besides the actual loss of the sex-

glands, an inhibition (connected with that loss) in the development of

other factors.

 

CHEMICAL  THEORY      Experiments  in  the  removal  of  the  sex-glands

(testes and ovaries) of

                                  animals, and in the grafting into vertebrates of

sex-glands from other individuals of the opposite sex,¹ have at last

thrown a partial light on the origin of sexual excitation, and have at the

same  time  still  further  reduced  the  significance  of  a  possible

accumulation  of  cellular  sexual  products.  It  has  become

experimentally  possible  (E.  Steinach)  to  transform  a  male  into  a

female,  and  conversely  a  female  into  a  male.  In  this  process  the

psychosexual behaviour of the animal alters in accordance with the

somatic  sexual  characters  and  simultaneously  with  them.  It  seems,

however, that this sex-determining influence is not an attribute of that

part  of  the  sex-glands  which  gives  rise  to  the  specific  sex-cells

(spermatozoa  and  ovum)  but  of  their  interstitial  tissue,  upon  which

special emphasis is laid by being described in the literature as the

‘puberty-gland’. It is quite possible that further investigation will show

that  this  puberty-gland  has  normally  a  hermaphrodite  disposition.  If

this were so, the theory of the bisexuality of the higher animals would

be  given  anatomical  foundation.  It  is  already  probable  that  the

puberty-gland is not the only organ concerned with the production of

sexual excitation and sexual characters. In any case, what we already

know of the part played by the thyroid gland in sexuality fits in with this

new  biological  discovery.  It  seems  probable,  then,  that  special

chemical substances are produced in the interstitial portion of the sex-

glands;  these  are  then  taken  up  in  the  blood  stream  and  cause

particular  parts  of  the  central  nervous  system  to  be  charged  withsexual tension. (We are already familiar with the fact that other toxic

substances, introduced into the body from outside, can bring about a

similar transformation of a toxic condition into a stimulus acting on a

particular organ.) The question of how sexual excitation arises from

the stimulation of erotogenic zones, when the central apparatus has

been previously charged, and the question of what interplay arises in

the course of these sexual processes between the effects of purely

toxic stimuli and of physiological ones - none of this can be treated,

even  hypothetically,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge.  It  must

suffice us to hold firmly to what is essential in this view of the sexual

processes: the assumption that substances of a peculiar kind arise

from the sexual metabolism. For this apparently arbitrary supposition

is supported by a fact which has received little attention but deserves

the closest consideration. The neuroses, which can be derived only

from disturbances of sexual life, show the greatest clinical similarity to

the  phenomena  of  intoxication  and  abstinence  that  arise  from  the

habitual use of toxic, pleasure-producing substances (alkaloids).

 

   ¹ Cf. Lipschütz’s work (1919), referred to on p. 1474 n.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1531

 

 

                              THE LIBIDO THEORY

 

      The  conceptual  scaffolding  which  we  have  set  up  to  help  us  in

dealing with the psychical manifestations of sexual life tallies well with

these hypotheses as to the chemical basis of sexual excitation. We

have defined the concept of libido as a quantitatively variable force

which  could  serve  as  a  measure  of  processes  and  transformations

occurring in the field of sexual excitation. We distinguish this libido in

respect of its special origin from the energy which must be supposed

to underlie mental processes in general, and we thus also attribute a

qualitative character to it. In thus distinguishing between libidinal and

other  forms  of  psychical  energy  we  are  giving  expression  to  the

presumption that the sexual processes occurring in the organism aredistinguished from the nutritive processes by a special chemistry. The

analysis of the perversions and psychoneuroses has shown us that

this sexual excitation is derived not from the so-called sexual parts

alone, but from all the bodily organs. We thus reach the idea of a

quantity of libido, to the mental representation of which we give the

name of ‘ego-libido’, and whose production, increase or diminution,

distribution  and  displacement  should  afford  us  possibilities  for

explaining the psychosexual phenomena observed.

   This ego-libido is, however, only conveniently accessible to analytic

study when it has been put to the use of cathecting sexual objects,

that  is,  when  it  has  become  object-libido.  We  can  then  perceive  it

concentrating upon objects, becoming fixed upon them or abandoning

them, moving from one object to another and, from these situations,

directing the subject’s sexual activity, which leads to the satisfaction,

that  is,  to  the  partial  and  temporary  extinction,  of  the  libido.  The

psycho-analysis of what are termed transference neuroses (hysteria

and obsessional neurosis) affords us a clear insight at this point.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1532

 

      We  can  follow  the  object-libido  through  still  further  vicissitudes.

When it is withdrawn from objects, it is held in suspense in peculiar

conditions of tension and is finally drawn back into the ego, so that it

becomes ego-libido once again. In contrast to object-libido, we also

describe ego-libido as ‘narcissistic’ libido. From the vantage-point of

psycho-analysis  we  can  look  across  a  frontier,  which  we  may  not

pass, at the activities of narcissistic libido, and may form some idea of

the  relation  between  it  and  object-libido.¹  Narcissistic  or  ego-libido

seems to be the great reservoir from which the object-cathexes are

sent out and into which they are withdrawn once more; the narcissistic

libidinal cathexis of the ego is the original state of things, realized in

earliest childhood, and is merely covered by the later extrusions of

libido, but in essentials persists behind them.

   It should be the task of a libido theory of neurotic and psychotic

disorders  to  express  all  the  observed  phenomena  and  inferredprocesses in terms of the economics of the libido. It is easy to guess

that the vicissitudes of the ego-libido will have the major part to play in

this  connection,  especially  when  it  is  a  question  of  explaining  the

deeper psychotic disturbances. We are then faced by the difficulty that

our method of research, psycho-analysis, for the moment affords us

assured information only on the transformations that take place in the

object-libido,²  but  is  unable  to  make  any  immediate  distinction

between the ego-libido and the other forms of energy operating in the

ego.³

      For  the  present,  therefore,  no  further  development  of  the  libido

theory is possible, except upon speculative lines. It would, however,

be sacrificing all that we have gained hitherto from psycho-analytic

observation, if we were to follow the example of C. G. Jung and water

down the meaning of the concept of libido itself by equating it with

psychical instinctual force in general. The distinguishing of the sexual

instinctual impulses from the rest and the consequent restriction of the

concept  of  libido  to  the  former  receives  strong  support  from  the

assumption  which  I  have  already  discussed  that  there  is  a  special

chemistry of the sexual function.

 

    ¹ [Footnote added  1924:]  Since  neuroses  other  than  the  transference  neuroses  have

become to a greater extent accessible to psycho-analysis, this limitation has lost its earlier
validity.

   ² [Footnote added 1924:] See the previous footnote.

   ³ [Footnote added 1915:] Cf. my paper on narcissism (1914c). [Added 1920:] The term

‘narcissism’  was  not  introduced,  as  I  erroneously  stated  in  that  paper,  by  Näcke,  but  by
Havelock Ellis.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1533

 

 

      THE DIFFERENTIATION BETWEEN MEN AND WOMEN

 

   As we all know, it is not until puberty that the sharp distinction is

established  between  the  masculine  and  feminine  characters.  From

that  time  on,  this  contrast  has  a  more  decisive  influence  than  any

other upon the shaping of human life. It is true that the masculine andfeminine  dispositions  are  already  easily  recognizable  in  childhood.

The development of the inhibitions of sexuality (shame, disgust, pity,

etc.) takes place in little girls earlier and in the face of less resistance

than in boys; the tendency to sexual repression seems in general to

be greater; and, where the component instincts of sexuality appear,

they prefer the passive form. The auto-erotic activity of the erotogenic

zones  is,  however,  the  same  in  both  sexes,  and  owing  to  this

uniformity there is no possibility of a distinction between the two sexes

such  as  arises  after  puberty.  So  far  as  the  auto-erotic  and

masturbatory manifestations of sexuality are concerned, we might lay

it  down  that  the  sexuality  of  little  girls  is  of  a  wholly  masculine

character. Indeed, if we were able to give a more definite connotation

to  the  concepts  of  ‘masculine’  and  ‘feminine’,  it  would  even  be

possible  to  maintain  that  libido  is  invariably  and  necessarily  of  a

masculine  nature,  whether  it  occurs  in  men  or  in  women  and

irrespective of whether its object is a man or a woman.¹

   Since I have become acquainted with the notion of bisexuality I have

regarded it as the decisive factor, and without taking bisexuality into

account  I  think  it  would  scarcely  be  possible  to  arrive  at  an

understanding  of  the  sexual  manifestations  that  are  actually  to  be

observed in men and women.

 

     ¹ [Footnote  added  1915:]  It  is  essential  to  understand  clearly  that  the  concepts  of

‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’, whose meaning seems so unambiguous to ordinary people, are
among the most confused that occur in science. It is possible to distinguish at least three
uses. ‘Masculine’ and ‘feminine’ are used sometimes in the sense of activity and passivity,
sometimes in a biological, and sometimes, again, in a sociological sense. The first of these
three meanings is the essential one and the most serviceable in psycho-analysis. When, for
instance, libido was described in the text above as being ‘masculine’, the word was being
used in this sense, for an instinct is always active even when it has a passive aim in view. The
second, or biological, meaning of ‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’ is the one whose applicability can
be determined most easily. Here ‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’ are characterized by the presence
of spermatozoa or ova respectively and by the functions proceeding from them. Activity and
its concomitant phenomena (more powerful muscular development, aggressiveness, greater
intensity of libido) are as a rule linked with biological masculinity; but they are not necessarily
so, for there are animal species in which these qualities are on the contrary assigned to the
female. The third, or sociological, meaning receives its connotation from the observation of
actually existing masculine and feminine individuals. Such observation shows that in human
beings pure masculinity or femininity is not to be found either in a psychological or a biological
sense. Every individual on the contrary displays a mixture of the character-traits belonging to
his own and to the opposite sex; and he shows a combination of activity and passivity whether
or not these last character-traits tally with his biological ones. 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1534

 

 

LEADING  ZONES  IN  MEN  AND  WOMEN      Apart  from  this  I  have  only  the

following to add. The

                                                               leading erotogenic zone in

female children is located at the clitoris, and is thus homologous to the

masculine  genital  zone  of  the  glans  penis.  All  my  experience

concerning masturbation in little girls has related to the clitoris and not

to  the  regions  of  the  external  genitalia  that  are  important  in  later

sexual functioning. I am even doubtful whether a female child can be

led  by  the  influence  of  seduction  to  anything  other  than  clitoridal

masturbation.  If  such  a  thing  occurs,  it  is  quite  exceptional.  The

spontaneous discharges of sexual excitement which occur so often

precisely in little girls are expressed in spasms of the clitoris. Frequent

erections  of  that  organ  make  it  possible  for  girls  to  form  a  correct

judgement, even without any instruction, of the sexual manifestations

of  the  other  sex:  they  merely  transfer  on  to  boys  the  sensations

derived from their own sexual processes.

   If we are to understand how a little girl turns into a woman, we must

follow the further vicissitudes of this excitability of the clitoris. Puberty,

which brings about so great an accession of libido in boys, is marked

in girls by a fresh wave of repression, in which it is precisely clitoridal

sexuality that is affected. What is thus overtaken by repression is a

piece  of  masculine  sexuality.  The  intensification  of  the  brake  upon

sexuality brought about by pubertal repression in women serves as a

stimulus to the libido in men and causes an increase of its activity.

Along with this heightening of libido there is also an increase of sexual

overvaluation which only emerges in full force in relation to a woman

who holds herself back and who denies her sexuality. When at last the

sexual act is permitted and the clitoris itself becomes excited, it still

retains a function: the task, namely, of transmitting the excitation to

the  adjacent  female  sexual  parts,  just  as  -  to  use  a  simile  -  pine

shavings can be kindled in order to set a log of harder wood on fire.

Before  this  transference  can  be  effected,  a  certain  interval  of  timemust often elapse, during which the young woman is anaesthetic. This

anaesthesia may become permanent if the clitoridal zone refuses to

abandon  its  excitability,  an  event  for  which  the  way  is  prepared

precisely  by  an  extensive  activity  of  that  zone  in  childhood.

Anaesthesia in women, as is well known, is often only apparent and

local. They are anaesthetic at the vaginal orifice but are by no means

incapable  of  excitement  originating  in  the  clitoris  or  even  in  other

zones. Alongside these erotogenic determinants of anaesthesia must

also  be  set  the  psychical  determinants,  which  equally,  arise  from

repression.

   When erotogenic susceptibility to stimulation has been successfully

transferred by a woman from the clitoris to the vaginal orifice, it implies

that she has adopted a new leading zone for the purposes of her later

sexual activity. A man, on the other hand, retains his leading zone

unchanged from childhood. The fact that women change their leading

erotogenic zone in this way, together with the wave of repression at

puberty, which, as it were, puts aside their childish masculinity, are the

chief determinants of the greater proneness of woman to neurosis and

especially  to  hysteria.  These  determinants,  therefore,  are  intimately

related to the essence of femininity.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1535

 

 

                        THE FINDING OF AN OBJECT

 

   The processes at puberty thus establish the primacy of the genital

zones; and, in a man, the penis, which has now become capable of

erection,  presses  forward  insistently  towards  the  new  sexual  aim  -

penetration into a cavity in the body which excites his genital zone.

Simultaneously on the psychical side the process of finding an object,

for  which  preparations  have  been  made  from  earliest  childhood,  is

completed.  At  a  time  at  which  the  first  beginnings  of  sexual

satisfaction are still linked with the taking of nourishment, the sexual

instinct has a sexual object outside the infant’s own body in the shapeof his mother’s breast. It is only later that the instinct loses that object,

just at the time, perhaps, when the child is able to form a total idea of

the person to whom the organ that is giving him satisfaction belongs.

As a rule the sexual instinct then becomes auto-erotic, and not until

the period of latency has been passed through is the original relation

restored.  There  are  thus  good  reasons  why  a  child  sucking  at  his

mother’s breast has become the prototype of every relation of love.

The finding of an object is in fact a refinding of it.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1915:] Psycho-analysis informs us that there are two methods of finding

an  object.  The  first,  described  in  the  text,  is  the  ‘anaclitic’  or  ‘attachment’  one,  based  on
attachment to early infantile prototypes. The second is the narcissistic one, which seeks for
the subject’s own ego and finds it again in other people. This latter method is of particularly
great importance in cases where the outcome is a pathological one, but it is not relevant to the
present context.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1536

 

 

THE SEXUAL OBJECT DURING EARLY INFANCY   But even after sexual activity

has become

                                                                            detached from the

taking  of  nourishment,  an  important  part  of  this  first  and  most

significant of all sexual relations is left over, which helps to prepare for

the choice of an object and thus to restore the happiness that has

been lost. All through the period of latency children learn to feel for

other  people  who  help  them  in  their  helplessness  and  satisfy  their

needs a love which is on the model of, and a continuation of, their

relation as sucklings to their nursing mother. There may perhaps be

an inclination to dispute the possibility of identifying a child’s affection

and  esteem  for  those  who  look  after  him  with  sexual  love.  I  think,

however,  that  a  closer  psychological  examination  may  make  it

possible  to  establish  this  identity  beyond  any  doubt.  A  child’s

intercourse  with  anyone  responsible  for  his  care  affords  him  an

unending  source  of  sexual  excitation  and  satisfaction  from  his

erotogenic zones. This is especially so since the person in charge of

him, who, after all, is as a rule his mother, herself regards him withfeelings that are derived from her own sexual life: she strokes him,

kisses him, rocks him and quite clearly treats him as a substitute for a

complete sexual object.¹ A mother would probably be horrified if she

were  made  aware  that  all  her  marks  of  affection  were  rousing  her

child’s sexual instinct and preparing for its later intensity. She regards

what she does as asexual, ‘pure’ love, since, after all, she carefully

avoids  applying  more  excitations  to  the  child’s  genitals  than  are

unavoidable in nursery care. As we know, however, the sexual instinct

is not aroused only by direct excitation of the genital zone. What we

call affection will unfailingly show its effects one day on the genital

zones as well. Moreover, if the mother understood more of the high

importance of the part played by instincts in mental life as a whole - in

all its ethical and psychical achievements - she would spare herself

any self-reproaches even after her enlightenment. She is only fulfilling

her task in teaching the child to love. After all, he is meant to grow up

into a strong and capable person with vigorous sexual needs and to

accomplish during his life all the things that human beings are urged

to do by their instincts. It is true that an excess of parental affection

does harm by causing precocious sexual maturity and also because,

by spoiling the child, it makes him incapable in later life of temporarily

doing without love or of being content with a smaller amount of it. One

of the clearest indications that a child will later become neurotic is to

be seen in an insatiable demand for his parents’ affection. And on the

other hand neuropathic parents, who are inclined as a rule to display

excessive affection, are precisely those who are most likely by their

caresses  to  arouse  the  child’s  disposition  to  neurotic  illness.

Incidentally, this example shows that there are ways more direct than

inheritance by which neurotic parents can hand their disorder on to

their children.

 

   ¹ Anyone who considers this ‘sacrilegious’ may be recommended to read Havelock Ellis’s

views on the relation between mother and child, which agree almost completely with mine.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1537

 

 INFANTILE ANXIETY   Children themselves behave from an early age as

though their dependence

                                  on the people looking after them were in the

nature of sexual love. Anxiety in children is originally nothing other

than an expression of the fact that they are feeling the loss of the

person they love. It is for this reason that they are frightened of every

stranger. They are afraid in the dark because in the dark they cannot

see the person they love; and their fear is soothed if they can take

hold  of  that  person’s  hand  in  the  dark.  To  attribute  to  bogeys  and

blood-curdling  stories  told  by  nurses  the  responsibility  for  making

children timid is to over-estimate their efficacy. The truth is merely that

children  who  are  inclined  to  be  timid  are  affected  by  stories  which

would  make  no  impression  what  ever  upon  others,  and  it  is  only

children  with  a  sexual  instinct  that  is  excessive  or  has  developed

prematurely or has become vociferous owing to too much petting who

are inclined to be timid. In this respect a child, by turning his libido into

anxiety when he cannot satisfy it, behaves like an adult. On the other

hand  an  adult  who  has  become  neurotic  owing  to  his  libido  being

unsatisfied  behaves  in  his  anxiety  like  a  child:  he  begins  to  be

frightened  when  he  is  alone,  that  is  to  say  when  he  is  away  from

someone of whose love he had felt secure, and he seeks to assuage

this fear by the most childish measures.¹

 

   ¹ For this explanation of the origin of infantile anxiety I have to thank a three-year-old boy

whom I once heard calling out of a dark room: ‘Auntie, speak to me! I’m frightened because
it’s so dark.’ His aunt answered him: ‘What good would that do? You can’t see me.’ ‘That
doesn’t matter,’ replied the child, ‘if anyone speaks, it gets light.’ Thus what he was afraid of
was not the dark, but the absence of someone he loved; and he could feel sure of being
soothed as soon as he had evidence of that person’s presence. [Added 1920:] One of the
most  important  results  of  psycho-analytic  research  is  this  discovery  that  neurotic  anxiety
arises out of libido, that it is the product of a transformation of it, and that it is thus related to it
in the same kind of way as vinegar is to wine. A further discussion of this problem will be
found in my Introductory Lectures  (1916-17),  Lecture  XXV,  though  even  there  it  must  be
confessed, the question is not finally cleared up.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1538

 

 THE  BARRIER  AGAINST  INCEST      We  see,  therefore,  that  the  parents’

affection for their child may

                                                    awaken his sexual instinct

prematurely (i.e. before the somatic conditions of puberty are present)

to  such  a  degree  that  the  mental  excitation  breaks  through  in  an

unmistakable fashion to the genital system. If, on the other hand, they

are fortunate enough to avoid this, then their affection can perform its

task of directing the child in his choice of a sexual object when he

reaches maturity. No doubt the simplest course for the child would be

to choose as his sexual objects the same persons whom, since his

childhood, he has loved with what may be described as damped-down

libido.¹ But, by the postponing of sexual maturation, time has been

gained  in  which  the  child  can  erect,  among  other  restraints  on

sexuality, the barrier against incest, and can thus take up into himself

the moral precepts which expressly exclude from his object-choice, as

being  blood  relations,  the  persons  whom  he  has  loved  in  his

childhood.  Respect  for  this  barrier  is  essentially  a  cultural  demand

made by society. Society must defend itself against the danger that

the interests which it needs for the establishment of higher social units

may be swallowed up by the family; and for this reason, in the case of

every individual, but in particular of adolescent boys, it seeks by all

possible  means  to  loosen  their  connection  with  their  family  -  a

connection which, in their childhood, is the only important one.²

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1915:] Cf. what has been said on p. 1518 about children’s object-choice

and the ‘affectionate current’.

    ² [Footnote added  1915:]  The  barrier  against  incest  is  probably  among  the  historical

acquisitions  of  mankind,  and,  like  other  moral  taboos,  has  no  doubt  already  become
established in many persons by organic inheritance. (Cf. my Totem and Taboo, 1912-13.)
Psycho-analytic investigation shows, however, how intensely the individual struggles with the
temptation to incest during his period of growth and how frequently the barrier is transgressed
in phantasies and even in reality.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1539

 

   It is in the world of ideas, however, that the choice of an object is

accomplished at first; and the sexual life of maturing youth is almostentirely restricted to indulging in phantasies, that is, in ideas that are

not destined to be carried into effect.¹ In these phantasies the infantile

tendencies invariably emerge once more, but this time with intensified

pressure  from  somatic  sources.  Among  these  tendencies  the  first

place is taken with uniform frequency by the child’s sexual impulses

towards his parents, which are as a rule already differentiated owing

to the attraction of the opposite sex - the son being drawn towards his

mother and the daughter towards her father.² At the same time as

these  plainly  incestuous  phantasies  are  overcome  and  repudiated,

one of the most significant, but also one of the most painful, psychical

achievements of the pubertal period is completed: detachment from

parental  authority,  a  process  that  alone  makes  possible  the

opposition,  which  is  so  important  for  the  progress  of  civilization,

between the new generation and the old. At every stage in the course

of  development  through  which  all  human  beings  ought  by  rights  to

pass, a certain number are held back; so there are some who have

never  got  over  their  parents’  authority  and  have  withdrawn  their

affection from them either very incompletely or not at all. They are

mostly girls, who, to the delight of their parents, have persisted in all

their childish love far beyond puberty. It is most instructive to find that

it is precisely these girls who in their later marriage lack the capacity to

give their husbands what is due to them; they make cold wives and

remain sexually anaesthetic. We learn from this that sexual love and

what appears to be non-sexual love for parents are fed from the same

sources; the latter, that is to say, merely corresponds to an infantile

fixation of the libido.

   The closer one comes to the deeper disturbances of psychosexual

development,  the  more  unmistakably  the  importance  of  incestuous

object-choice  emerges.  In  psychoneurotics  a  large  portion  or  the

whole of their psychosexual activity in finding an object remains in the

unconscious as a result of their repudiation of sexuality. Girls with an

exaggerated need for affection and an equally exaggerated horror of

the real demands made by sexual life have an irresistible temptation

on the one hand to realize the ideal of asexual love in their lives and

on the other hand to conceal their libido behind an affection which

they can express without self-reproaches, by holding fast throughout

their  lives  to  their  infantile  fondness,  revived  at  puberty,  for  theirparents or brothers and sisters. Psycho-analysis has no difficulty in

showing persons of this kind that they are in love, in the everyday

sense of the word, with these blood-relations of theirs; for, with the

help  of  their  symptoms  and  other  manifestations  of  their  illness,  it

traces their unconscious thoughts and translates them into conscious

ones. In cases in which someone who has previously been healthy

falls ill after an unhappy experience in love it is also possible to show

with certainty that the mechanism of his illness consists in a turning-

back of his libido on to those whom he preferred in his infancy.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1920:] The phantasies of the pubertal period have as their starting-point

the infantile sexual researches that were abandoned in childhood. No doubt, too, they are also
present before the end of the latency period. They may persist wholly, or to a great extent,
unconsciously and for that reason it is often impossible to date them accurately. They are of
great importance in the origin of many symptoms, since they precisely constitute preliminary
stages  of  these  symptoms  and  thus  lay  down  the  forms  in  which  the  repressed  libidinal
components  find  satisfaction.  In  the  same  way,  they  are  the  prototypes  of  the  nocturnal
phantasies which become conscious as dreams. Dreams are often nothing more than revivals
of pubertal phantasies of this kind under the influence of, and in relation to, some stimulus left
over from the waking life of the previous day (the ‘day’s residues’). Some among the sexual
phantasies of the pubertal period are especially prominent, and are distinguished by their very
general occurrence and by being to a great extent independent of individual experience. Such
are the adolescent’s phantasies of overhearing his parents in sexual intercourse, of having
been seduced at an early age by someone he loves and of having been threatened with
castration; such, too, are his phantasies of being in the womb, and even of experiences there,
and the so-called ‘Family Romance’, in which he reacts to the difference between his attitude
towards his parents now and in his childhood. The close relations existing between these
phantasies and myths has been demonstrated in the case of the last instance by Otto Rank
(1909).
   It has justly been said that the Oedipus complex is the nuclear complex of the neuroses,
and constitutes the essential part of their content. It represents the peak of infantile sexuality,
which, through its after-effects, exercises a decisive influence on the sexuality of adults. Every
new arrival on this planet is faced by the task of mastering the Oedipus complex; anyone who
fails  to  do  so  falls  a  victim  to  neurosis.  With  the  progress  of  psycho-analytic  studies  the
importance  of  the  Oedipus  complex  has  became  more  and  more  clearly  evident;  its
recognition has become the shibboleth that distinguishes the adherents of psycho-analysis
from its opponents.
   [Added 1924:] In another work (1924), Rank has traced attachment to the mother back to
the  prehistoric  intra-uterine  period  and  has  thus  indicated  the  biological  foundation  of  the
Oedipus complex. He differs from what has been said above, by deriving the barrier against
incest from the traumatic effect of anxiety at birth.

   ² Cf. my remarks in The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a), on the inevitability of Fate in the

fable of Oedipus.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality                                                                                      1540

 

 

AFTER-EFFECTS  OF  INFANTILE  OBJECT-CHOICE      Even  a  person  who  has

been fortunate enough

                                                                               to avoid an

incestuous fixation of his libido does not entirely escape its influence.

It often happens that a young man falls in love seriously for the first

time with a mature woman, or a girl with an elderly man in a position of

authority; this is clearly an echo of the phase of development that we

have  been  discussing,  since  these  figures  are  able  to  re-animate

pictures of their mother or father.¹ There can be no doubt that every

object-choice  whatever  is  based,  though  less  closely,  on  these

prototypes. A man, especially, looks for someone who can represent

his picture of his mother, as it has dominated his mind from his earliest

childhood; and accordingly, if his mother is still alive, she may well

resent this new version of herself and meet her with hostility. In view

of the importance of a child’s relations to his parents in determining his

later choice of a sexual object, it can easily be understood that any

disturbance of those relations will produce the gravest effects upon his

adult sexual life. Jealousy in a lover is never without an infantile root

or at least an infantile reinforcement. If there are quarrels between the

parents or if their marriage is unhappy, the ground will be prepared in

their children for the severest predisposition to a disturbance of sexual

development or to a neurotic illness.

   A child’s affection for his parents is no doubt the most important

infantile trace which, after being revived at puberty, points the way to

his choice of an object; but it is not the only one. Other starting-points

with the same early origin enable a man to develop more than one

sexual line, based no less upon his childhood, and to lay down very

various conditions for his object-choice.²

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1920:] Cf. my paper ‘A Special Type of Choice of Object made by Men’

(1910h).

   ² [Footnote added 1915:] The innumerable peculiarities of the erotic life of human beings as

well as the compulsive character of the process of falling in love itself are quite unintelligible
except by reference back to childhood and as being residual effects of childhood.
                     Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1541

 

 

PREVENTION OF INVERSION   One of the tasks implicit in object-choice is

that it should find its

                                                way to the opposite sex. This, as we

know, is not accomplished without a certain amount of fumbling. Often

enough the first impulses after puberty go astray, though without any

permanent  harm  resulting.  Dessoir  has  justly  remarked  upon  the

regularity  with  which  adolescent  boys  and  girls  form  sentimental

friendships with others of their own sex. No doubt the strongest force

working  against  a  permanent  inversion  of  the  sexual  object  is  the

attraction  which  the  opposing  sexual  characters  exercise  upon  one

another.  Nothing  can  be  said  within  the  framework  of  the  present

discussion to throw light upon it.¹ This factor is not in itself, however,

sufficient to exclude inversion; there are to doubt a variety of other

contributory factors. Chief among these is its authoritative prohibition

by society. Where inversion is not regarded as a crime it will be found

that it answers fully to the sexual inclinations of no small number of

people. It may be presumed, in the next place, that in the case of men

a childhood recollection of the affection shown them by their mother

and others of the female sex who looked after them when they were

children  contributes  powerfully  to  directing  their  choice  towards

women; on the other hand their early experience of being deterred by

their father from sexual activity and their competitive relation with him

deflect  them  from  their  own  sex.  Both  of  these  two  factors  apply

equally  to  girls,  whose  sexual  activity  is  particularly  subject  to  the

watchful  guardianship  of  their  mother.  They  thus  acquire  a  hostile

relation to their own sex which influences their object-choice decisively

in what is regarded as the normal direction. The education of boys by

male  persons  (  by  slaves,  in  antiquity)  seems  to  encourage

homosexuality.  The  frequency  of  inversion  among  the  present-day

aristocracy is made somewhat more intelligible by their employment of

menservants,  as  well  as  by  the  fact  that  their  mothers  give  less

personal  care  to  their  children.  In  the  case  of  some  hysterics  it  is

found that the early loss of one of their parents, whether by death,divorce  or  separation,  with  the  result  that  the  remaining  parent

absorbs the whole of the child’s love, determines the sex of the person

who is later to be chosen as a sexual object, and may thus open the

way to permanent inversion.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] This is the place at which to draw attention to Ferenczi’s Versuch

einer Genitaltheorie (1924), a work which, though somewhat fanciful, is nevertheless of the
greatest interest, and in which the sexual life of the higher animals is traced back to their
biological evolution.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1542

 

 

                                      SUMMARY

 

The time has arrived for me to attempt to summarize what I have said.

We started out from the aberrations of the sexual instinct in respect of

its object and of its aim and we were faced by the question of whether

these arise from an innate disposition or are acquired as a result of

experiences in life. We arrived at an answer to this question from an

understanding,  derived  from  psycho-analytic  investigation,  of  the

workings of the sexual instinct in psychoneurotics, a numerous class

of people and one not far removed from the healthy. We found that in

them tendencies to every kind of perversion can be shown to exist as

unconscious forces and betray their presence as factors leading to the

formation of symptoms. It was thus possible to say that neurosis is, as

it were, the negative of perversion. In view of what was now seen to

be the wide dissemination of tendencies to perversion we were driven

to the conclusion that a disposition to perversions is an original and

universal  disposition  of  the  human  sexual  instinct  and  that  normal

sexual behaviour is developed out of it as a result of organic changes

and  psychical  inhibitions  occurring  in  the  course  of  maturation;  we

hoped to be able to show the presence of this original disposition in

childhood.  Among  the  forces  restricting  the  direction  taken  by  the

sexual instinct we laid emphasis upon shame, disgust, pity and the

structures of morality and authority erected by society. We were thusled to regard any established aberration from normal sexuality as an

instance  of  developmental  inhibition  and  infantilism.  Though  it  was

necessary to place in the foreground the importance of the variations

in the original disposition, a co-operative and not an opposing relation

was to be assumed as existing between them and the influences of

actual  life.  It  appeared,  on  the  other  hand,  that  since  the  original

disposition is necessarily a complex one, the sexual instinct itself must

be  something  put  together  from  various  factors,  and  that  in  the

perversions  it  falls  apart,  as  it  were,  into  its  components.  The

perversions were thus seen to be on the one hand inhibitions, and on

the  other  hand  dissociations,  of  normal  development.  Both  these

aspects  were  brought  together  in  the  supposition  that  the  sexual

instinct of adults arises from a combination of a number of impulses of

childhood into a unity, an impulsion with a single aim.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1543

 

   After having explained the preponderance of perverse tendencies in

psychoneurotics by recognizing it as a collateral filling of subsidiary

channels when the main current of the instinctual stream has been

blocked by ‘repression’,¹ we proceeded to a consideration of sexual

life in childhood. We found it a regrettable thing that the existence of

the sexual instinct in childhood has been denied and that the sexual

manifestations not infrequently to be observed in children have been

described  as  irregularities.  It  seemed  to  us  on  the  contrary  that

children bring germs of sexual activity with them into the world, that

they  already  enjoy  sexual  satisfaction  when  they  begin  to  take

nourishment and that they persistently seek to repeat the experience

in  the  familiar  activity  of  ‘thumb-sucking’.  The  sexual  activity  of

children, however, does not, it appeared, develop pari passu with their

other functions, but, after a short period of efflorescence from the ages

of two to five, enters upon the so-called period of latency. During that

period the production of sexual excitation is not by any means stopped

but continues and produces a store of energy which is employed to a

great extent for purposes other than sexual - namely, on the one handin contributing the sexual components to social feelings and on the

other hand (through repression and reaction-forming) in building up

the subsequently developed barriers against sexuality. On this view,

the forces destined to retain the sexual instinct upon certain lines are

built up in childhood chiefly at the cost of perverse sexual impulses

and with the assistance of education. A certain portion of the infantile

sexual  impulses  would  seem  to  evade  these  uses  and  succeed  in

expressing  itself  as  sexual  activity.  We  next  found  that  sexual

excitation in children springs from a multiplicity of forces. Satisfaction

arises  first  and  foremost  from  the  appropriate  sensory  excitation  of

what we have described as erotogenic zones. It seems probable that

any  part  of  the  skin  and  any  sense-organ  -  probably,  indeed, any

organ - can function as an erotogenic zone, though there are some

particularly marked erotogenic zones whose excitation would seem to

be  secured  from  the  very  first  by  certain  organic  contrivances.  It

further  appears  that  sexual  excitation  arises  as  a  by-product,  as  it

were, of a large number of processes that occur in the organism, as

soon as they reach a certain degree of intensity, and most especially

of any relatively powerful emotion, even though it is of a distressing

nature. The excitations from all these sources are not yet combined;

but each follows its own separate aim, which is merely the attainment

of a certain sort of pleasure. In childhood, therefore, the sexual instinct

is not unified and is at first without an object, that is, auto-erotic.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1915:] This does not apply only to the ‘negative’ tendencies to perversion

which appear in neuroses but equally to the ‘positive,’ properly so-called, perversions. Thus
these latter are to be derived not merely from a fixation of infantile tendencies but also from a
regression  to  those  tendencies  as  a  result  of  other  channels  of  the  sexual  current  being
blocked.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  positive  perversions  also  are  accessible  to  psycho-
analytic therapy.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1544

 

   The erotogenic zone of the genitals begins to make itself noticeable,

it seems, even during the years of childhood. This may happen in two

ways. Either, like any other erotogenic zone, it yields satisfaction in

response to appropriate sensory stimulation; or, in a manner which isnot  quite  understandable,  when  satisfaction  is  derived  from  other

sources, a sexual excitation is simultaneously produced which has a

special  relation  to  the  genital  zone.  We  were  reluctantly  obliged  to

admit  that  we  could  not  satisfactorily  explain  the  relation  between

sexual satisfaction and sexual excitation, or that between the activity

of the genital zone and the activity of the other sources of sexuality.

   We found from the study of neurotic disorders that beginnings of an

organization of the sexual instinctual components can be detected in

the sexual life of children from its very beginning. During a first, very

early phase, oral erotism occupies most of the picture. A second of

these pregenital organizations is characterized by the predominance

of  sadism  and  anal  erotism.  It  is  not  until  a  third  phase  has  been

reached  that  the  genital  zones  proper  contribute  their  share  in

determining sexual life, and in children this last phase is developed

only so far as to a primacy of the phallus.

   We were then obliged to recognize, as one of our most surprising

findings, that this early efflorescence of infantile sexual life (between

the ages of two and five) already gives rise to the choice of an object,

with all the wealth of mental activities which such a process involves.

Thus, in spite of the lack of synthesis between the different instinctual

components  and  the  uncertainty  of  the  sexual  aim,  the  phase  of

development  corresponding  to  that  period  must  be  regarded  as  an

important precursor of the subsequent final sexual organization.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1545

 

   The fact that the onset of sexual development in human beings

occurs in two phases, i.e. that the development is interrupted by the

period of latency, seemed to call for particular notice. This appears to

be  one  of  the  necessary  conditions  of  the  aptitude  of  men  for

developing a higher civilization, but also of their tendency to neurosis.

So far as we know, nothing analogous is to be found in man’s animal

relatives. It would seem that the origin of this peculiarity of man must

be looked for in the prehistory of the human species.

   It was not possible to say what amount of sexual activity can occurin childhood without being described as abnormal or detrimental to

further development. The nature of these sexual manifestations was

found to be predominantly masturbatory. Experience further showed

that  the  external  influences  of  seduction  are  capable  of  provoking

interruptions of the latency period or even its cessation, and that in

this  connection  the  sexual  instinct  of  children  proves  in  fact  to  be

polymorphously  perverse;  it  seems,  moreover,  that  any  such

premature sexual activity diminishes a child’s educability.

   In spite of the gaps in our knowledge of infantile sexual life, we had

to proceed to an attempt at examining the alterations brought about in

it by the arrival of puberty. We selected two of these as being the

decisive  ones:  the  subordination  of  all  the  other  sources  of  sexual

excitation under the primacy of the genital zones and the process of

finding an object. Both of these are already adumbrated in childhood.

The  first  is  accomplished  by  the  mechanism  of  exploiting  fore-

pleasure: what were formerly self-contained sexual acts, attended by

pleasure and excitation, become acts preparatory to the new sexual

aim (the discharge of the sexual products), the attainment of which,

enormously pleasurable, brings the sexual excitation to an end. In this

connection we had to take into account the differentiation of sexuality

into masculine and feminine; and we found that in order to become a

woman a further stage of repression is necessary, which discards a

portion of infantile masculinity and prepares the woman for changing

her leading genital zone. As regards object-choice, we found that it is

given its direction by the childhood hints (revived at puberty) of the

child’s sexual inclination towards his parents and others in charge of

him, but that it is diverted away from them, on to other people who

resemble  them,  owing  to  the  barrier  against  incest  which  has

meanwhile  been  erected.  Finally  it  must  be  added  that  during  the

transition period of puberty the processes of somatic and of psychical

development continue for a time side by side independently, until the

irruption of an intense mental erotic impulse, leading to the innervation

of the genitals, brings about the unity of the erotic function which is

necessary for normality.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality                                                                                      1546

 

 

FACTORS INTERFERING WITH DEVELOPMENT   Every step on this long path of

development can

                                                                           become a point of

fixation,  every  juncture  in  this  involved  combination  can  be  an

occasion for a dissociation of the sexual instinct, as we have already

shown from numerous instances. It remains for us to enumerate the

various factors, internal and external, that interfere with development,

and to indicate the place in the mechanism on which the disturbance

arising  from  each  of  them  impinges.  The  factors  that  we  shall

enumerate can evidently not be of equal importance, and we must be

prepared for difficulties in assigning an appropriate value to each.

 

CONSTITUTION  AND  HEREDITY      First  and  foremost  we  must  name  the

innate variety of sexual

                                                    constitutions, upon which it is

probable that the principal weight falls, but which can clearly only be

inferred from their later manifestations and even then not always with

great certainty. We picture this variety as a preponderance of one or

another of the many sources of sexual excitation, and it is our view

that  a  difference  in  disposition  of  this  kind  is  always  bound  to  find

expression in the final result, even though that result may not overstep

the limits of what is normal. No doubt it is conceivable that there may

also  be  variations  in  the  original  disposition  of  a  kind  which  must

necessarily, and without the concurrence of any other factors, lead to

the development of an abnormal sexual life. These might be described

as  ‘degenerative’  and  be  regarded  as  an  expression  of  inherited

degeneracy. In this connection I have a remarkable fact to record. In

more than half of the severe cases of hysteria, obsessional neurosis,

etc., which I have treated psychotherapeutically, I have been able to

prove  with  certainty  that  the  patient’s  father  suffered  from  syphilis

before  marriage,  whether  there  was  evidence  of  tabes  or  general

paralysis, or whether the anamnesis indicated in some other way the

presence of syphilitic disease. I should like to make it perfectly plain

that the children who later became neurotic bore no physical signs ofhereditary syphilis, so that it was their abnormal sexual constitution

that was to be regarded as the last echo of their syphilitic heritage.

Though I am far from wishing to assert that descent from syphilitic

parents  is  an  invariable  or  indispensable  aetiological  condition  of  a

neuropathic  constitution,  I  am  nevertheless  of  opinion  that  the

coincidence  which  I  have  observed  is  neither  accidental  nor

unimportant.

   The hereditary conditions in the case of positive perverts are less

well known, for they know how to avoid investigation. Yet there are

good reasons to suppose that what is true of the neuroses applies

also to the perversions. For it is no rare thing to find perversions and

psychoneuroses occurring in the same family, and distributed between

the two sexes in such a way that the male members of the family, or

one  of  them,  are  positive  perverts,  while  the  females,  true  to  the

tendency  of  their  sex  to  repression,  are  negative  perverts,  that  is,

hysterics. This is good evidence of the essential connections which we

have shown to exist between the two disorders.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1547

 

 

FURTHER MODIFICATION   On the other hand, it is not possible to adopt

the view that the form to

                                           be taken by sexual life is unambiguously

decided,  once  and  for  all,  with  the  inception  of  the  different

components  of  the  sexual  constitution.  On  the  contrary,  the

determining  process  continues,  and  further  possibilities  arise

according  to  the  vicissitudes  of  the  tributary  streams  of  sexuality

springing  from  their  separate  sources.  This  further  modification  is

clearly  what  brings  the  decisive  outcome,  and  constitutions  which

might  be  described  as  the  same  can  lead  to  three  different  final

results:-

   If the relation between all the different dispositions - a relation which

we  will  assume  to  be  abnormal  -  persists  and  grows  stronger  at

maturity, the result can only be a perverse sexual life. The analysis ofabnormal  constitutional  dispositions  of  this  kind  has  not  yet  been

properly taken in hand. But we already know cases which can easily

be  explained  on  such  a  basis  as  this.  Writers  on  the  subject,  for

instance, have asserted that the necessary precondition of a whole

number of perverse fixations lies in an innate weakness of the sexual

instinct. In this form the view seems to me untenable. It makes sense,

however,  if  what  is  meant  is  a  constitutional  weakness  of  one

particular factor in the sexual instinct, namely the genital zone - a zone

which  takes  over  the  function  of  combining  the  separate  sexual

activities for the purposes of reproduction. For if the genital zone is

weak, this combination, which is required to take place at puberty, is

bound to fail, and the strongest of the other components of sexuality

will continue its activity as a perversion.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1915:] In such circumstances one often finds that at puberty a normal

sexual current begins to operate at first, but that, as a result of its internal weakness, it breaks
down in face of the first external obstacles and is then replaced by regression to the perverse
fixation.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1548

 

 

REPRESSION      A  different  result  is  brought  about  if  in  the  course  of

development some of the

                        components which are of excessive strength in the

disposition are submitted to the process of repression (which, it must

be insisted, is not equivalent to their being abolished). If this happens,

the  excitations  concerned  continue  to  be  generated  as  before;  but

they are prevented by psychical obstruction from attaining their aim

and are diverted into numerous other channels till they find their way

to expression as symptoms. The outcome may be an approximately

normal sexual life - though usually a restricted one - but there is in

addition psychoneurotic illness. These particular cases have become

familiar to us from the psycho-analytic investigation of neurotics. Their

sexual life begins like that of perverts, and a considerable part of their

childhood is occupied with perverse sexual activity which occasionallyextends far into maturity. A reversal due to repression then occurs,

owing to internal causes (usually before puberty, but now and then

even long afterwards), and from that time onwards neurosis takes the

place of perversion, without the old impulses being extinguished. We

are reminded of the proverb ‘Junge Hure, alte Betschwester’,¹ only

that here youth has lasted all too short a time. The fact that perversion

can be replaced by neurosis in the life of the same person, like the

fact which we have already mentioned that perversion and neurosis

can be distributed among different members of the same family, tallies

with the view that neurosis is the negative of perversion.

 

   ¹ [‘A young whore makes an old nun.’]

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1549

 

 

SUBLIMATION   The third alternative result of an abnormal constitutional

disposition is made 

                          possible by the process of sublimation. This enables

excessively  strong  excitations  arising  from  particular  sources  of

sexuality  to  find  an  outlet  and  use  in  other  fields,  so  that  a  not

inconsiderable  increase  in  psychical  efficiency  results  from  a

disposition which is itself is perilous. Here we have one of the origins

of  artistic  activity;  and,  according  to  the  completeness  or

incompleteness of the sublimation, a characterological analysis of a

highly  gifted  individual,  and  in  particular  of  one  with  an  artistic

disposition, may reveal a mixture, in every proportion, of efficiency,

perversion and neurosis. A sub-species of sublimation is to be found

in suppression by reaction-formation, which, as we have seen, begins

during a child’s period of latency and continues in favourable cases

throughout his whole life. What we describe as a person’s ‘character’

is  built  up  to  a  considerable  extent  from  the  material  of  sexual

excitations and is composed of instincts that have been fixed since

childhood, of constructions achieved by means of sublimation, and of

other constructions, employed for effectively holding in check perverse

impulses  which  have  been  recognized  as  being  unutilizable.¹  Themultifariously perverse sexual disposition of childhood can accordingly

be regarded as the source of a number of our virtues, in so far as

through reaction-formation it stimulates their development.²

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1920:] In the case of some character-traits it has even been possible to

trace  a  connection  with  particular  erotogenic  components.  Thus,  obstinacy,  thrift  and
orderliness arise from an exploitation of anal erotism, while ambition is determined by a strong
urethral-erotic disposition.

   ² Emile Zola, a keen observer of human nature, describes in La joie de vivre how a girl,

cheerfully  and  selflessly  and  without  thought  of  reward,  sacrificed  to  those  she  loved
everything that she possessed or could lay claim to - her money and her hopes. This girl’s
childhood  was  dominated  by  an  insatiable  thirst  for  affection,  which  was  transformed  into
cruelty on an occasion when she found herself slighted in favour of another girl.
 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1550

 

 

ACCIDENTAL EXPERIENCES   No other influences on the course of sexual

development can

                                               compare in importance with releases of

sexuality, waves of repression and sublimations - the two latter being

processes of which the inner causes are quite unknown to us. It might

be possible to include repressions and sublimations as a part of the

constitutional disposition, by regarding them as manifestations of it in

life;  and  anyone  who  does  so  is  justified  in  asserting  that  the  final

shape  taken  by  sexual  life  is  principally  the  outcome  of  the  innate

constitution.  No  one  with  perception  will,  however,  dispute  that  an

interplay of factors such as this also leaves room for the modifying

effects of accidental events experienced in childhood and later. It is

not  easy  to  estimate  the  relative  efficacy  of  the  constitutional  and

accidental factors. In theory one is always inclined to overestimate the

former; therapeutic practice emphasizes the importance of the latter. It

should, however, of no account be forgotten that the relation between

the  two  is  a  co-operative  and  not  a  mutually  exclusive  one.  The

constitutional factor must await experiences before it can make itself

felt; the accidental factor must have a constitutional basis in order to

come into operation. To cover the majority of cases we can picture