 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4254

 

   This brings us to a further question: how is it possible, from an

economic  point  of  view,  for  a  mere  process  of  withdrawal  and

discharge,  like  the  withdrawing  of  a  preconscious  ego-cathexis,  to

produce  unpleasure  or  anxiety,  seeing  that,  according  to  our

assumptions, unpleasure and anxiety can only arise as a result of an

increase in cathexis? The reply is that this causal sequence should

not be explained from an economic point of view. Anxiety is not newly

created  in  repression;  it  is  reproduced  as  an  affective  state  in

accordance with an already existing mnemic image. If we go further

and enquire into the origin of that anxiety - and of affects in general -

we shall be leaving the realm of pure psychology and entering the

borderland of physiology. Affective states have become incorporated

in the mind as precipitates of primaeval traumatic experiences, and

when a similar situation occurs they are revived like mnemic symbols.

I do not think I have been wrong in likening them to the more recent

and individually acquired hysterical attack and in regarding them as its

normal prototypes. In man and the higher animals it would seem that

the  act  of  birth,  as  the  individual’s  first  experience  of  anxiety,  has

given the affect of anxiety certain characteristic forms of expression.

But,  while  acknowledging  this  connection,  we  must  not  lay  undue

stress on it nor overlook the fact that biological necessity demands

that a situation of danger should have an affective symbol, so that a

symbol of this kind would have to be created in any case. Moreover, I

do not think that we are justified in assuming that whenever there is an

outbreak of anxiety something like a reproduction of the situation of

birth goes on in the mind. It is not even certain whether hysterical

attacks,  though  they  were  originally  traumatic  reproductions  of  this

sort, retain that character permanently.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4255

    As I have shown elsewhere, most of the repressions with which we

have to deal in our therapeutic work are cases of after-pressure. They

presuppose the operation of earlier, primal repressions which exert an

attraction on the more recent situation. Far too little is known as yet

about the background and preliminary stages of repression. There is a

danger of over-estimating the part played in repression by the super-

ego. We cannot at present say whether it is perhaps the emergence of

the super-ego which provides the line of demarcation between primal

repression and after-pressure. At any rate, the earliest outbreaks of

anxiety, which are of a very intense kind, occur before the super-ego

has  become  differentiated.  It  is  highly  probable  that  the  immediate

precipitating causes of primal repressions are quantitative factors such

as an excessive degree of excitation and the breaking through of the

protective shield against stimuli.

   This mention of the protective shield sounds a note which recalls to

us the fact that repression occurs in two different situations - namely,

when an undesirable instinctual impulse is aroused by some external

perception, and when it arises internally without any such provocation.

We shall return to this difference later. But the protective shield exists

only in regard to external stimuli, not in regard to internal instinctual

demands.

   So long as we direct our attention to the ego’s attempt at flight we

shall get no nearer to the subject of symptom-formation. A symptom

arises  from  an  instinctual  impulse  which  has  been  detrimentally

affected  by  repression.  If  the  ego,  by  making  use  of  the  signal  of

unpleasure, attains its object of completely suppressing the instinctual

impulse, we learn nothing of how this has happened. We can only find

out about it from those cases in which repression must be described

as having to a greater or less extent failed. In this event the position,

generally  speaking,  is  that  the  instinctual  impulse  has  found  a

substitute in spite of repression, but a substitute which is very much

reduced, displaced and inhibited and which is no longer recognizable

as  a  satisfaction.  And  when  the  substitutive  impulse  is  carried  out

there is no sensation of pleasure; its carrying out has, instead, the

quality of a compulsion.

                           Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4256

 

   In thus degrading a process of satisfaction to a symptom, repression

displays  its  power  in  a  further  respect.  The  substitutive  process  is

prevented,  if  possible,  from  finding  discharge  though  motility;  and

even if this cannot be done, the process is forced to expend itself in

making alterations in the subject’s own body and is not permitted to

impinge  upon  the  external  world.  It  must  not  be  transformed  into

action. For, as we know, in repression the ego is operating under the

influence  of  external  reality  and  therefore  it  debars  the  substitutive

process from having any effect upon that reality.

   Just as the ego controls the path to action in regard to the external

world,  so  it  controls  access  to  consciousness.  In  repression  it

exercises its power in both directions, acting in the one manner upon

the instinctual impulse itself and in the other upon the representative

of that impulse. At this point it is relevant to ask how I can reconcile

this acknowledgement of the might of the ego with the description of

its position which I gave in The Ego and the Id. In that book I drew a

picture of its dependent relationship to the id and to the super-ego and

revealed how powerless and apprehensive it was in regard to both

and with what an effort it maintained its show of superiority over them.

This view has been widely echoed in psycho-analytic literature. Many

writers have laid much stress on the weakness of the ego in relation to

the id and of our rational elements in the face of the daemonic forces

within us; and they display a strong tendency to make what I have

said  into  a  corner-stone  of  a  psycho-analytic Weltanschauung.  Yet

surely  the  psycho-analyst,  with  his  knowledge  of  the  way  in  which

repression works, should, of all people, be restrained from adopting

such an extreme and one-sided view.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4257

 

      I  must  confess  that  I  am  not  at  all  partial  to  the  fabrication  of

Weltanschauungen. Such activities may be left to philosophers, who

avowedly find it impossible to make their journey through life without aBaedeker of that kind to give them information on every subject. Let

us humbly accept the contempt with which they look down on us from

the vantage-ground of their superior needs. But since we cannot forgo

our narcissistic pride either, we will draw comfort from the reflection

that  such  ‘Handbooks  to  Life’  soon  grow  out  of  date  and  that  it  is

precisely  our  short-sighted,  narrow  and  finicky  work  which  obliges

them to appear in new editions, and that even the most up-to-date of

them  are  nothing  but  attempts  to  find  a  substitute  for  the  ancient,

useful and all-sufficient Church Catechism. We know well enough how

little light science has so far been able to throw on the problems that

surround us. But however much ado the philosophers may make, they

cannot alter the situation. Only patient, persevering research, in which

everything  is  subordinated  to  the  one  requirement  of  certainty,  can

gradually  bring  about  a  change.  The  benighted  traveller  may  sing

aloud in the dark to deny his own fears; but, for all that, he will not see

an inch further beyond his nose.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4258

 

                                            III

 

   To return to the problem of the ego. The apparent contradiction is

due  to  our  having  taken  abstractions  too  rigidly  and  attended

exclusively now to the one side and now to the other of what is in fact

a complicated state of affairs. We were justified, I think, in dividing the

ego from the id, for there are certain considerations which necessitate

that step. On the other hand the ego is identical with the id, and is

merely a specially differentiated part of it. If we think of this part by

itself in contradistinction to the whole, or if a real split has occurred

between the two, the weakness of the ego becomes apparent. But if

the ego remains bound up with the id and indistinguishable from it,

then it displays its strength. The same is true of the relation between

the ego and the super-ego. In many situations the two are merged;

and as a rule we can only distinguish one from the other when there is

a tension or conflict between them. In repression the decisive fact isthat the ego is an organization and the id is not. The ego is, indeed,

the  organized  portion  of  the  id.  We  should  be  quite  wrong  if  we

pictured  the  ego  and  the  id  as  two  opposing  camps  and  if  we

supposed  that,  when  the  ego  tries  to  suppress  a  part  of  the  id  by

means of repression, the remainder of the id comes to the rescue of

the endangered part and measures its strength with the ego. This may

often be what happens, but it is certainly not the initial situation in

repression. As a rule the instinctual impulse which is to be repressed

remains  isolated.  Although  the  act  of  repression  demonstrates  the

strength  of  the  ego,  in  one  particular  it  reveals  the  ego’s

powerlessness  and  how  impervious  to  influence  are  the  separate

instinctual impulses of the id. For the mental process which has been

turned  into  a  symptom  owing  to  repression  now  maintains  its

existence outside the organization of the ego and independently of it.

Indeed, it is not that process alone but all its derivatives which enjoy,

as it were, this same privilege of extra-territoriality; and whenever they

come into associative contact with a part of the ego-organization, it is

not at all certain that they will not draw that part over to themselves

and thus enlarge themselves at the expense of the ego. An analogy

with  which  we  have  long  been  familiar  compared  a  symptom  to  a

foreign body which was keeping up a constant succession of stimuli

and  reactions  in  the  tissue  in  which  it  was  embedded.  It  does

sometimes happen that the defensive struggle against an unwelcome

instinctual  impulse  is  brought  to  an  end  with  the  formation  of  a

symptom.  As  far  as  can  be  seen,  this  is  most  often  possible  in

hysterical conversion. But usually the outcome is different. The initial

act of repression is followed by a tedious or interminable sequel in

which the struggle against the instinctual impulse is prolonged into a

struggle against the symptom.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4259

 

   In this secondary defensive struggle the ego presents two faces with

contradictory expressions. The one line of behaviour it adopts springs

from  the  fact  that  its  very  nature  obliges  it  to  make  what  must  beregarded as an attempt at restoration or reconciliation. The ego is an

organization. It is based on the maintenance of free intercourse and of

the  possibility  of  reciprocal  influence  between  all  its  parts.  Its

desexualized energy still shows traces of its origin in its impulsion to

bind  together  and  unify,  and  this  necessity  to  synthesize  grows

stronger  in  proportion  as  the  strength  of  the  ego  increases.  It  is

therefore only natural that the ego should try to prevent symptoms

from remaining isolated and alien by using every possible method to

bind them to itself in one way or another, and to incorporate them into

its organization by means of those bonds. As we know, a tendency of

this kind is already operative in the very act of forming a symptom. A

classical instance of this are those hysterical symptoms which have

been shown to be a compromise between the need for satisfaction

and the need for punishment. Such symptoms participate in the ego

from the very beginning, since they fulfil a requirement of the super-

ego, while on the other hand they represent positions occupied by the

repressed and points at which an irruption has been made by it into

the ego-organization. They are a kind of frontier-station with a mixed

garrison. (Whether all primary hysterical symptoms are constructed on

these lines would be worth enquiring into very carefully.) The ego now

proceeds to behave as though it recognized that the symptom had

come to stay and that the only thing to do was to accept the situation

in  good  part  and  draw  as  much  advantage  from  it  as  possible.  It

makes an adaptation to the symptom - to this piece of the internal

world which is alien to it - just as it normally does to the real external

world.  It  can  always  find  plenty  of  opportunities  for  doing  so.  The

presence of a symptom may entail a certain impairment of capacity,

and this can be exploited to appease some demand on the part of the

super-ego or to refuse some claim from the external world. In this way

the symptom gradually comes to be the representative of important

interests; it is found to be useful in asserting the position of the self

and becomes more and more closely merged with the ego and more

and more indispensable to it. It is only very rarely that the physical

process of ‘healing’ round a foreign body follows such a course as

this.  There  is  a  danger,  too,  of  exaggerating  the  importance  of  a

secondary adaptation of this kind to a symptom, and of saying that the

ego has created the symptom merely in order to enjoy its advantages.It would be equally true to say that a man who had lost his leg in the

war had got it shot away so that he might thenceforward live on his

pension without having to do any more work.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4260

 

      In  obse4160ssional  neurosis  and  paranoia  the  forms  which  the

symptoms  assume  become  very  valuable  to  the  ego  because  they

obtain  for  it,  not  certain  advantages,  but  a  narcissistic  satisfaction

which  it  would  otherwise  be  without.  The  systems  which  the

obsessional neurotic constructs flatter his self-love by making him feel

that he is better than other people because he is specially cleanly or

specially conscientious. The delusional constructions of the paranoic

offer to his acute perceptive and imaginative powers a field of activity

which he could not easily find elsewhere.

   All of this results in what is familiar to us as the ‘(secondary) gain

from  illness’  which  follows  a  neurosis.  This  gain  comes  to  the

assistance of the ego in its endeavour to incorporate the symptom and

increases the symptom’s fixation. When the analyst tries subsequently

to help the ego in its struggle against the symptom, he finds that these

conciliatory bonds between ego and symptom operate on the side of

the resistances and that they are not easy to loosen.

      The  two  lines  of  behaviour  which  the  ego  adopts  towards  the

symptom are in fact directly opposed to each other. For the other line

is  less  friendly  in  character,  since  it  continues  in  the  direction  of

repression. Nevertheless the ego, it appears, cannot be accused of

inconsistency.  Being  of  a  peaceable  disposition  it  would  like  to

incorporate  the  symptom  and  make  it  part  of  itself.  It  is  from  the

symptom itself that the trouble comes. For the symptom, being the

true substitute for and derivative of the repressed impulse, carries on

the role of the latter; it continually renews its demands for satisfaction

and thus obliges the ego in its turn to give the signal of unpleasure

and put itself in a posture of defence.

   The secondary defensive struggle against the symptom takes many

shapes. It is fought out on different fields and makes use of a varietyof methods. We shall not be able to say much about it until we have

made  an  enquiry  into  the  various  different  instances  of  symptom-

formation. In doing this we shall have an opportunity of going into the

problem of anxiety - a problem which has long been looming in the

background.  The  wisest  plan  will  be  to  start  from  the  symptoms

produced by the hysterical neurosis; for we are not as yet in a position

to  consider  the  conditions  in  which  the  symptoms  of  obsessional

neurosis, paranoia and other neuroses are formed.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4261

 

                                            IV

 

      Let  us  start  with  an  infantile  hysterical  phobia  of  animals  -  for

instance,  the  case  of  ‘Little  Hans’,  whose  phobia  of  horses  was

undoubtedly  typical  in  all  its  main  features.  The  first  thing  that

becomes apparent is that in a concrete case of neurotic illness the

state of affairs is much more complex than one would suppose so long

as one was dealing with abstractions. It takes a little time to find one’s

bearings  and  to  decide  which  the  repressed  impulse  is,  what

substitutive symptom it has found and where the motive for repression

lies.

   ‘Little Hans’ refused to go out into the street because he was afraid

of  horses.  This  was  the  raw  material  of  the  case.  Which  part  of  it

constituted  the  symptom?  Was  it  his  having  the  fear?  Was  it  his

choice of an object for his fear? Was it his giving up of his freedom of

movement? Or was it more than one of these combined? What was

the  satisfaction  which  he  renounced?  And  why  did  he  have  to

renounce it?

   At a first glance one is tempted to reply that the case is not so very

obscure.  ‘Little  Hans’s’  unaccountable  fear  of  horses  was  the

symptom and his inability to go out into the streets was an inhibition, a

restriction which his ego had imposed on itself so as not to arouse the

anxiety-symptom.  The  second  point  is  clearly  correct;  and  in  the

discussion which follows I shall not concern myself any further withthis  inhibition.  But  as  regards  the  alleged  symptom,  a  superficial

acquaintance  with  the  case  does  not  even  disclose  its  true

formulation. For further investigation shows that what he was suffering

from was not a vague fear of horses but a quite definite apprehension

that  a  horse  was  going  to  bite  him.  This  idea,  indeed,  was

endeavouring to withdraw from consciousness and get itself replaced

by an undefined phobia in which only the anxiety and its object still

appeared.  Was  it  perhaps  this  idea  that  was  the  nucleus  of  his

symptom?

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4262

 

   We shall not make any headway until we have reviewed the little

boy’s psychical situation as a whole as it came to light in the course of

the analytic treatment. He was at the time in the jealous and hostile

Oedipus attitude towards his father, whom nevertheless - except in so

far as his mother was the cause of estrangement - he dearly loved.

Here, then, we have a conflict due to ambivalence: a well-grounded

love  and  a  no  less  justifiable  hatred  directed  towards  one  and  the

same  person.  ‘Little  Hans’s’  phobia  must  have  been  an  attempt  to

solve this conflict. Conflicts of this kind due to ambivalence are very

frequent and they can have another typical outcome, in which one of

the  two  conflicting  feelings  (usually  that  of  affection)  becomes

enormously  intensified  and  the  other  vanishes.  The  exaggerated

degree and compulsive character of the affection alone betray the fact

that it is not the only one present but is continually on the alert to keep

the opposite feeling under suppression, and enable us to postulate the

operation of a process which we call repression by means of reaction-

formation (in the ego). Cases like ‘Little Hans’s’ show no traces of a

reaction-formation  of  this  kind.  There  are  clearly  different  ways  of

egress from a conflict due to ambivalence.

      Meanwhile  we  have  been  able  to  establish  another  point  with

certainty. The instinctual impulse which underwent repression in ‘Little

Hans’ was a hostile one against his father. Proof of this was obtained

in his analysis while the idea of the biting horse was being followedup. He had seen a horse fall down and he had also seen a playmate,

with  whom  he  was  playing  at  horses,  fall  down  and  hurt  himself.

Analysis justified the inference that he had a wishful impulse that his

father should fall down and hurt himself as his playmate and the horse

had done. Moreover, his attitude towards someone’s departure on a

certain occasion makes it probable that his wish that his father should

be out of the way also found less hesitating expression. But a wish of

this sort is tantamount to an intention of putting one’s father out of the

way oneself - is tantamount, that is, to the murderous impulse of the

Oedipus complex.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4263

 

   So far there seem to be no connecting links between ‘Little Hans’s’

repressed  instinctual  impulse  and  the  substitute  for  it  which  we

suspect  is  to  be  seen  in  his  phobia  of  horses.  Let  us  simplify  his

psychical situation by setting on one side the infantile factor and the

ambivalence. Let us imagine that he is a young servant who is in love

with the mistress of the house and has received some tokens of her

favour. He hates his master, who is more powerful than he is, and he

would  like  to  have  him  out  of  the  way.  It  would  then  be  eminently

natural for him to dread his master’s vengeance and to develop a fear

of him - just as ‘Little Hans’ developed a phobia of horses. We cannot,

therefore, describe the fear belonging to this phobia as a symptom. If

‘Little  Hans’,  being  in  love  with  his  mother,  had  shown  fear  of  his

father, we should have no right to say that he had a neurosis or a

phobia.  His  emotional  reaction  would  have  been  entirely

comprehensible. What made it a neurosis was one thing alone: the

replacement  of  his  father  by  a  horse.  It  is  this  displacement,  then,

which has a claim to be called a symptom, and which, incidentally,

constitutes the alternative mechanism which enables a conflict due to

ambivalence to be resolved without the aid of a reaction-formation.

Such a displacement is made possible or facilitated at ‘Little Hans’s’

early age because the inborn traces of totemic thought can still be

easily revived. Children do not as yet recognize or, at any rate, laysuch exaggerated stress upon the gulf that separates human beings

from the animal world. In their eyes the grown man, the object of their

fear  and  admiration,  still  belongs  to  the  same  category  as  the  big

animal who has so many enviable attributes but against whom they

have been warned because he may become dangerous. As we see,

the conflict due to ambivalence is not dealt with in relation to one and

the same person: it is circumvented, as it were, by one of the pair of

conflicting impulses being directed to another person as a substitutive

object.

   So far everything is clear. But the analysis of ‘Hans’s’ phobia has

been a complete disappointment in one respect. The distortion which

constituted  the  symptom-formation  was  not  applied  to  the

representative (the ideational content) of the instinctual impulse that

was to be repressed; it was applied to a quite different representative

and one which only corresponded to a reaction to the disagreeable

instinct. It would be more in accordance with our expectations if ‘Little

Hans’ had developed, instead of a fear of horses, as inclination to ill-

treat them and to beat them or if he had expressed in plain terms a

wish  to  see  them  fall  down  or  be  hurt  or  even  die  in  convulsions

(‘make a row with their feet’). Something of the sort did in fact emerge

in his analysis, but it was not by any means in the forefront of his

neurosis. And, curiously enough, if he really had produced a hostility

of  this  sort  not  against  his  father  but  against  horses  as  his  main

symptom,  we  should  not  have  said  that  he  was  suffering  from  a

neurosis.  There  must  be  something  wrong  either  with  our  view  of

repression or with our definition of a symptom. One thing, of course,

strikes  us  at  once:  if  ‘Little  Hans’  had  really  behaved  like  that  to

horses,  it  would  mean  that  repression  had  in  no  way  altered  the

character of his objectionable and aggressive instinctual impulse itself

but only the object towards which it was directed.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4264

 

      Undoubtedly  there  are  cases  in  which  this  is  all  that  repression

does.  But  more  than  this  happened  in  the  development  of  ‘LittleHans’s’  phobia  -  how  much  more  can  be  guessed  from  a  part  of

another analysis.

   As we know, ‘Little Hans’ alleged that what he was afraid of was that

a  horse  would  bite  him.  Now  some  time  later  I  was  able  to  learn

something about the origin of another animal phobia. In this instance

the dreaded animal was a wolf; it, too, had the significance of a father-

substitute. As a boy the patient in question - a Russian whom I did not

analyse till he was in his twenties - had had a dream (whose meaning

was revealed in analysis) and, immediately after it, had developed a

fear of bring devoured by a wolf, like the seven little goats in the fairy

tale. 1 In the case of ‘Little Hans’ the ascertained fact that his father

used to play at horses with him doubtless determined his choice of a

horse  as  his  anxiety-animal.  In  the  same  way  it  appeared  at  least

highly  probable  that  the  father  of  my  Russian  patient  used,  when

playing  with  him,  to  pretend  to  be  a  wolf  and  jokingly  threaten  to

gobble him up. Since then I have come across a third instance. The

patient was a young American who came to me for analysis. He did

not, it is true, develop an animal phobia, but it is precisely because of

this omission that his case helps to throw light upon the other two. As

a child he had been sexually excited by a fantastic children’s story

which had been read aloud to him about an Arab chief who pursued a

‘ginger-bread man’ so as to eat him up. He identified himself with this

edible person, and the Arab chief was easily recognizable as a father-

substitute. This phantasy formed the earliest substratum of his auto-

erotic phantasies.

 

   ¹  ‘From the History of an Infantile Neurosis’ (1918b).

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4265

 

   The idea of being devoured by the father is typical age-old childhood

material.  It  has  familiar  parallels  in  mythology  (e.g.  the  myth  of

Kronos) and in the animal kingdom. Yet in spite of this confirmation

the idea is so strange to us that we can hardly credit its existence in a

child. Nor do we know whether it really means what it seems to say,and we cannot understand how it can have become the subject of a

phobia.  Analytic  observation  supplies  the  requisite  information.  It

shows that the idea of being devoured by the father gives expression,

in a form that has undergone regressive degradation, to a passive,

tender impulse to be loved by him in a genital-erotic sense. Further

investigation of the case history leaves no doubt of the correctness of

this explanation. The genital impulse, it is true, betrays no sign of its

tender purpose when it is expressed in the language belonging to the

superseded  transitional  phase  between  the  oral  and  sadistic

organizations of the libido. Is it, moreover, a question merely of the

replacement of the representative by a regressive form of expression

or is it a question of a genuine regressive degradation of the genitally-

directed impulse in the id? It is not at all easy to make certain. The

case history of the Russian ‘Wolf Man’ gives very definite support to

the  second,  more  serious,  view;  for,  from  the  time  of  the  decisive

dream onward, the boy became naughty, tormenting and sadistic, and

soon  afterwards  developed  a  regular  obsessional  neurosis.  At  any

rate, we can see that repression is not the only means which the ego

can  employ  for  the  purpose  of  defence  against  an  unwelcome

instinctual impulse. If it succeeds in making an instinct regress, it will

actually have done it more injury than it could have by repressing it.

Sometimes, indeed, after forcing an instinct to regress in this way, it

goes on to repress it.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4266

 

   The case of the ‘Wolf Man’ and the somewhat less complicated one

of ‘Little Hans’ raise a number of further considerations. But we have

already made two unexpected discoveries. There can be no doubt that

the instinctual impulse which was repressed in both phobias was a

hostile one against the father. One might say that that impulse had

been repressed by the process of being transformed into its opposite.

Instead  of  aggressiveness  on  the  part  of  the  subject  towards  his

father, there appeared aggressiveness (in the shape of revenge) on

the part of his father towards the subject. Since this aggressiveness isin any case rooted in the sadistic phase of the libido, only a certain

amount of degradation is needed to reduce it to the oral stage. This

stage, while only hinted at in ‘Little Hans’s’ fear of being bitten, was

blatantly exhibited in the ‘Wolf Man’s’ terror of being devoured. But,

besides  this,  the  analysis  has  demonstrated,  beyond  a  shadow  of

doubt,  the  presence  of  another  instinctual  impulse  of  an  opposite

nature  which  had  succumbed  to  repression.  This  was  a  tender,

passive  impulse  directed  towards  the  father,  which  had  already

reached the genital (phallic) level of libidinal organization. As regards

the final outcome of the process of repression, this impulse seems,

indeed, to have been the more important of the two; it underwent a

more far-reaching regression and had a decisive influence upon the

content of the phobia. In following up a single instinctual repression

we have thus had to recognize a convergence of two such processes.

The two instinctual impulses that have been overtaken by repression -

sadistic  aggressiveness  towards  the  father  and  a  tender  passive

attitude  to  him  -  form  a  pair  of  opposites.  Furthermore,  a  full

appreciation  of  ‘Little  Hans’s’  case  shows  that  the  formation  of  his

phobia had had the effect of abolishing his affectionate object-cathexis

of his mother as well, though the actual content of his phobia betrayed

no sign of this. The process of repression had attacked almost all the

components of his Oedipus complex - both his hostile and his tender

impulses  towards  his  father  and  his  tender  impulses  towards  his

mother.  In  my  Russian  patient  this  state  of  affairs  was  much  less

obvious.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4267

 

   These are unwelcome complications, considering that we only set

out to study simple cases of symptom-formation due to repression,

and with that intention selected the earliest and to all appearances,

most transparent neuroses of childhood. Instead of a single repression

we have found a collection of them and have become involved with

regression into the bargain. Perhaps we have added to the confusion

by treating the two cases of animal phobia at our disposal - ‘ LittleHans’  and  the  ‘Wolf  Man’  -  as  though  they  were  cast  in  the  same

mould. As a matter of fact, certain differences between them stand

out. It is only with regard to ‘Little Hans’ that we can say with certainty

that what his phobia disposed of were the two main impulses of the

Oedipus  complex  -  his  aggressiveness  towards  his  father  and  his

over-fondness  for  his  mother.  A  tender  feeling  for  his  father  was

undoubtedly there too and played a part in repressing the opposite

feeling; but we can prove neither that it was strong enough to draw

repression  upon  itself  nor  that  it  disappeared  afterwards.  ‘Hans’

seems,  in  fact,  to  have  been  a  normal  boy  with  what  is  called  a

‘positive’ Oedipus complex. It is possible that the factors which we do

not find were actually at work in him, but we cannot demonstrate their

existence. Even the most exhaustive analysis has gaps in its data and

is insufficiently documented. In the case of the Russian the deficiency

lies elsewhere. His attitude to female objects had been disturbed by

an  early  seduction  and  his  passive,  feminine  side  was  strongly

developed.  The  analysis  of  his  wolf-dream  revealed  very  little

intentional aggressiveness towards his father, but it brought forward

unmistakable  proof  that  what  repression  overtook  was  his  passive

tender attitude to his father. In his case, too, the other factors may

have been operative as well; but they were not in evidence. How is it

that, in spite of these differences in the two cases, almost amounting

to an antithesis, the final outcome - a phobia - was approximately the

same? The answer must be sought in another quarter. I think it will be

found in the second fact which emerges from our brief comparative

examination. It seems to me that in both cases we can detect what the

motive force of the repression was and can substantiate our view of its

nature  from  the  line  of  development  which  the  two  children

subsequently  pursued.  This  motive  force  was  the  same  in  both  of

them. It was the fear of impending castration. ‘Little Hans’ gave up his

aggressiveness towards his father from fear of being castrated. His

fear that a horse would bite him can, without any forcing, be given the

full  sense  of  a  fear  that  a  horse  would  bite  off  his  genitals,  would

castrate him. But it was from fear of being castrated, too, that the little

Russian relinquished his wish to be loved by his father, for he thought

that a relation of that sort presupposed a sacrifice of his genitals - of

the organ which distinguished him from a female. As we see, bothforms  of  the  Oedipus  complex,  the  normal,  active  form  and  the

inverted  one,  came  to  grief  through  the  castration  complex.  The

Russian boy’s anxiety-idea of being devoured by a wolf contained, it is

true,  no  suggestion  of  castration,  for  the  oral  regression  it  had

undergone  had  removed  it  too  far  from  the  phallic  stage.  But  the

analysis  of  his  dream  rendered  further  proof  superfluous.  It  was  a

triumph of repression that the form in which his phobia was expressed

should no longer have contained any allusion to castration.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4268

 

   Here, then, is our unexpected finding: in both patients the motive

force of the repression was fear of castration. The ideas contained in

their anxiety - being bitten by a horse and being devoured by a wolf -

were substitutes by distortion for the idea of being castrated by their

father.  This  was  the  idea  which  had  undergone  repression.  In  the

Russian boy the idea was an expression of a wish which was not able

to subsist in the face of his masculine revolt; in ‘Little Hans’ it was the

expression of a reaction in him which had turned his aggressiveness

into its opposite. But the affect of anxiety, which was the essence of

the phobia, came, not from the process of repression, not from the

libidinal cathexes of the repressed impulses, but from the repressing

agency  itself.  The  anxiety  belonging  to  the  animal  phobias  was  an

untransformed fear of castration. It was therefore a realistic fear, a

fear of a danger which was actually impending or was judged to be a

real  one.  It  was  anxiety  which  produced  repression  and  not,  as  I

formerly believed, repression which produced anxiety.

   It is no use denying the fact, though it is not pleasant to recall it, that

I have on many occasions asserted that in repression the instinctual

representative  is  distorted,  displaced  and  so  on,  while  the  libido

belonging to the instinctual impulse is transformed into anxiety. But

now an examination of phobias, which should be best able to provide

confirmatory evidence, fails to bear out my assertion; it seems, rather,

to contradict it directly. The anxiety felt in animal phobias is the ego’s

fear of castration; while the anxiety felt in agoraphobia (a subject thathas  been  less  thoroughly  studied)  seems  to  be  its  fear  of  sexual

temptation - a fear which, after all, must be connected in its origins

with  the  fear  of  castration.  As  far  as  can  be  seen  at  present,  the

majority of phobias go back to an anxiety of this kind felt by the ego in

regard to the demands of the libido. It is always the ego’s attitude of

anxiety which is the primary thing and which sets repression going.

Anxiety never arises from repressed libido. If I had contented myself

earlier with saying that after the occurrence of repression a certain

amount of anxiety appeared in place of the manifestation of libido that

was  to  be  expected,  I  should  have  nothing  to  retract  to-day.  The

description  would  be  correct;  and  there  does  undoubtedly  exist  a

correspondence  of  the  kind  asserted  between  the  strength  of  the

impulse  that  has  to  be  repressed  and  the  intensity  of  the  resultant

anxiety. But I must admit that I thought I was giving more than a mere

description.  I  believed  I  had  put  my  finger  on  a  metapsychological

process of direct transformation of libido into anxiety. I can now no

longer maintain this view. And, indeed, I found it impossible at the time

to explain how a transformation of that kind was carried out.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4269

 

   It may be asked how I arrived at this idea of transformation in the

first instance. It was while I was studying the ‘actual neuroses’, at a

time  when  analysis  was  still  a  very  long  way  from  distinguishing

between processes in the ego and processes in the id. I found that

outbreaks of anxiety and a general state of preparedness for anxiety

were produced by certain sexual practices such as coitus interruptus,

undischarged  sexual  excitation  or  enforced  abstinence  -  that  is,

whenever sexual excitation was inhibited, arrested or deflected in its

progress  towards  satisfaction.  Since  sexual  excitation  was  an

expression of libidinal instinctual impulses it did not seem too rash to

assume that the libido was turned into anxiety through the agency of

these disturbances. The observations which I made at the time still

hold good. Moreover, it cannot be denied that the libido belonging to

the  id-processes  is  subjected  to  disturbance  at  the  instigation  ofrepression. It might still be true, therefore, that in repression anxiety is

produced from the libidinal cathexis of the instinctual impulses. But

how can we reconcile this conclusion with our other conclusion that

the anxiety felt in phobias is an ego anxiety and arises in the ego, and

that it does not proceed out of repression but, on the contrary, sets

repression in motion? There seems to be a contradiction here which it

is not at all a simple matter to solve. It will not be easy to reduce the

two sources of anxiety to a single one. We might attempt to do so by

supposing  that,  when  coitus  is  disturbed  or  sexual  excitation

interrupted or abstinence enforced, the ego scents certain dangers to

which it reacts with anxiety. But this takes us nowhere. On the other

hand, our analysis of the phobias seems to admit of no correction.

Non liquet.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4270

 

                                            V

 

   We set out to study the formation of symptoms and the secondary

struggle waged by the ego against symptoms. But in picking on the

phobias for this purpose we have clearly made an unlucky choice. The

anxiety which predominates in the picture of these disorders is now

seen as a complication which obscures the situation. There are plenty

of  neuroses  which  exhibit  no  anxiety  whatever.  True  conversion

hysteria  is  one  of  these.  Even  in  its  most  severe  symptoms  no

admixture of anxiety is found. This fact alone ought to warn us against

making  too  close  a  connection  between  anxiety  and  symptom-

formation. The phobias are so closely akin to conversion hysteria in

every other respect that I have felt justified in classing them alongside

of it under the name of ‘anxiety hysteria’. But no one has as yet been

able to say what it is that determines whether any given case shall

take the form of a conversion hysteria or a phobia - has been able,

that is to say, to establish what determines the generating of anxiety in

hysteria.

   The commonest symptoms of conversion hysteria - motor paralyses,contractures,  involuntary  actions  or  discharges,  pains  and

hallucinations - are cathectic processes which are either permanently

maintained or intermittent. But this puts fresh difficulties in the way.

Not  much  is  actually  known  about  these  symptoms.  Analysis  can

show what the disturbed excitatory process is which the symptoms

replace. It usually turns out that they themselves have a share in that

process. It is as though the whole energy of the process had been

concentrated in this one part of it. For instance, it will be found that the

pains  from  which  a  patient  suffers  were  present  in  the  situation  in

which the repression occurred; or that his hallucination was, at that

time, a perception; or that his motor paralysis is a defence against an

action which should have been performed in that situation but was

inhibited;  or  that  his  contracture  is  usually  a  displacement  of  an

intended innervation of the muscles in some other part of his body; or

that his convulsions are the expression of an outburst of affect which

has been withdrawn from the normal control of the ego. The sensation

of unpleasure which accompanies the appearance of the symptoms

varies  in  a  striking  degree.  In  chronic  symptoms  which  have  been

displaced on to motility, like paralyses and contractures, it is almost

always entirely absent; the ego behaves towards the symptoms as

though it had nothing to do with them. In intermittent symptoms and in

those concerned with the sensory sphere, sensations of unpleasure

are as a rule distinctly felt; and in symptoms of pain these may reach

an  extreme  degree.  The  picture  presented  is  so  manifold  that  it  is

difficult to discover the factor which permits of all these variations and

yet allows a uniform explanation of them. There is, moreover, little to

be  seen  in  conversion  hysteria  of  the  ego’s  struggle  against  the

symptom after it has been formed. It is only when sensitivity to pain in

some part of the body constitutes the symptom that that symptom is in

a position to play a dual role. The symptom of pain will appear no less

regularly whenever the part of the body concerned is touched from

outside  than  when  the  pathogenic  situation  which  it  represents  is

associatively activated from within; and the ego will take precautions

to  prevent  the  symptom  from  being  aroused  through  external

perceptions. Why the formation of symptoms in conversion hysteria

should be such a peculiarly obscure thing I cannot tell; but the fact

affords us a good reason for quitting such an unproductive field ofenquiry without delay.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4271

 

 

   Let us turn to the obsessional neuroses in the hope of learning more

about  the  formation  of  symptoms.  The  symptoms  belonging  to  this

neurosis  fall,  in  general,  into  two  groups,  each  having  an  opposite

trend. They are either prohibitions, precautions and expiations - that

is, negative in character - or they are, on the contrary, substitutive

satisfactions which often appear in symbolic disguise. The negative,

defensive group of symptoms is the older of the two; but as illness is

prolonged,  the  satisfactions,  which  scoff  at  all  defensive  measures,

gain the upper hand. The symptom-formation scores a triumph if it

succeeds in combining the prohibition with satisfaction so that what

was  originally  a  defensive  command  or  prohibition  acquires  the

significance of a satisfaction as well; and in order to achieve this end it

will often make use of the most ingenious associative paths. Such an

achievement  demonstrates  the  tendency  of  the  ego  to  synthesize,

which  we  have  already  observed.  In  extreme  cases  the  patient

manages to make most of his symptoms acquire, in addition to their

original meaning, a directly contrary one. This is a tribute to the power

of ambivalence, which, for some unknown reason, plays such a large

part in obsessional neuroses. In the crudest instance the symptom is

diphasic:  an  action  which  carries  out  a  certain  injunction  is

immediately succeeded by another action which stops or undoes the

first one even if it does not go quite so far as to carry out its opposite.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4272

 

      Two  impressions  at  once  emerge  from  this  brief  survey  of

obsessional symptoms. The first is that a ceaseless struggle is being

waged against the repressed, in which the repressing forces steadily

lose ground; the second is that the ego and the super-ego have aspecially large share in the formation of the symptoms.

   Obsessional neurosis is unquestionably the most interesting and

repaying subject of analytic research. But as a problem it has not yet

been  mastered.  It  must  be  confessed  that,  if  we  endeavour  to

penetrate  more  deeply  into  its  nature,  we  still  have  to  rely  upon

doubtful  assumptions  and  unconfirmed  suppositions.  Obsessional

neurosis  originates,  no  doubt,  in  the  same  situation  as  hysteria,

namely,  the  necessity  of  fending  off  the  libidinal  demands  of  the

Oedipus complex. Indeed, every obsessional neurosis seems to have

a substratum of hysterical symptoms that have been formed at a very

early stage. But it is subsequently shaped along quite different lines

owing to a constitutional factor. The genital organization of the libido

turns out to be feeble and insufficiently resistant, so that when the ego

begins its defensive efforts the first thing it succeeds in doing is to

throw back the genital organization (of the phallic phase), in whole or

in  part,  to  the  earlier  sadistic-anal  level.  This  fact  of  regression  is

decisive for all that follows.

   Another possibility has to be considered. Perhaps regression is the

result no t of a constitutional factor but of a time-factor. It may be that

regression is rendered possible not because the genital organization

of the libido is too feeble but because the opposition of the ego begins

too early, while the sadistic phase is at its height. I am not prepared to

express a definite opinion on this point, but I may say that analytic

observation does not speak in favour of such an assumption. It shows

rather that, by the time an obsessional neurosis is entered upon, the

phallic stage has already been reached. Moreover, the onset of this

neurosis belongs to a later time of life than that of hysteria - to the

second period of childhood, after the latency period has set in. In a

woman  patient  whose  case  I  was  able  to  study  and  who  was

overtaken by this disorder at a very late date, it became clear that the

determining  cause  of  her  regression  and  of  the  emergence  of  her

obsessional neurosis was a real occurrence through which her genital

life, which had up till then been intact, lost all its value.¹

 

   ¹ See my paper on ‘The Disposition to Obsessional Neurosis’ (1913I).

                           Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4273

 

   As regards the metapsychological explanation of regression, I am

inclined  to  find  it  in  a  ‘defusion  of  instinct’,  in  a  detachment  of  the

erotic  components  which,  with  the  onset  of  the  genital  stage,  had

joined the destructive cathexes belonging to the sadistic phase.

      In  enforcing  regression,  the  ego  scores  its  first  success  in  its

defensive  struggle  against  the  demands  of  the  libido.  (In  this

connection it is of advantage to distinguish the more general notion of

‘defence’ from ‘repression’. Repression is only one of the mechanisms

which defence makes use of.) It is perhaps in obsessional cases more

than in normal or hysterical ones that we can most clearly recognize

that the motive force of defence is the castration complex and that

what is being fended off are the trends of the Oedipus complex. We

are  at  present  dealing  with  the  beginning  of  the  latency  period,  a

period  which  is  characterized  by  the  dissolution  of  the  Oedipus

complex,  the  creation  or  consolidation  of  the  super-ego  and  the

erection of ethical and aesthetic barriers in the ego. In obsessional

neuroses  these  processes  are  carried  further  than  is  normal.  In

addition  to  the  destruction  of  the  Oedipus  complex  a  regressive

degradation  of  the  libido  takes  place,  the  super-ego  becomes

exceptionally  severe  and  unkind,  and  the  ego,  in  obedience  to  the

super-ego,  produces  strong  reaction-formations  in  the  shape  of

conscientiousness,  pity  and  cleanliness.  Implacable,  though  not

always on that account successful, severity is shown in condemning

the  temptation  to  continue  early  infantile  masturbation,  which  now

attaches  itself  to  regressive  (sadistic-anal)  ideas  but  which

nevertheless  represents  the  unsubjugated  part  of  the  phallic

organization.  There  is  an  inherent  contradiction  about  this  state  of

affairs, in which, precisely in the interests of masculinity (that is to say,

from  fear  of  castration),  every  activity  belonging  to  masculinity  is

stopped.  But  here,  too,  obsessional  neurosis  is  only  overdoing  the

normal method of getting rid of the Oedipus complex. We once more

find here an illustration of the truth that every exaggeration contains

the seed of its own undoing. For, under the guise of obsessional acts,

the  masturbation  that  has  been  suppressed  approaches  ever  moreclosely to satisfaction.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4274

 

      The  reaction-formations  in  the  ego  of  the  obsessional  neurotic,

which we recognize as exaggerations of normal character-formation,

should be regarded, I think, as yet another mechanism of defence and

placed  alongside  of  regression  and  repression.  They  seem  to  be

absent or very much weaker in hysteria. Looking back, we can now

get an idea of what is peculiar to the defensive process in hysteria. It

seems that in it the process is limited to repression alone. The ego

turns  away  from  the  disagreeable  instinctual  impulse,  leaves  it  to

pursue its course in the unconscious, and takes no further part in its

fortunes.  This  view  cannot  be  absolutely  correct,  for  we  are

acquainted with the case in which a hysterical symptom is at the same

time a fulfilment of a penalty imposed by the super-ego; but it may

describe  a  general  characteristic  of  the  behaviour  of  the  ego  in

hysteria.

   We can either simply accept it as a fact that in obsessional neurosis

a  super-ego  of  this  severe  kind  emerges,  or  we  can  take  the

regression  of  the  libido  as  the  fundamental  characteristic  of  the

affection and attempt to relate the severity of the super-ego to it. And

indeed  the  super-ego,  originating  as  it  does  from  the  id,  cannot

dissociate  itself  from  the  regression  and  defusion  of  instinct  which

have taken place there. We cannot be surprised if it becomes harsher,

unkinder  and  more  tormenting  than  where  development  has  been

normal.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4275

 

   The chief task during the latency period seems to be the fending-off

of the temptation to masturbate. This struggle produces a series of

symptoms  which  appear  in  a  typical  fashion  in  the  most  different

individuals and which in general have the character of a ceremonial. Itis  a  great  pity  that  no  one  has  as  yet  collected  them  and

systematically  analysed  them.  Being  the  earliest  products  of  the

neurosis they should best be able to shed light on the mechanisms

employed in its symptom-formation. They already exhibit the features

which  will  emerge  so  disastrously  if  a  serious  illness  follows.  They

tend to become attached to activities (which would later be carried out

almost automatically) such as going to sleep, washing, dressing and

walking about; and they tend also to repetition and waste of time. Why

this should be so is at present not at all clear; but the sublimation of

anal-erotic components plays an unmistakable part in it.

   The advent of puberty opens a decisive chapter in the history of an

obsessional neurosis. The genital organization which has been broken

off in childhood starts again with great vigour. But, as we know, the

sexual development in childhood determines what direction this new

start at puberty will take. Not only will the early aggressive impulses

be re-awakened; but a greater or lesser proportion of the new libidinal

impulses - in bad cases the whole of them - will have to follow the

course  prescribed  for  them  by  regression  and  will  emerge  as

aggressive and destructive tendencies. In consequence of the erotic

trends being disguised in this way and owing to the powerful reaction-

formations in the ego, the struggle against sexuality will henceforward

be carried on under the banner of ethical principles. The ego will recoil

with astonishment from promptings to cruelty and violence which enter

consciousness  from  the  id,  and  it  has  no  notion  that  in  them  it  is

combating  erotic  wishes,  including  some  to  which  it  would  not

otherwise have taken exception. The overstrict super-ego insists all

the  more  strongly  on  the  suppression  of  sexuality,  since  this  has

assumed  such  repellent  forms.  Thus  in  obsessional  neurosis  the

conflict is aggravated in two directions: the defensive forces become

more intolerant and the forces that are to be fended off become more

intolerable. Both effects are due to a single factor, namely, regression

of the libido.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4276

       A  good  deal  of  what  has  been  said  may  be  objected  to  on  the

ground  that  the  unpleasant  obsessive  ideas  are  themselves  quite

conscious. But there is no doubt that before becoming conscious they

have  been  though  the  process  of  repression.  In  most  of  them  the

actual  wording  of  the  aggressive  instinctual  impulse  is  altogether

unknown to the ego, and it requires a good deal of analytic work to

make it conscious. What does penetrate into consciousness is usually

only a distorted substitute which is either of a vague, dream-like and

indeterminate nature or so travestied as to be unrecognizable. Even

where  repression  has  not  encroached  upon  the  content  of  the

aggressive  impulse  it  has  certainly  got  rid  of  its  accompanying

affective  character.  As  a  result,  the  aggressiveness  appears  to  the

ego not to be an impulsion but, as the patients themselves say, merely

a ‘thought’ which awakens no feeling. But the remarkable thing is that

this is not the case. What happens is that the affect left out when the

obsessional idea is perceived appears in a different place. The super-

ego behaves as though repression had not occurred and as though it

knew the real wording and full affective character of the aggressive

impulse, and it treats the ego accordingly. The ego which, on the one

hand, knows that it is innocent is obliged, on the other hand, to be

aware of a sense of guilt and to carry a responsibility which it cannot

account  for.  This  state  of  affairs  is,  however,  not  so  puzzling  as  it

would seem at first sight. The behaviour of the super-ego is perfectly

intelligible, and the contradiction in the ego merely shows that it has

shut out the id by means of repression while remaining fully accessible

to the influence of the super-ego. 1 If it is asked why the ego does not

also attempt to withdraw from the tormenting criticism of the super-

ego, the answer is that it does manage to do so in a great number of

instances. There are obsessional neuroses in which no sense of guilt

whatever  is  present.  In  them,  as  far  as  can  be  seen,  the  ego  has

avoided becoming aware of it by instituting a fresh set of symptoms,

penances  or  restrictions  of  a  self-punishing  kind.  These  symptoms,

however,  represent  at  the  same  time  a  satisfaction  of  masochistic

impulses which, in their turn, have been reinforced by regression.

 

   ¹ Cf. Theodor Reik, 1925, 51.

                           Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4277

 

      Obsessional  neurosis  presents  such  a  vast  multiplicity  of

phenomena that no efforts have yet succeeded in making a coherent

synthesis of all its variations. All we can do is to pick out certain typical

correlations; but there is always the risk that we may have overlooked

other uniformities of a no less important kind.

      I  have  already  described  the  general  tendency  of  symptom-

formation in obsessional neurosis. It is to give ever greater room to

substitutive satisfaction at the expense of frustration. Symptoms which

once  stood  for  a  restriction  of  the  ego  come  later  on  to  represent

satisfactions as well, thanks to the ego’s inclination to synthesis, and it

is quite clear that this second meaning gradually becomes the more

important of the two. The result of this process, which approximates

more  and  more  to  a  complete  failure  of  the  original  purpose  of

defence, is an extremely restricted ego which is reduced to seeking

satisfaction in the symptoms. The displacement of the distribution of

forces in favour of satisfaction may have the dreaded final outcome of

paralysing the will of the ego, which in every decision it has to make is

almost as strongly impelled from the one side as from the other. The

over-acute conflict between id and super-ego which has dominated

the  illness  from  the  very  beginning  may  assume  such  extensive

proportions that the ego, unable to carry out its office of mediator, can

undertake nothing which is not drawn into the sphere of that conflict.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4278

 

                                            VI

 

   In the course of these struggles we come across two activities of the

ego  which  form  symptoms  and  which  deserve  special  attention

because  they  are  obviously  surrogates  of  repression  and  therefore

well calculated to illustrate its purpose and technique. The fact that

such auxiliary and substitutive techniques emerge may argue that truerepression has met with difficulties in its functioning. If one considers

how much more the ego is the scene of action of symptom-formation

in obsessional neurosis than it is in hysteria and with what tenacity the

ego clings to its relations to reality and to consciousness, employing

all  its  intellectual  faculties  to  that  end  -  and  indeed  how  the  very

process of thinking becomes hypercathected and erotized - then one

may perhaps come to a better understanding of these variations of

repression.

   The two techniques I refer to are undoing what has been done and

isolating. The first of these has a wide range of application and goes

back very far. It is, as it were, negative magic, and endeavours, by

means  of  motor  symbolism,  to  ‘blow  away’  not  merely  the

consequences of some event (or experience or impression) but the

event itself. I choose the term ‘blow away’ advisedly, so as to remind

the reader of the part played by this technique not only in neuroses

but in magical acts, popular customs and religious ceremonies as well.

In obsessional neurosis the technique of undoing what has been done

is  first  met  with  in  the  ‘diphasic’  symptoms,  in  which  one  action  is

cancelled out by a second, so that it is as though neither action had

taken place, whereas, in reality, both have. This aim of undoing is the

second underlying motive of obsessional ceremonials, the first being

to take precautions in order to prevent the occurrence or recurrence of

some particular event. The difference between the two is easily seen:

the  precautionary  measures  are  rational,  while  trying  to  get  rid  of

something by ‘making it not to have happened’ is irrational and in the

nature of magic. It is of course to be suspected that the latter is the

earlier  motive  of  the  two  and  proceeds  from  the  animistic  attitude

towards  the  environment.  This  endeavour  to  undo  shades  off  into

normal behaviour in the case in which a person decides to regard an

event  as  not  having  happened.  But  whereas  he  will  take  no  direct

steps against the event, and will simply pay no further attention to it or

its consequences, the neurotic person will try to make the past itself

non-existent.  He  will  try  to  repress  it  by  motor  means.  The  same

purpose may perhaps account for the obsession for repeating which is

so frequently met with in this neurosis and the carrying out of which

serves a number of contradictory intentions at once. When anything

has not happened in the desired way it is undone by being repeated ina different way; and thereupon all the motives that exist for lingering

over  such  repetitions  come  into  play  as  well.  As  the  neurosis

proceeds,  we  often  find  that  the  endeavour  to  undo  a  traumatic

experience  is  a  motive  of  first-rate  importance  in  the  formation  of

symptoms. We thus unexpectedly discover a new, motor technique of

defence,  or  (as  we  may  say  in  this  case  with  less  inaccuracy)  of

repression.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4279

 

   The second of these techniques which we are setting out to describe

for the first time, that of isolation, is peculiar to obsessional neurosis.

It, too, takes place in the motor sphere. When something unpleasant

has happened to the subject or when he himself has done something

which has a significance for his neurosis, he interpolates an interval

during  which  nothing  further  must  happen  -  during  which  he  must

perceive  nothing  and  do  nothing.  This  behaviour,  which  seems

strange at first sight, is soon seen to have a relation to repression. We

know that in hysteria it is possible to cause a traumatic experience to

be overtaken by amnesia. In obsessional neurosis this can often not

be  achieved:  the  experience  is  not  forgotten,  but,  instead,  it  is

deprived of its affect, and its associative connections are suppressed

or  interrupted  so  that  it  remains  as  though  isolated  and  is  not

reproduced in the ordinary processes of thought. The effect of this

isolation is the same as the effect of repression with amnesia. This

technique,  then,  is  reproduced  in  the  isolations  of  obsessional

neurosis;  and  it  is  at  the  same  time  given  motor  reinforcement  for

magical purposes. The elements that are held apart in this way are

precisely  those  which  belong  together  associatively.  The  motor

isolation  is  meant  to  ensure  an  interruption  of  the  connection  in

thought. The normal phenomenon of concentration provides a pretext

for this kind of neurotic procedure: what seems to us important in the

way of an impression or a piece of work must not be interfered with by

the simultaneous claims of any other mental processes or activities.

But even a normal person uses concentration to keep away not onlywhat is irrelevant or unimportant, but, above all, what is unsuitable

because it is contradictory. He is most disturbed by those elements

which once belonged together but which have been torn apart in the

course of his development - as, for instance, by manifestations of the

ambivalence  of  his  father-complex  in  his  relation  to  God,  or  by

impulses  attached  to  his  excretory  organs  in  his  emotions  of  love.

Thus,  in  the  normal  course  of  things,  the  ego  has  a  great  deal  of

isolating work to do in its function of directing the current of thought.

And,  as  we  know,  we  are  obliged,  in  carrying  out  our  analytic

technique,  to  train  it  to  relinquish  that  function  for  the  time  being,

eminently justified as it usually is.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4280

 

   We have all found by experience that it is especially difficult for an

obsessional  neurotic  to  carry  out  the  fundamental  rule  of  psycho-

analysis.  His  ego  is  more  watchful  and  makes  sharper  isolations,

probably because of the high degree of tension due to conflict that

exists  between  his  super-ego  and  his  id.  While  he  is  engaged  in

thinking,  his  ego  has  to  keep  off  too  much  -  the  intrusion  of

unconscious phantasies and the manifestation of ambivalent trends. It

must not relax, but is constantly prepared for a struggle. It fortifies this

compulsion to concentrate and to isolate by the help of the magical

acts  of  isolation  which,  in  the  form  of  symptoms,  grow  to  be  so

noticeable and to have so much practical importance for the patient,

but which are, of course, useless in themselves and are in the nature

of ceremonials.

   But in thus endeavouring to prevent associations and connections of

thought, the ego is obeying one of the oldest and most fundamental

commands of obsessional neurosis, the taboo on touching. If we ask

ourselves why the avoidance of touching, contact or contagion should

play such a large part in this neurosis and should become the subject-

matter  of  complicated  systems,  the  answer  is  that  touching  and

physical contact are the immediate aim of the aggressive as well as

the loving object- cathexes. Eros desires contact because it strives tomake the ego and the loved object one, to abolish all spatial barriers

between them. But destructiveness, too, which (before the invention of

long-range weapons) could only take effect at close quarters, must

presuppose physical contact, a coming to grips. To ‘touch’ a woman

has become a euphemism for using her as a sexual object. Not to

‘touch’ one’s genitals is the phrase employed for forbidding auto-erotic

satisfaction. Since obsessional neurosis begins by persecuting erotic

touching  and  then,  after  regression  has  taken  place,  goes  on  to

persecute  touching  in  the  guise  of  aggressiveness,  it  follows  that

nothing is so strongly proscribed in that illness as touching nor so well

suited  to  become  the  central  point  of  a  system  of  prohibitions.  But

isolating  is  removing  the  possibility  of  contact;  it  is  a  method  of

withdrawing  a  thing  from  being  touched  in  any  way.  And  when  a

neurotic  isolates  an  impression  or  an  activity  by  interpolating  an

interval, he is letting it be understood symbolically that he will not allow

his thoughts about that impression or activity to come into associative

contact with other thoughts.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4281

 

 

   This is as far as our investigations into the formation of symptoms

take us. It is hardly worth while summing them up, for the results they

have yielded are scanty and incomplete and tell us scarcely anything

that we do not already know. It would be fruitless to turn our attention

to symptom-formation in other disorders besides phobias, conversion

hysteria and obsessional neurosis, for too little is known about them.

But  in  reviewing  those  three  neuroses  together  we  are  brought  up

against  a  very  serious  problem  the  consideration  of  which  can  no

longer be put off. All three have as their outcome the destruction of the

Oedipus  complex;  and  in  all  three  the  motive  force  of  the  ego’s

opposition is, we believe, the fear of castration. Yet it is only in the

phobias  that  this  fear  comes  to  the  surface  and  is  acknowledged.

What has become of it in the other two neuroses? How has the ego

spared itself this fear? The problem becomes accentuated when werecall the possibility, already referred to, that anxiety arises directly, by

a kind of fermentation, from a libidinal cathexis whose processes have

been  disturbed.  Furthermore,  is  it  absolutely  certain  that  fear  of

castration is the only motive force of repression (or defence)? If we

think of neuroses in women we are bound to doubt it. For though we

can  with  certainty  establish  in  them  the  presence  of  a  castration

complex,  we  can  hardly  speak  with  propriety  of  castration anxiety

where castration has already taken place.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

 4282

 

                                          VII

 

   Let us go back again to infantile phobias of animals; for, when all is

said and done, we understand them better than any other cases. In

animal phobias, then, the ego has to oppose a libidinal object-cathexis

coming from the id - a cathexis that belongs either to the positive or

the negative Oedipus complex - because it believes that to give way to

it  would  entail  the  danger  of  castration.  This  question  has  already

been discussed, but there still remains a doubtful point to clear up. In

‘Little Hans’s’ case - that is, in the case of a positive Oedipus complex

-  was  it  his  fondness  for  his  mother  or  was  it  his  aggressiveness

towards his father which called out the defence by the ego? In practice

it  seems  to  make  no  difference,  especially  as  each  set  of  feelings

implies the other; but the question has a theoretical interest, since it is

only the feeling of affection for the mother which can count as a purely

erotic one. The aggressive impulse flows mainly from the destructive

instinct; and we have always believed that in a neurosis it is against

the demands of the libido and not against those of any other instinct

that  the  ego  is  defending  itself.  In  point  of  fact  we  know  that  after

‘Hans’s’ phobia had been formed, his tender attachment to his mother

seemed  to  disappear,  having  been  completely  disposed  of  by

repression,  while  the  formation  of  the  symptom  (the  substitutive

formation)  took  place  in  relation  to  his  aggressive  impulses.  In  the

‘Wolf Man’ the situation was simpler. The impulse that was repressed- his feminine attitude towards his father - was a genuinely erotic one;

and  it  was  in  relation  to  that  impulse  that  the  formation  of  his

symptoms took place.

   It is almost humiliating that, after working so long, we should still be

having difficulty in understanding the most fundamental facts. But we

have made up our minds to simplify nothing and to hide nothing. If we

cannot  see  things  clearly  we  will  at  least  see  clearly  what  the

obscurities are. What is hampering us here is evidently some hitch in

the development of our theory of the instincts. We began by tracing

the organization of the libido through its successive stages - from the

oral through the sadistic-anal to the genital - and in doing so placed all

the components of the sexual instinct on the same footing. Later it

appeared  that  sadism  was  the  representative  of  another  instinct,

which was opposed to Eros. This new view, that the instincts fall into

two  groups,  seems  to  explode  the  earlier  construction  of  the

successive  stages  of  libidinal  organization.  But  we  do  not  have  to

break  fresh  ground  in  order  to  find  a  way  out  of  the  difficulty.  The

solution has been at hand for a long time and lies in the fact that what

we are concerned with are scarcely ever pure instinctual impulses but

mixtures in various proportions of the two groups of instincts. If this is

so, there is no need to revise our view of the organizations of the

libido. A sadistic cathexis of an object may also legitimately claim to

be treated as a libidinal one; and an aggressive impulse against the

father can just as well be subjected to repression as a tender impulse

towards  the  mother.  Nevertheless  we  shall  bear  in  mind  for  future

consideration the possibility that repression is a process which has a

special relation to the genital organization of the libido and that the

ego resorts to other methods of defence when it has to secure itself

against the libido on other levels of organization. To continue: a case

like ‘Little Hans’s’ does not enable us to come to any clear conclusion.

It  is  true  that  in  him  an  aggressive  impulse  was  disposed  of  by

repression, but this happened after the genital organization had been

reached.

   This time we will not lose sight of the part played by anxiety. We

have said that as soon as the ego recognizes the danger of castration

it  gives  the  signal  of  anxiety  and  inhibits  through  the  pleasure-

unpleasure agency (in a way which we cannot as yet understand) theimpending cathectic process in the id. At the same time the phobia is

formed. And now the castration anxiety is directed to a different object

and expressed in a distorted form, so that the patient is afraid, not of

being  castrated  by  his  father,  but  of  being  bitten  by  a  horse  or

devoured  by  a  wolf.  This  substitutive  formation  has  two  obvious

advantages. In the first place it avoids a conflict due to ambivalence

(for the father was a loved object, too), and in the second place it

enables  the  ego  to  cease  generating  anxiety.  For  the  anxiety

belonging to a phobia is conditional; it only emerges when the object

of it is perceived - and rightly so, since it is only then that the danger-

situation is present. There is no need to be afraid of being castrated

by a father who is not there. On the other hand one cannot get rid of a

father; he can appear whenever he chooses. But if he is replaced by

an animal, all one has to do is to avoid the sight of it - that is, its

presence - in order to be free from danger and anxiety. ‘Little Hans’,

therefore,  imposed  a  restriction  upon  his  ego.  He  produced  the

inhibition  of  not  leaving  the  house,  so  as  not  to  come  across  any

horses. The young Russian had an even easier time of it, for it was

hardly a privation for him not to look at a particular picture-book any

more. If his naughty sister had not kept on showing him the book with

the picture of the wolf standing upright in it, he would have been able

to feel safe from his fear.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4283

 

      On  a  previous  occasion  I  have  stated  that  phobias  have  the

character of a projection in that they replace an internal, instinctual

danger by an external, perceptual one. The advantage of this is that

the subject can protect himself against an external danger by fleeing

from it and avoiding the perception of it, whereas it is useless to flee

from dangers that arise from within. This statement of mine was not

incorrect,  but  it  did  not  go  below  the  surface  of  things.  For  an

instinctual demand is, after all, not dangerous in itself; it only becomes

so  inasmuch  as  it  entails  a  real  external  danger,  the  danger  of

castration. Thus what happens in a phobia in the last resort is merelythat one external danger is replaced by another. The view that in a

phobia the ego is able to escape anxiety by means of avoidance or of

inhibitory symptoms fits in very well with the theory that that anxiety is

only an affective signal and that no alteration has taken place in the

economic situation.

   The anxiety felt in animal phobias is, therefore, an affective reaction

on  the  part  of  the  ego  to  danger;  and  the  danger  which  is  being

signalled in this way is the danger of castration. This anxiety differs in

no respect from the realistic anxiety which the ego normally feels in

situations of danger, except that its content remains unconscious and

only becomes conscious in the form of a distortion.

   The same will prove true, I think, of the phobias of adults, although

the material which their neuroses work over is much more abundant

and  there  are  some  additional  factors  in  the  formation  of  the

symptoms. Fundamentally the position is identical. The agoraphobic

patient  imposes  a  restriction  on  his  ego  so  as  to  escape  a  certain

instinctual  danger  -  namely,  the  danger  of  giving  way  to  his  erotic

desires. For if he did so the danger of being castrated, or some similar

danger, would once more be conjured up as it was in his childhood. I

may  cite  as  an  instance  the  case  of  a  young  man  who  became

agoraphobic because he was afraid of yielding to the solicitations of

prostitutes  and  of  contracting  a  syphilitic  infection  from  them  as  a

punishment.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4284

 

   I am well aware that a number of cases exhibit a more complicated

structure and that many other repressed instinctual impulses can enter

into a phobia. But they are only tributary streams which have for the

most part joined the main current of the neurosis at a later stage. The

symptomatology  of  agoraphobia  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  the

ego does not confine itself to making a renunciation. In order to rob

the  situation  of  danger  it  does  more:  it  usually  effects  a  temporal

regression to infancy (in extreme cases, to a time when the subject

was in his mother’s womb and protected against the dangers whichthreaten  him  in  the  present).  Such  a  regression  now  becomes  a

condition  whose  fulfilment  exempts  the  ego  from  making  its

renunciation.  For  instance,  an  agoraphobic  patient  may  be  able  to

walk in the street provided he is accompanied, like a small child, by

someone he knows and trusts; or, for the same reason, he may be

able to go out alone provided he remains within a certain distance of

his own house and does not go to places which are not familiar to him

or where people do not know him. What these stipulations are will

depend  in  each  case  on  the  infantile  factors  which  dominate  him

through his neurosis. The phobia of being alone is unambiguous in its

meaning, irrespective of any infantile regression: it is, ultimately, an

endeavour to avoid the temptation to indulge in solitary masturbation.

Infantile regression can, of course, only take place when the subject is

no longer a child.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4285

 

      A  phobia  generally  sets  in  after  a  first  anxiety  attack  has  been

experienced in specific circumstances, such as in the street or in a

train or in solitude. Thereafter the anxiety is held in ban by the phobia,

but it re-emerges whenever the protective condition cannot be fulfilled.

The mechanism of phobia does good service as a means of defence

and tends to be very stable. A continuation of the defensive struggle,

in the shape of a struggle against the symptom, occurs frequently but

not invariably.

      What  we  have  learnt  about  anxiety  in  phobias  is  applicable  to

obsessional neuroses as well. In this respect it is not difficult for us to

put obsessional neuroses on all fours with phobias. In the former, the

mainspring of all later symptom-formation is clearly the ego’s fear of

its super-ego. The danger-situation from which the ego must get away

is the hostility of the super-ego. There is no trace of projection here;

the danger is completely internalized. But if we ask ourselves what it is

that the ego fears from the super-ego, we cannot but think that the

punishment  threatened  by  the  latter  must  be  an  extension  of  the

punishment  of  castration.  Just  as  the  father  has  becomedepersonalized  in  the  shape  of  the  super-ego,  so  has  the  fear  of

castration at his hands become transformed into an undefined social

or moral anxiety. But this anxiety is concealed. The ego escapes it by

obediently carrying out the commands, precautions and penances that

have been enjoined on it. If it is impeded in doing so, it is at once

overtaken by an extremely distressing feeling of discomfort which may

be  regarded  as  an  equivalent  of  anxiety  and  which  the  patients

themselves liken to anxiety.

   The conclusion we have come to, then, is this. Anxiety is a reaction

to a situation of danger. It is obviated by the ego’s doing something to

avoid  that  situation  or  to  withdraw  from  it.  It  might  be  said  that

symptoms are created so as to avoid the generating of anxiety. But

this does not go deep enough. It would be truer to say that symptoms

are created so as to avoid a danger-situation whose presence has

been signalled by the generation of anxiety. In the cases that we have

discussed, the danger concerned was the danger of castration or of

something traceable back to castration.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4286

 

   If anxiety is a reaction of the ego to danger, we shall be tempted to

regard the traumatic neuroses, which so often follow upon a narrow

escape from death, as a direct result of a fear of death (or fear for life)

and  to  dismiss  from  our  minds  the  question  of  castration  and  the

dependent relationships of the ego. Most of those who observed the

traumatic neuroses that occurred during the last war took this line, and

triumphantly announced that proof was now forthcoming that a threat

to the instinct of self-preservation could by itself produce a neurosis

without any admixture of sexual factors and without requiring any of

the complicated hypotheses of psycho-analysis. It is in fact greatly to

be regretted that not a single analysis of a traumatic neurosis of any

value is extant. And it is to be regretted, not because such an analysis

would contradict the aetiological importance of sexuality - for any such

contradiction has long since been disposed of by the introduction of

the concept of narcissism, which brings the libidinal cathexis of theego into line with the cathexes of objects and emphasizes the libidinal

character  of  the  instinct  of  self-preservation  -  but  because,  in  the

absence of any analyses of this kind, we have lost a most precious

opportunity  of  drawing  decisive  conclusions  about  the  relations

between anxiety and the formation of symptoms. In view of all that we

know  about  the  structure  of  the  comparatively  simple  neuroses  of

everyday life, it would seem highly improbable that a neurosis could

come into being merely because of the objective presence of danger,

without any participation of the deeper levels of the mental apparatus.

But  the  unconscious  seems  to  contain  nothing  that  could  give  any

content to our concept of the annihilation of life. Castration can be

pictured  on  the  basis  of  the  daily  experience  of  the  faeces  being

separated from the body or on the basis of losing the mother’s breast

at  weaning.  But  nothing  resembling  death  can  ever  have  been

experienced; or if it has, as in fainting, it has left no observable traces

behind. I am therefore inclined to adhere to the view that the fear of

death should be regarded as analogous to the fear of castration and

that  the  situation  to  which  the  ego  is  reacting  is  one  of  being

abandoned by the protecting super-ego - the powers of destiny - so

that  it  has  no  longer  any  safeguard  against  all  the  dangers  that

surround it. In addition, it must be remembered that in the experiences

which  lead  to  a  traumatic  neurosis  the  protective  shield  against

external stimuli is broken through and excessive amounts of excitation

impinge upon the mental apparatus; so that we have here a second

possibility - that anxiety is not only being signalled as an affect but is

also  being  freshly  created  out  of  the  economic  conditions  of  the

situation.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4287

 

   The statement I have just made, to the effect that the ego has been

prepared  to  expect  castration  by  having  undergone  constantly

repeated object-losses, places the question of anxiety in a new light.

We have hitherto regarded it as an affective signal of danger; but now,

since the danger is so often one of castration, it appears to us as areaction  to  a  loss,  a  separation.  Even  though  a  number  of

considerations  immediately  arise  which  make  against  this  view,  we

cannot  but  be  struck  by  one  very  remarkable  correlation.  The  first

experience of anxiety which an individual goes through (in the case of

human beings, at all events) is birth, and, objectively speaking, birth is

a separation from the mother. It could be compared to a castration of

the mother (by equating the child with a penis). Now it would be very

satisfactory  if  anxiety,  as  a  symbol  of  a  separation,  were  to  be

repeated on every subsequent occasion on which a separation took

place.  But  unfortunately  we  are  prevented  from  making  use  of  this

correlation by the fact that birth is not experienced subjectively as a

separation  from  the  mother,  since  the  foetus,  being  a  completely

narcissistic creature, is totally unaware of her existence as an object.

Another  adverse  argument  is  that  we  know  what  the  affective

reactions to a separation are: they are pain and mourning, not anxiety.

Incidentally, it may be remembered that in discussing the question of

mourning we also failed to discover why it should be such a painful

thing.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4288

 

                                          VIII

 

   The time has come to pause and consider. What we clearly want is

to find something that will tell us what anxiety really is, some criterion

that will enable us to distinguish true statements about it from false

ones. But this is not easy to get. Anxiety is not so simple a matter. Up

till now we have arrived at nothing but contradictory views about it,

none of which can, to the unprejudiced eye, be given preference over

the  others.  I  therefore  propose  to  adopt  a  different  procedure.  I

propose  to  assemble,  quite  impartially,  all  the  facts  that  we  know

about anxiety without expecting to arrive at a fresh synthesis.

   Anxiety, then, is in the first place something that is felt. We call it an

affective state, although we are also ignorant of what an affect is. As a

feeling, anxiety has a very marked character of unpleasure. But that isnot  the  whole  of  its  quality.  Not  every  unpleasure  can  be  called

anxiety,  for  there  are  other  feelings,  such  as  tension,  pain  or

mourning, which have the character of unpleasure. Thus anxiety must

have other distinctive features besides this quality of unpleasure. Can

we succeed in understanding the differences between these various

unpleasurable affects?

   We can at any rate note one or two things about the feeling of

anxiety. Its unpleasurable character seems to have a note of its own -

something not very obvious, whose presence is difficult to prove yet

which is in all likelihood there. But besides having this special feature

which is difficult to isolate, we notice that anxiety is accompanied by

fairly definite physical sensations which can be referred to particular

organs of the body. As we are not concerned here with the physiology

of  anxiety,  we  shall  content  ourselves  with  mentioning  a  few

representatives of these sensations. The clearest and most frequent

ones are those connected with the respiratory organs and with the

heart.  They  provide  evidence  that  motor  innervations  -  that  is,

processes of discharge - play a part in the general phenomenon of

anxiety.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4289

 

   Analysis of anxiety-states therefore reveals the existence of (1) a

specific  character  of  unpleasure,  (2)  acts  of  discharge  and  (3)

perceptions  of  those  acts.  The  two  last  points  indicate  at  once  a

difference  between  states  of  anxiety  and  other  similar  states,  like

those  of  mourning  and  pain.  The  latter  do  not  have  any  motor

manifestation; or if they have, the manifestation is not an integral part

of the whole state but is distinct from it as being a result of it or a

reaction to it. Anxiety, then, is a special state of unpleasure with acts

of discharge along particular paths. In accordance with our general

views we should be inclined to think that anxiety is based upon an

increase of excitation which on the one hand produces the character

of  unpleasure  and  on  the  other  finds  relief  through  the  acts  of

discharge already mentioned. But a purely physiological account ofthis  sort  will  scarcely  satisfy  us.  We  are  tempted  to  assume  the

presence of a historical factor which binds the sensations of anxiety

and its innervations firmly together. We assume, in other words, that

an  anxiety-state  is  the  reproduction  of  some  experience  which

contained the necessary conditions for such an increase of excitation

and  a  discharge  along  particular  paths,  and  that  from  this

circumstance the unpleasure of anxiety receives its specific character.

In man, birth provides a prototypic experience of this kind, and we are

therefore  inclined  to  regard  anxiety-states  as  a  reproduction  of  the

trauma of birth.

   This does not imply that anxiety occupies an exceptional position

among the affective states. In my opinion the other affects are also

reproductions of very early, perhaps even pre-individual, experiences

of  vital  importance;  and  I  should  be  inclined  to  regard  them  as

universal, typical and innate hysterical attacks, as compared to the

recently  and  individually  acquired  attacks  which  occur  in  hysterical

neuroses and whose origin and significance as mnemic symbols have

been revealed by analysis. It would be very desirable, of course, to be

able to demonstrate the truth of this view in a number of such affects -

a thing which is still very far from being the case.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4290

 

      The  view  that  anxiety  goes  back  to  the  event  of  birth  raises

immediate objections which have to be met. It may be argued that

anxiety  is  a  reaction  which,  in  all  probability,  is  common  to  every

organism, certainly every organism of a higher order, whereas birth is

only experienced by the mammals; and it is doubtful whether in all of

them, even, birth has the significance of a trauma. Therefore there can

be anxiety without the prototype of birth. But this objection takes us

beyond  the  barrier  that  divides  psychology  from  biology.  It  may  be

that,  precisely  because  anxiety  has  an  indispensable  biological

function  to  fulfil  as  a  reaction  to  a  state  of  danger,  it  is  differently

contrived in different organisms. We do not know, besides, whether

anxiety involves the same sensations and innervations in organismsfar removed from man as it does in man himself. Thus there is no

good argument here against the view that, in man, anxiety is modelled

upon the process of birth.

      If  the  structure  and  origin  of  anxiety  are  as  described,  the  next

question is: what is the function of anxiety and on what occasions is it

reproduced?  The  answer  seems  to  be  obvious  and  convincing:

anxiety arose originally as a reaction to a state of danger and it is

reproduced whenever a state of that kind recurs.

      This  answer,  however,  raises  further  considerations.  The

innervations involved in the original state of anxiety probably had a

meaning  and  purpose,  in  just  the  same  way  as  the  muscular

movements  which  accompany  a  first  hysterical  attack.  In  order  to

understand  a  hysterical  attack,  all  one  has  to  do  is  to  look  for  the

situation  in  which  the  movements  in  question  formed  part  of  an

appropriate and expedient action. Thus at birth it is probable that the

innervation, in being directed to the respiratory organs, is preparing

the way for the activity of the lungs, and, in accelerating the heartbeat,

is  helping  to  keep  the  blood  free  from  toxic  substances.  Naturally,

when  the  anxiety-state  is  reproduced  later  as  an  affect  it  will  be

lacking  in  any  such  expediency,  just  as  are  the  repetitions  of  a

hysterical attack. When the individual is placed in a new situation of

danger it may well be quite inexpedient for him to respond with an

anxiety-state  (which  is  a  reaction  to  an  earlier  danger)  instead  of

initiating  a  reaction  appropriate  to  the  current  danger.  But  his

behaviour may become expedient once more if the danger-situation is

recognized  as  it  approaches  and  is  signalled  by  an  outbreak  of

anxiety. In that case he can at once get rid of his anxiety by having

recourse to more suitable measures. Thus we see that there are two

ways in which anxiety can emerge: in an inexpedient way, when a

new situation of danger has occurred, or in an expedient way in order

to give a signal and prevent such a situation from occurring.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4291

 

   But what is a ‘danger’? In the act of birth there is a real danger tolife.  We  know  what  this  means  objectively;  but  in  a  psychological

sense it says nothing at all to us. The danger of birth has as yet no

psychical content. We cannot possibly suppose that the foetus has

any  sort  of  knowledge  that  there  is  a  possibility  of  its  life  being

destroyed.  It  can  only  be  aware  of  some  vast  disturbance  in  the

economy of its narcissistic libido. Large sums of excitation crowd in

upon it, giving rise to new kinds of feelings of unpleasure, and some

organs acquire an increased cathexis, thus foreshadowing the object-

cathexis which will soon set in. What elements in all this will be made

use of as the sign of a ‘danger-situation’?

   Unfortunately far too little is known about the mental make-up of a

new-born baby to make a direct answer possible. I cannot even vouch

for the validity of the description I have just given. It is easy to say that

the baby will repeat its affect of anxiety in every situation which recalls

the  event  of  birth.  The  important  thing  to  know  is  what  recalls  the

event and what it is that is recalled.

   All we can do is to examine the occasions on which infants in arms

or somewhat older children show readiness to produce anxiety. In his

book  on  the  trauma  of  birth,  Rank  (1924)  has  made  a  determined

attempt  to  establish  a  relationship  between  the  earliest  phobias  of

children and the impressions made on them by the event of birth. But I

do  not  think  he  has  been  successful.  His  theory  is  open  to  two

objections. In the first place, he assumes that the infant has received

certain sensory impressions, in particular of a visual kind, at the time

of birth, the renewal of which can recall to its memory the trauma of

birth and thus evoke a reaction of anxiety. This assumption is quite

unfounded and extremely improbable. It is not credible that a child

should  retain  any  but  tactile  and  general  sensations  relating  to  the

process of birth. If, later on, children show fear of small animals that

disappear into holes or emerge from them, this reaction, according to

Rank, is due to their perceiving an analogy. But it is an analogy of

which they cannot be aware. In the second place, in considering these

later  anxiety-situations  Rank  dwells,  as  suits  him  best,  now  on  the

child’s  recollection  of  its  happy  intra-uterine  existence,  now  on  its

recollection  of  the  traumatic  disturbance  which  interrupted  that

existence which leaves the door wide open for arbitrary interpretation.

There  are,  moreover,  certain  examples  of  childhood  anxiety  whichdirectly traverse his theory. When, for instance, a child is left alone in

the dark one would expect it, according to his view, to welcome the re-

establishment of the intra-uterine situation; yet it is precisely on such

occasions that the child reacts with anxiety. And if this is explained by

saying that the child is being reminded of the interruption which the

event  of  birth  made  in  its  intra-uterine  happiness,  it  becomes

impossible to shut one’s eyes any longer to the far-fetched character

of such explanations.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4292

 

   I am driven to the conclusion that the earliest phobias of infancy

cannot be directly traced back to impressions of the act of birth and

that so far they have not been explained. A certain preparedness for

anxiety  is  undoubtedly  present  in  the  infant  in  arms.  But  this

preparedness  for  anxiety,  instead  of  being  at  its  maximum

immediately after birth and then slowly decreasing, does not emerge

till later, as mental development proceeds, and lasts over a certain

period of childhood. If these early phobias persist beyond that period

one  is  inclined  to  suspect  the  presence  of  a  neurotic  disturbance,

although it is not at all clear what their relation is to the undoubted

neuroses that appear later on in childhood.

      Only  a  few  of  the  manifestations  of  anxiety  in  children  are

comprehensible  to  us,  and  we  must  confine  our  attention  to  them.

They occur, for instance, when a child is alone, or in the dark, or when

it finds itself with an unknown person instead of one to whom it is used

- such as its mother. These three instances can be reduced to a single

condition - namely, that of missing someone who is loved and longed

for. But here, I think, we have the key to an understanding of anxiety

and to a reconciliation of the contradictions that seem to beset it.

   The child’s mnemic image of the person longed for is no doubt

intensely cathected, probably in a hallucinatory way at first. But this

has  no  effect;  and  now  it  seems  as  though  the  longing  turns  into

anxiety. This anxiety has all the appearance of being an expression of

the  child’s  feeling  at  its  wits’  end,  as  though  in  its  still  veryundeveloped state it did not know how better to cope with its cathexis

of longing. Here anxiety appears as a reaction to the felt loss of the

object; and we are at once reminded of the fact that castration anxiety,

too, is a fear of being separated from a highly valued object, and that

the  earliest  anxiety  of  all  -  the  ‘primal  anxiety’  of  birth  -  is  brought

about on the occasion of a separation from the mother.

   But a moment’s reflection takes us beyond this question of loss of

object.  The  reason  why  the  infant  in  arms  wants  to  perceive  the

presence of its mother is only because it already knows by experience

that she satisfies all its needs without delay. The situation, then, which

it regards as a ‘danger’ and against which it wants to be safeguarded

is that of non-satisfaction, of a growing tension due to need, against

which it is helpless. I think that if we adopt this view all the facts fall

into place. The situation of non-satisfaction in which the amounts of

stimulation rise to an unpleasurable height without its being possible

for them to be mastered psychically or discharged must for the infant

be analogous to the experience of being born - must be a repetition of

the situation of danger. What both situations have in common is the

economic  disturbance  caused  by  an  accumulation  of  amounts  of

stimulation  which  require  to  be  disposed  of.  It  is  this  factor,  then,

which is the real essence of the ‘danger’. In both cases the reaction of

anxiety sets in. (This reaction is still an expedient one in the infant in

arms, for the discharge, being directed into the respiratory and vocal

muscular apparatus, now calls its mother to it, just as it activated the

lungs  of  the  new-born  baby  to  get  rid  of  the  internal  stimuli.)  It  is

unnecessary to suppose that the child carries anything more with it

from the time of its birth than this way of indicating the presence of

danger.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4293

 

      When  the  infant  has  found  out  by  experience  that  an  external,

perceptible object can put an end to the dangerous situation which is

reminiscent of birth, the content of the danger it fears is displaced from

the  economic  situation  on  to  the  condition  which  determined  thatsituation, viz., the loss of object. It is the absence of the mother that is

now the danger; and as soon as that danger arises the infant gives the

signal of anxiety, before the dreaded economic situation has set in.

This  change  constitutes  a  first  great  step  forward  in  the  provision

made  by  the  infant  for  its  self-preservation,  and  at  the  same  time

represents  a  transition  from  the  automatic  and  involuntary  fresh

appearance of anxiety to the intentional reproduction of anxiety as a

signal of danger.

      In  these  two  aspects,  as  an  automatic  phenomenon  and  as  a

rescuing signal, anxiety is seen to be a product of the infant’s mental

helplessness  which  is  a  natural  counterpart  of  its  biological

helplessness.  The  striking  coincidence  by  which  the  anxiety  of  the

new-born  baby  and  the  anxiety  of  the  infant  in  arms  are  both

conditioned  by  separation  from  the  mother  does  not  need  to  be

explained  on  psychological  lines.  It  can  be  accounted  for  simply

enough biologically; for, just as the mother originally satisfied all the

needs of the foetus through the apparatus of her own body, so now,

after its birth, she continues to do so, though partly by other means.

There is much more continuity between intra-uterine life and earliest

infancy than the impressive caesura of the act of birth would have us

believe.  What  happens  is  that  the  child’s  biological  situation  as  a

foetus is replaced for it by a psychical object-relation to its mother. But

we must not forget that during its intra-uterine life the mother was not

an object for the foetus, and that at that time there were no objects at

all. It is obvious that in this scheme of things there is no place for the

abreaction of the birth trauma. We cannot find that anxiety has any

function other than that of being a signal for the avoidance of a danger

situation.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4294

 

   The significance of the loss of object as a determinant of anxiety

extends considerably further. For the next transformation of anxiety,

viz. the castration anxiety belonging to the phallic phase, is also a fear

of separation and is thus attached to the same determinant. In thiscase the danger is of being separated from one’s genitals. Ferenczi

has traced, quite correctly, I think, a clear line of connection between

this fear and the fears contained in the earlier situations of danger.

The high degree of narcissistic value which the penis possesses can

appeal to the fact that that organ is a guarantee to its owner that he

can be once more united to his mother - i.e. to a substitute for her - in

the  act  of  copulation.  Being  deprived  of  it  amounts  to  a  renewed

separation  from  her,  and  this  in  its  turn  means  being  helplessly

exposed to an unpleasurable tension due to instinctual need, as was

the case at birth. But the need whose increase is feared is now a

specific  one  belonging  to  the  genital  libido  and  is  no  longer  an

indeterminate one, as it was in the period of infancy. It may be added

that for a man who is impotent (that is, who is inhibited by the threat of

castration) the substitute for copulation is a phantasy of returning into

his mother’s womb. Following Ferenczi’s line of thought, we might say

that the man in question, having tried to bring about his return into his

mother’s womb by using his genital organ to represent him, is now

replacing that organ regressively by his whole person.

   The progress which the child makes in its development - its growing

independence,  the  sharper  division  of  its  mental  apparatus  into

several agencies, the advent of new needs - cannot fail to exert an

influence upon the content of the danger situation. We have already

traced the change of that content from loss of the mother as an object

to castration. The next change is caused by the power of the super-

ego.  With  the  depersonalization  of  the  parental  agency  from  which

castration was feared, the danger becomes less defined. Castration

anxiety develops into moral anxiety - social anxiety - and it is not so

easy now to know what the anxiety is about. The formula, ‘separation

and expulsion from the horde’, only applies to that later portion of the

super-ego which has been formed on the basis of social prototypes,

not  to  the  nucleus  of  the  super-ego,  which  corresponds  to  the

introjected parental agency. Putting it more generally, what the ego

regards as the danger and responds to with an anxiety-signal is that

the super-ego should be angry with it or punish it or cease to love it.

The final transformation which the fear of the super-ego undergoes is,

it seems to me, the fear of death (or fear for life) which is a fear of the

super-ego projected on to the powers of destiny. 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4295

 

   At one time I attached some importance to the view that what was

used  as  a  discharge  of  anxiety  was  the  cathexis  which  had  been

withdrawn in the process of repression. To-day this seems to me of

scarcely any interest. The reason for this is that whereas I formerly

believed that anxiety invariably arose automatically by an economic

process, my present conception of anxiety as a signal given by the

ego in order to affect the pleasure-unpleasure agency does away with

the necessity of considering the economic factor. Of course there is

nothing to be said against the idea that it is precisely the energy that

has been liberated by being withdrawn through repression which is

used  by  the  ego  to  arouse  the  affect;  but  it  is  no  longer  of  any

importance which portion of energy is employed for this purpose.

   This new view of things calls for an examination of another assertion

of mine - namely, that the ego is the actual seat of anxiety. I think this

proposition  still  holds  good.  There  is  no  reason  to  assign  any

manifestation  of  anxiety  to  the  super-ego;  while  the  expression

‘anxiety of the id’ would stand in need of correction, though rather as

to its form than its substance. Anxiety is an affective state and as such

can, of course, only be felt by the ego. The id cannot have anxiety as

the  ego  can;  for  it  is  not  an  organization  and  cannot  make  a

judgement about situations of danger. On the other hand it very often

happens that processes take place or begin to take place in the id

which cause the ego to produce anxiety. Indeed, it is probable that the

earliest repressions as well as most of the later ones are motivated by

an ego-anxiety of this sort in regard to particular processes in the id.

Here again we are rightly distinguishing between two cases: the case

in which something occurs in the id which activates one of the danger-

situations for the ego and induces the latter to give the anxiety-signal

for  inhibition  to  take  place,  and  the  case  in  which  a  situation

analogous  to  the  trauma  of  birth  is  established  in  the  id  and  an

automatic reaction of anxiety ensues. The two cases may be brought

closer together if it is pointed out that the second case corresponds tothe  earliest  and  original  danger-situation,  while  the  first  case

corresponds to any one of the later determinants of anxiety that have

been derived from it; or, as applied to the disorders which we in fact

come across, that the second case is operative in the aetiology of the

‘actual’  neuroses,  while  the  first  remains  typical  for  that  of  the

psychoneuroses.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4296

 

   We see, then, that it is not so much a question of taking back our

earlier  findings  as  of  bringing  them  into  line  with  more  recent

discoveries. It is still an undeniable fact that in sexual abstinence, in

improper  interference  with  the  course  of  sexual  excitation  or  if  the

latter is diverted from being worked over psychically, anxiety arises

directly out of libido; in other words, that the ego is reduced to a state

of helplessness in the face of an excessive tension due to need, as it

was in the situation of birth, and that anxiety is then generated. Here

once more, though the matter is of little importance, it is very possible

that what finds discharge in the generating of anxiety is precisely the

surplus  of  unutilized  libido.  As  we  know,  a  psychoneurosis  is

especially liable to develop on the basis of an ‘actual’ neurosis. This

looks as though the ego were attempting to save itself from anxiety,

which it has learned to keep in suspension for a while, and to bind it

by the formation of symptoms. Analysis of the traumatic war neuroses

- a term which, incidentally, covers a great variety of disorders - would

probably  have  shown  that  a  number  of  them  possess  some

characteristics of the ‘actual’ neuroses.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4297

 

   In describing the evolution of the various danger-situations from their

prototype, the act of birth, I have had no intention of asserting that

every later determinant of anxiety completely invalidates the preceding

one. It is true that, as the development of the ego goes on, the earlierdanger-situations tend to lose their force and to be set aside, so that

we  might  say  that  each  period  of  the  individual’s  life  has  its

appropriate  determinant  of  anxiety.  Thus  the  danger  of  psychical

helplessness  is  appropriate  to  the  period  of  life  when  his  ego  is

immature; the danger of loss of object, to early childhood when he is

still  dependent  on  others;  the  danger  of  castration,  to  the  phallic

phase;  and  the  fear  of  his  super-ego,  to  the  latency  period.

Nevertheless, all these danger-situations and determinants of anxiety

can  persist  side  by  side  and  cause  the  ego  to  react  to  them  with

anxiety at a period later than the appropriate one; or, again, several of

them  can  come  into  operation  at  the  same  time.  It  is  possible,

moreover, that there is a fairly close relationship between the danger-

situation that is operative and the form taken by the ensuing neurosis.¹

 

   ¹ Since the differentiation of the ego and the id, our interest in the problems of repression,

too, was bound to receive a fresh impetus. Up till then we had been content to confine our
interest to those aspects of repression which concerned the ego - the keeping away from
consciousness and from motility, and the formation of substitutes (symptoms). With regard to
the repressed instinctual impulses themselves, we assumed that they remained unaltered in
the  unconscious  for  an  indefinite  length  of  time.  But  now  our  interest  is  turned  to  the
vicissitudes of the repressed and we begin to suspect that it is not self-evident, perhaps not
even usual, that those impulses should remain unaltered and unalterable in this way. There is
no doubt that the original impulses have been inhibited and deflected from their aim through
repression. But has the portion of them in the unconscious maintained itself and been proof
against the influences of life that tend to alter and depreciate them? In other words, do the old
wishes, about whose former existence analysis tells us, still exist? The answer seems ready
to  hand  and  certain.  It  is  that  the  old,  repressed  wishes  must  still  be  present  in  the
unconscious since we still find their derivatives, the symptoms, in operation. But this answer is
not sufficient. It does not enable us to decide between two possibilities: either that the old wish
is now operating only through its derivatives, having transferred the whole of its cathectic
energy to them, or that it is itself still in existence too. If its fate has been to exhaust itself in
cathecting its derivatives, there is yet a third possibility. In the course of the neurosis it may
have become re-animated by regression, anachronistic though it may now be. These are no
idle speculations. There are many things about mental life, both normal and pathological,
which seem to call for the raising of such questions. In my paper, ‘The Dissolution of the
Oedipus  Complex’  (1924d),  I  had  occasion  to  notice  the  difference  between  the  mere
repression and the real removal of an old wishful impulse.
 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4298

 

   When, in an earlier part of this discussion, we found that the dangerof castration was of importance in more than one neurotic illness, we

put  ourselves  on  guard  against  overestimating  that  factor,  since  it

could not be a decisive one for the female sex, who are undoubtedly

more  subject  to  neuroses  than  men.  We  now  see  that  there  is  no

danger of our regarding castration anxiety as the sole motive force of

the  defensive  processes  which  lead  to  neurosis.  I  have  shown

elsewhere how little girls, in the course of their development, are led

into making a tender object-cathexis by their castration complex. It is

precisely in women that the danger situation of loss of object seems to

have remained the most effective. All we need to do is to make a

slight modification in our description of their determinant of anxiety, in

the sense that it is no longer a matter of feeling the want of, or actually

losing the object itself, but of losing the object’s love. Since there is no

doubt  that  hysteria  has  a  strong  affinity  with  femininity,  just  as

obsessional neurosis has with masculinity, it appears probable that, as

a determinant of anxiety, loss of love plays much the same part in

hysteria as the threat of castration does in phobias and fear of the

super-ego in obsessional neurosis.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4299

 

                                            IX

 

   What is now left for us is to consider the relationship between the

formation of symptoms and the generating of anxiety.

   There seem to be two very widely held opinions on this subject. One

is that anxiety is itself a symptom of neurosis. The other is that there is

a  much  more  intimate  relation  between  the  two.  According  to  the

second opinion, symptoms are only formed in order to avoid anxiety:

they bind the psychical energy which would otherwise be discharged

as anxiety. Thus anxiety would be the fundamental phenomenon and

main problem of neurosis.

   That this latter opinion is at least in part true is shown by some

striking  examples.  If  an  agoraphobic  patient  who  has  been

accompanied  into  the  street  is  left  alone  there,  he  will  produce  ananxiety  attack.  Or  if  an  obsessional  neurotic  is  prevented  from

washing his hands after having touched something, he will become a

prey to almost unbearable anxiety. It is plain, then, that the purpose

and the result of the imposed condition of being accompanied in the

street and the obsessional act of washing the hands were to obviate

outbreaks of anxiety of this kind. In this sense every inhibition which

the ego imposes on itself can be called a symptom.

   Since we have traced back the generating of anxiety to a situation of

danger, we shall prefer to say that symptoms are created in order to

remove  the  ego  from  a  situation  of  danger.  If  the  symptoms  are

prevented from being formed, the danger does in fact materialize; that

is, a situation analogous to birth is established in which the ego is

helpless in the face of a constantly increasing instinctual demand - the

earliest  and  original  determinant  of  anxiety.  Thus  in  our  view  the

relation  between  anxiety  and  symptom  is  less  close  than  was

supposed,  for  we  have  inserted  the  factor  of  the  danger-situation

between them. We can also add that the generating of anxiety sets

symptom formation going and is, indeed, a necessary prerequisite of

it. For if the ego did not arouse the pleasure-unpleasure agency by

generating anxiety, it would not obtain the power to arrest the process

which is preparing in the id and which threatens danger. There is in all

this an evident inclination to limit to a minimum the amount of anxiety

generated and to employ it only as a signal; for to do otherwise would

only  result  in  feeling  in  another  place  the  unpleasure  which  the

instinctual process was threatening to produce, and that would not be

a success from the standpoint of the pleasure principle, although it is

one that occurs often enough in the neuroses.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4300

 

   Symptom-formation, then, does in fact put an end to the danger-

situation. It has two aspects: one, hidden from view, brings about the

alteration in the id in virtue of which the ego is removed from danger;

the other, presented openly, shows what has been created in place of

the  instinctual  process  that  has  been  affected  -  namely,  thesubstitutive formation.

      It  would,  however,  be  more  correct  to  ascribe  to  the defensive

process what we have just said about symptom-formation and to use

the latter term as synonymous with substitute-formation. It will then be

clear that the defensive process is analogous to the flight by means of

which  the  ego  removes  itself  from  a  danger  that  threatens  it  from

outside.  The  defensive  process  is  an  attempt  at  flight  from  an

instinctual  danger.  An  examination  of  the  weak  points  in  this

comparison will make things clearer.

   One objection to it is that loss of an object (or loss of love on the part

of the object) and the threat of castration are just as much dangers

coming from outside as, let us say, a ferocious animal would be; they

are not instinctual dangers. Nevertheless, the two cases are not the

same. A wolf would probably attack us irrespectively of our behaviour

towards it; but the loved person would not cease to love us nor should

we be threatened with castration if we did not entertain certain feelings

and  intentions  within  us.  Thus  such  instinctual  impulses  are

determinants  of  external  dangers  and  so  become  dangerous  in

themselves; and we can now proceed against the external danger by

taking measures against the internal ones. In phobias of animals the

danger seems to be still felt entirely as an external one, just as it has

undergone an external displacement in the symptom. In obsessional

neuroses  the  danger  is  much  more  internalized.  That  portion  of

anxiety in regard to the super-ego which constitutes social anxiety still

represents  an  internal  substitute  for  an  external  danger,  while  the

other portion- moral anxiety - is already completely endopsychic.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4301

 

   Another objection is that in an attempt at flight from an impending

external danger all that the subject is doing is to increase the distance

between himself and what is threatening him. He is not preparing to

defend himself against it or attempting to alter anything about it, as

would be the case if he attacked the wolf with a stick or shot at it with

a gun. But the defensive process seems to do something more thanwould  correspond  to  an  attempt  at  flight.  It  joins  issue  with  the

threatening instinctual process and somehow suppresses it or deflects

it from its aims and thus renders it innocuous. This objection seems

unimpeachable and must be given due weight. I think it is probable

that there are some defensive processes which can truly be likened to

an attempt at flight, while in others the ego takes a much more active

line  of  self-protection  and  initiates  vigorous  counter-measures.  But

perhaps the whole analogy between defence and flight is invalidated

by the fact that both the ego and the instinct in the id are parts of the

same organization, not separate entities like the wolf and the child, so

that  any  kind  of  behaviour  on  the  part  of  the  ego  will  result  in  an

alteration in the instinctual process as well.

   This study of the determinants of anxiety has, as it were, shown the

defensive behaviour of the ego transfigured in a rational light. Each

situation  of  danger  corresponds  to  a  particular  period  of  life  or  a

particular developmental phase of the mental apparatus and appears

to  be  justifiable  for  it.  In  early  infancy  the  individual  is  really  not

equipped to master psychically the large sums of excitation that reach

him whether from without or from within. Again, at a certain period of

life  his  most  important  interest  really  is  that  the  people  he  is

dependent on should not withdraw their loving care of him. Later on in

his boyhood, when he feels that his father is a powerful rival in regard

to his mother and becomes aware of his own aggressive inclinations

towards him and of his sexual intentions towards his mother, he really

is justified in being afraid of his father; and his fear of being punished

by him can find expression through phylogenetic reinforcement in the

fear of being castrated. Finally, as he enters into social relationships, it

really is necessary for him to be afraid of his super-ego, to have a

conscience; and the absence of that factor would give rise to severe

conflicts, dangers and so on.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4302

 

   But this last point raises a fresh problem. Instead of the affect of

anxiety let us take, for a moment, another affect - that of pain, forinstance. It seems quite normal that at four years of age a girl should

weep painfully if her doll is broken; or at six, if her governess reproves

her; or at sixteen, if she is slighted by her young man; or at twenty-

five, perhaps, if a child of her own dies. Each of these determinants of

pain has its own time and each passes away when that time is over.

Only the final and definitive determinants remain throughout life. We

should think it strange if this same girl, after she had grown to be a

wife  and  mother,  were  to  cry  over  some  worthless  trinket  that  had

been damaged. Yet that is how the neurotic behaves. Although all the

agencies for mastering stimuli have long ago been developed within

wide  limits  in  his  mental  apparatus,  and  although  he  is  sufficiently

grown up to satisfy most of his needs for himself and has long ago

learnt  that  castration  is  no  longer  practised  as  a  punishment,  he

nevertheless behaves as though the old danger-situations still existed,

and keeps hold of all the earlier determinants of anxiety.

   Why this should be so calls for a rather long reply. First of all, we

must sift the facts. In a great number of cases the old determinants of

anxiety do really lapse, after having produced neurotic reactions. The

phobias of very young children, fears of being alone or in the dark or

with strangers - phobias which can almost be called normal - usually

pass off later on; the child ‘grows out of them’, as we say about some

other disturbances of childhood. Animal phobias, which are of such

frequent  occurrence,  undergo  the  same  fate  and  many  conversion

hysterias of early years find no continuation in later life. Ceremonial

actions appear extremely often in the latency period, but only a very

small  percentage  of  them  develop  later  into  a  full  obsessional

neurosis. In general, so far as we can tell from our observations of

town  children  belonging  to  the  white  races  and  living  according  to

fairly  high  cultural  standards,  the  neuroses  of  childhood  are  in  the

nature of regular episodes in a child’s development, although too little

attention is still being paid to them. Signs of childhood neuroses can

be detected in all adult neurotics without exception; but by no means

all children who show those signs become neurotic in later life. It must

be, therefore, that certain determinants of anxiety are relinquished and

certain  danger-situations  lose  their  significance  as  the  individual

becomes  more  mature.  Moreover,  some  of  these  danger-situations

manage to survive into later times by modifying their determinants ofanxiety so as to bring them up to date. Thus, for instance, a man may

retain his fear of castration in the guise of a syphilidophobia, after he

has come to know that it is no longer customary to castrate people for

indulging  their  sexual  lusts,  but  that,  on  the  other  hand,  severe

diseases may overtake anyone who thus gives way to his instincts.

Other  determinants  of  anxiety,  such  as  fear  of  the  super-ego,  are

destined not to disappear at all but to accompany people throughout

their lives. In that case the neurotic will differ from the normal person

in that his reactions to the dangers in question will he unduly strong.

Finally, being grown-up affords no absolute protection against a return

of the original traumatic anxiety-situation. Each individual has in all

probability  a  limit  beyond  which  his  mental  apparatus  fails  in  its

function of mastering the quantities of excitation which require to be

disposed of.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4303

 

   These minor rectifications cannot in any way alter the fact which is

here under discussion, that a great many people remain infantile in

their behaviour in regard to danger and do not overcome determinants

of anxiety which have grown out of date. To deny this would be to

deny the existence of neurosis, for it is precisely such people whom

we call neurotics. But how is this possible? Why are not all neuroses

episodes in the development of the individual which come to a close

when  the  next  phase  is  reached?  Whence  comes  the  element  of

persistence  in  these  reactions  to  danger?  Why  does  the  affect  of

anxiety alone seem to enjoy the advantage over all other affects of

evoking  reactions  which  are  distinguished  from  the  rest  in  being

abnormal and which, through their inexpediency, run counter to the

movement of life? In other words, we have once more come unawares

upon  the  riddle  which  has  so  often  confronted  us:  whence  does

neurosis come - what is its ultimate, its own peculiar raison d’être?

After tens of years of psycho-analytic labours, we are as much in the

dark about this problem as we were at the start.

                           Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4304

 

                                            X

 

      Anxiety  is  the  reaction  to  danger.  One  cannot,  after  all,  help

suspecting that the reason why the affect of anxiety occupies a unique

position  in  the  economy  of  the  mind  has  something  to  do  with  the

essential  nature  of  danger.  Yet  dangers  are  the  common  lot  of

humanity; they are the same for everyone. What we need and cannot

lay our finger on is some factor which will explain why some people

are able to subject the affect of anxiety, in spite of its peculiar quality,

to the normal workings of the mind, or which decides who is doomed

to come to grief over that task. Two attempts to find a factor of this

kind have been made; and it is natural that such efforts should meet

with  a  sympathetic  reception,  since  they  promise  help  to  meet  a

tormenting  need.  The  two  attempts  in  question  are  mutually

complementary; they approach the problem at opposite ends. The first

was made by Alfred Adler more than ten years ago. His contention,

reduced to its essence, was that the people who came to grief over

the task set them by danger were those who were too greatly impeded

by some organic inferiority. If it were true that simplex sigillum veri, we

should welcome such a solution as a deliverance. But on the contrary,

our critical studies of the last ten years have effectively demonstrated

the  total  inadequacy  of  such  an  explanation  -  an  explanation,

moreover, which sets aside the whole wealth of material that has been

discovered by psycho-analysis.

   The second attempt was made by Otto Rank in 1923 in his book,

The Trauma of Birth. It would be unjust to put his attempt on the same

level as Adler’s except in this single point which concerns us here, for

it remains on psycho-analytic ground and pursues a psycho-analytic

line of thought, so that it may be accepted as a legitimate endeavour

to solve the problems of analysis. In this matter of the relation of the

individual to danger Rank moves away from the question of organic

defect in the individual and concentrates on the variable degree of

intensity of the danger. The process of birth is the first situation of

danger, and the economic upheaval which it produces becomes theprototype of the reaction of anxiety. We have already traced the line of

development  which  connects  this  first  danger-situation  and

determinant of anxiety with all the later ones, and we have seen that

they all retain a common quality in so far as they signify in a certain

sense a separation from the mother - at first only in a biological sense,

next as a direct loss of object and later as a loss of object incurred

indirectly.  The  discovery  of  this  extensive  concatenation  is  an

undoubted  merit  of  Rank’s  construction.  Now  the  trauma  of  birth

overtakes each individual with a different degree of intensity, and the

violence of his anxiety-reaction varies with the strength of the trauma;

and  it  is  the  initial  amount  of  anxiety  generated  in  him  which,

according to Rank, decides whether he will ever learn to control it -

whether he will become neurotic or normal.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4305

 

   It is not our business to criticize Rank’s hypothesis in detail here. We

have only to consider whether it helps to solve our particular problem.

His formula - that those people become neurotic in whom the trauma

of birth was so strong that they have never been able completely to

abreact it - is highly disputable from a theoretical point of view. We do

not  rightly  know  what  is  meant  by  abreacting  the  trauma.  Taken

literally, it implies that the more frequently and the more intensely a

neurotic person reproduces the affect of anxiety the more closely will

he  approach  to  mental  health  -  an  untenable  conclusion.  It  was

because  it  did  not  tally  with  the  facts  that  I  gave  up  the  theory  of

abreaction which had played such a large part in the cathartic method.

To lay so much stress, too, on the variability in the strength of the birth

trauma  is  to  leave  no  room  for  the  legitimate  claims  of  hereditary

constitution as an aetiological factor. For this variability is an organic

factor  which  operates  in  an  accidental  fashion  in  relation  to  the

constitution and is itself dependent on many influences which might be

called accidental - as, for instance, on timely assistance in child-birth.

Rank’s  theory  completely  ignores  constitutional  factors  as  well  as

phylogenetic ones. If, however, we were to try to find a place for theconstitutional factor by qualifying his statement with the proviso, let us

say, that what is really important is the extent to which the individual

reacts to the variable intensity of the trauma of birth, we should be

depriving his theory of its significance and should be relegating the

new factor introduced by him to a position of minor importance: the

factor  which  decided  whether  a  neurosis  should  supervene  or  not

would lie in a different, and once more in an unknown, field.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4306

 

   Moreover, the fact that while man shares the process of birth with

the  other  mammals  he  alone  has  the  privilege  over  them  of

possessing a special disposition to neurosis is hardly favourable to

Rank’s theory. But the main objection to it is that it floats in the air

instead  of  being  based  upon  ascertained  observations.  No  body  of

evidence has been collected to show that difficult and protracted birth

does in fact coincide with the development of a neurosis, or even that

children  so  born  exhibit  the  phenomena  of  early  infantile

apprehensiveness more strongly and over a longer period than other

children. It might be rejoined that induced labour and births that are

easy  for  the  mother  may  possibly  involve  a  severe  trauma  for  the

child.  But  we  can  still  point  out  that  births  which  lead  to  asphyxia

would  be  bound  to  give  clear  evidence  of  the  results  which  are

supposed  to  follow.  It  should  be  one  of  the  advantages  of  Rank’s

aetiological theory that it postulates a factor whose existence can be

verified by observation. And so long as no such attempt at verification

has been made it is impossible to assess the theory’s value.

   On the other hand I cannot identify myself with the view that Rank’s

theory contradicts the aetiological importance of the sexual instincts

as  hitherto  recognized  by  psycho-analysis.  For  his  theory  only  has

reference to the individual’s relation to the danger-situation, so that it

leaves it perfectly open to us to assume that if a person has not been

able to master his first dangers he is bound to come to grief as well in

later  situations  involving  sexual  danger  and  thus  be  driven  into  a

neurosis.      I  do  not  believe,  therefore,  that  Rank’s  attempt  has  solved  the

problem of the causation of neurosis; nor do I believe that we can say

as  yet  how  much  it  may  nevertheless  have contributed  to  such  a

solution.  If  an  investigation  into  the  effects  of  difficult  birth  on  the

disposition to neurosis should yield negative results, we shall rate the

value of his contribution low. It is to be feared that our need to find a

single,  tangible  ‘ultimate  cause’  of  neurotic  illness  will  remain

unsatisfied. The ideal solution, which medical men no doubt still yearn

for, would be to discover some bacillus which could be isolated and

bred in a pure culture and which, when injected into anyone, would

invariably  produce  the  same  illness;  or,  to  put  it  rather  less

extravagantly,  to  demonstrate  the  existence  of  certain  chemical

substances  the  administration  of  which  would  bring  about  or  cure

particular neuroses. But the probability of a solution of this kind seems

slight.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4307

 

   Psycho-analysis leads to less simple and satisfactory conclusions.

What I have to say in this connection has long been familiar and I

have nothing new to add. If the ego succeeds in protecting itself from

a dangerous instinctual impulse, through, for instance, the process of

repression, it has certainly inhibited and damaged the particular part of

the  id  concerned;  but  it  has  at  the  same  time  given  it  some

independence and has renounced some of its own sovereignty. This is

inevitable from the nature of repression, which is, fundamentally, an

attempt at flight. The repressed is now, as it were, an outlaw; it is

excluded from the great organization of the ego and is subject only to

the  laws  which  govern  the  realm  of  the  unconscious.  If,  now,  the

danger-situation changes so that the ego has no reason for fending off

a  new  instinctual  impulse  analogous  to  the  repressed  one,  the

consequence of the restriction of the ego which has taken place will

become  manifest.  The  new  impulse  will  run  its  course  under  an

automatic influence - or, as I should prefer to say, under the influence

of the compulsion to repeat. It will follow the same path as the earlier,repressed  impulse,  as  though  the  danger-situation  that  had  been

overcome still existed. The fixating factor in repression, then, is the

unconscious id’s compulsion to repeat - a compulsion which in normal

circumstances is only done away with by the freely mobile function of

the  ego.  The  ego  may  occasionally  manage  to  break  down  the

barriers  of  repression  which  it  has  itself  put  up  and  to  recover  its

influence over the instinctual impulse and direct the course of the new

impulse in accordance with the changed danger-situation. But in point

of fact the ego very seldom succeeds in doing this: it cannot undo its

repressions. It is possible that the way the struggle will go depends

upon  quantitative  relations.  In  some  cases  one  has  the  impression

that the outcome is an enforced one: the regressive attraction exerted

by the repressed impulse and the strength of the repression are so

great that the new impulse has no choice but to obey the compulsion

to repeat. In other cases we perceive a contribution from another play

of  forces:  the  attraction  exerted  by  the  repressed  prototype  is

reinforced by a repulsion coming from the direction of difficulties in

real life which stand in the way of any different course that might be

taken by the new instinctual impulse.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4308

 

   That this is a correct account of fixation upon repression and of the

retention of danger-situations that are no longer present-day ones is

confirmed  by  the  fact  of  analytic  therapy  -  a  fact  which  is  modest

enough in itself but which can hardly be overrated from a theoretical

point of view. When, in analysis, we have given the ego assistance

which is able to put it in a position to lift its repressions, it recovers its

power over the repressed id and can allow the instinctual impulses to

run  their  course  as  though  the  old  situations  of  danger  no  longer

existed. What we can do in this way tallies with what can be achieved

in other fields of medicine; for as a rule our therapy must be content

with  bringing  about  more  quickly,  more  reliably  and  with  less

expenditure  of  energy  than  would  otherwise  be  the  case  the  good

result which in favourable circumstances would have occurred of itself.      We  see  from  what  has  been  said  that quantitative–  relations  -

relations  which  are  not  directly  observable  but  which  can  only  be

inferred - are what determine whether or not old situations of danger

shall be preserved, repressions on the part of the ego maintained and

childhood neuroses find a continuation. Among the factors that play a

part in the causation of neuroses and that have created the conditions

under which the forces of the mind are pitted against one another,

three  emerge  into  prominence:  a  biological,  a  phylogenetic  and  a

purely psychological factor.

   The biological factor is the long period of time during which the

young  of  the  human  species  is  in  a  condition  of  helplessness  and

dependence.  Its  intra-uterine  existence  seems  to  be  short  in

comparison with that of most animals, and it is sent into the world in a

less finished state. As a result, the influence of the real external world

upon it is intensified and an early differentiation between the ego and

the id is promoted. Moreover, the dangers of the external world have a

greater importance for it, so that the value of the object which can

alone protect it against them and take the place of its former intra-

uterine  life  is  enormously  enhanced.  The  biological  factor,  then,

establishes the earliest situations of danger and creates the need to

be loved which will accompany the child through the rest of its life.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4309

 

   The existence of the second, phylogenetic, factor, is based only

upon  inference.  We  have  been  led  to  assume  its  existence  by  a

remarkable feature in the development of the libido. We have found

that the sexual life of man, unlike that of most of the animals nearly

related to him, does not make a steady advance from birth to maturity,

but that, after an early efflorescence up till the fifth year, it undergoes

a very decided interruption; and that it then starts on its course once

more at puberty, taking up again the beginnings broken off in early

childhood.  This  has  led  us  to  suppose  that  something  momentous

must have occurred in the vicissitudes of the human species which

has  left  behind  this  interruption  in  the  sexual  development  of  theindividual as a historical precipitate. This factor owes its pathogenic

significance to the fact that the majority of the instinctual demands of

this infantile sexuality are treated by the ego as dangers and fended

off as such, so that the later sexual impulses of puberty, which in the

natural  course  of  things  would  be  ego-syntonic,  run  the  risk  of

succumbing to the attraction of their infantile prototypes and following

them into repression. It is here that we come upon the most direct

aetiology of the neuroses. It is a curious thing that early contact with

the demands of sexuality should have a similar effect on the ego to

that produced by premature contact with the external world.

   The third, psychological, factor resides in a defect of our mental

apparatus which has to do precisely with its differentiation into an id

and an ego, and which is therefore also attributable ultimately to the

influence of the external world. In view of the dangers of reality, the

ego is obliged to guard against certain instinctual impulses in the id

and to treat them as dangers. But it cannot protect itself from internal

instinctual dangers as effectively as it can from some piece of reality

that is not part of itself. Intimately bound up with the id as it is, it can

only fend off an instinctual danger by restricting its own organization

and  by  acquiescing  in  the  formation  of  symptoms  in  exchange  for

having impaired the instinct. If the rejected instinct renews its attack,

the ego is overtaken by all those difficulties which are known to us as

neurotic ailments.

   Further than this, I believe, our knowledge of the nature and causes

of neurosis has not as yet been able to go.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4310

 

                                            XI

 

                                      ADDENDA

 

   In the course of this discussion various themes have had to be put

aside  before  they  had  been  fully  dealt  with.  I  have  brought  them

together in this chapter so that they may receive the attention theydeserve.

 

                                            A

 

                    MODIFICATIONS OF EARLIER VIEWS

 

 (a) Resistance and Anticathexis

   An important element in the theory of repression is the view that

repression  is  not  an  event  that  occurs  once  but  that  it  requires  a

permanent  expenditure.  If  this  expenditure  were  to  cease,  the

repressed impulse, which is being fed all the time from its sources,

would on the next occasion flow along the channels from which it had

been forced away, and the repression would either fail in its purpose

or would have to be repeated an indefinite number of times. Thus it is

because instincts are continuous in their nature that the ego has to

make its defensive action secure by a permanent expenditure. This

action  undertaken  to  protect  repression  is  observable  in  analytic

treatment  as resistance.  Resistance  presupposes  the  existence  of

what I have called anticathexis. An anticathexis of this kind is clearly

seen  in  obsessional  neurosis.  It  appears  there  in  the  form  of  an

alteration  of  the  ego,  as  a  reaction-formation  in  the  ego,  and  is

effected by the reinforcement of the attitude which is the opposite of

the instinctual trend that has to be repressed - as, for instance, in pity,

conscientiousness  and  cleanliness.  These  reaction-formations  of

obsessional neurosis are essentially exaggerations of the normal traits

of character which develop during the latency period. The presence of

an  anticathexis  in  hysteria  is  much  more  difficult  to  detect,  though

theoretically  it  is  equally  indispensable.  In  hysteria,  too,  a  certain

amount  of  alteration  of  the  ego  through  reaction-formation  is

unmistakable and in some circumstances becomes so marked that it

forces itself on our attention as the principal symptom. The conflict

due  to  ambivalence,  for  instance,  is  resolved  in  hysteria  by  this

means. The subject’s hatred of a person whom he loves is kept down

by  an  exaggerated  amount  of  tenderness  for  him  and

apprehensiveness  about  him.  But  the  difference  between  reaction-

formations in obsessional neurosis and in hysteria is that in the latter

they do not have the universality of a character-trait but are confinedto particular relationships. A hysterical woman, for instance, may be

specially  affectionate  with  her  own  children  whom  at  bottom  she

hates; but she will not on that account be more loving in general than

other  women  or  even  more  affectionate  to  other  children.  The

reaction-formation of hysteria clings tenaciously to a particular object

and never spreads over into a general disposition of the ego, whereas

what is characteristic of obsessional neurosis is precisely a spreading-

over  of  this  kind  -  a  loosening  of  relations  to  the  object  and  a

facilitation of displacement in the choice of object.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4311

 

   There is another kind of anticathexis, however, which seems more

suited  to  the  peculiar  character  of  hysteria.  A  repressed  instinctual

impulse can be activated (newly cathected) from two directions: from

within, through reinforcement from its internal sources of excitation,

and from without, through the perception of an object that it desires.

The  hysterical  anticathexis  is  mainly  directed  outwards,  against

dangerous perceptions. It takes the form of a special kind of vigilance

which, by means of restrictions of the ego, causes situations to be

avoided  that  would  entail  such  perceptions,  or,  if  they  do  occur,

manages to withdraw the subject’s attention from them. Some French

analysts,  in  particular  Laforgue,  have  recently  given  this  action  of

hysteria  the  special  name  of  ‘scotomization’.  This  technique  of

anticathexis is still more noticeable in the phobias, whose interest is

concentrated on removing the subject ever further from the possibility

of the occurrence of the feared perception. The fact that anticathexis

has an opposite direction in hysteria and the phobias from what it has

in obsessional neurosis - though the distinction is not an absolute one

-  seems  to  be  significant.  It  suggests  that  there  is  an  intimate

connection between repression and external anticathexis on the one

hand and between regression and internal anticathexis (i.e. alteration

in  the  ego  through  reaction-formation)  on  the  other.  The  task  of

defence against a dangerous perception is, incidentally, common to all

neuroses.  Various  commands  and  prohibitions  in  obsessionalneurosis have the same end in view.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4312

 

   We showed on an earlier occasion that the resistance that has to be

overcome  in  analysis  proceeds  from  the  ego,  which  clings  to  its

anticathexes. It is hard for the ego to direct its attention to perceptions

and  ideas  which  it  has  up  till  now  made  a  rule  of  avoiding,  or  to

acknowledge  as  belonging  to  itself  impulses  that  are  the  complete

opposite  of  those  which  it  knows  as  its  own.  Our  fight  against

resistance  in  analysis  is  based  upon  this  view  of  the  facts.  If  the

resistance  is  itself  unconscious,  as  so  often  happens  owing  to  its

connection with the repressed material, we make it conscious. If it is

conscious, or when it has become conscious, we bring forward logical

arguments against it; we promise the ego rewards and advantages if it

will give up its resistance. There can be no doubt or mistake about the

existence of this resistance on the part of the ego. But we have to ask

ourselves whether it covers the whole state of affairs in analysis. For

we  find  that  even  after  the  ego  has  decided  to  relinquish  its

resistances  it  still  has  difficulty  in  undoing  the  repressions;  and  we

have  called  the  period  of  strenuous  effort  which  follows  after  its

praiseworthy decision, the phase of ‘working-through’. The dynamic

factor  which  makes  a  working-through  of  this  kind  necessary  and

comprehensible  is  not  far  to  seek.  It  must  be  that  after  the  ego’s

resistance has been removed the power of the compulsion to repeat -

the  attraction  exerted  by  the  unconscious  prototype  upon  the

repressed  instinctual  process  -  has  still  to  be  overcome.  There  is

nothing to be said against describing this factor as the resistance of

the  unconscious.  There  is  no  need  to  be  discouraged  by  these

emendations. They are to be welcomed if they add something to our

knowledge, and they are no disgrace to us so long as they enrich

rather than invalidate our earlier views - by limiting some statement,

perhaps, that was too general or by enlarging some idea that was too

narrowly formulated.

                           Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4313

 

   It must not be supposed that these emendations provide us with a

complete  survey  of  all  the  kinds  of  resistance  that  are  met  with  in

analysis. Further investigation of the subject shows that the analyst

has to combat no less than five kinds of resistance, emanating from

three directions - the ego, the id and the super-ego. The ego is the

source of three of these, each differing in its dynamic nature. The first

of these three ego-resistances is the repression resistance, which we

have already discussed above and about which there is least new to

be added. Next there is the transference resistance, which is of the

same  nature  but  which  has  different  and  much  clearer  effects  in

analysis, since it succeeds in establishing a relation to the analytic

situation  or  the  analyst  himself  and  thus  re-animating  a  repression

which should only have been recollected. The third resistance, though

also an ego-resistance, is of quite a different nature. It proceeds from

the gain  from  illness  and  is  based  upon  an  assimilation  of  the

symptom into the ego. It represents an unwillingness to renounce any

satisfaction or relief that has been obtained. The fourth variety, arising

from  the id,  is  the  resistance  which,  as  we  have  just  seen,

necessitates ‘working-through’. The fifth, coming from the super-ego

and the last to be discovered, is also the most obscure though not

always the least powerful one. It seems to originate from the sense of

guilt or the need for punishment; and it opposes every move towards

success,  including,  therefore,  the  patient’s  own  recovery  through

analysis.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4314

 

(b) Anxiety from Transformation of Libido

      The  view  of  anxiety  which  I  have  put  forward  in  these  pages

diverges  somewhat  from  the  one  I  have  hitherto  thought  correct.

Formerly I regarded anxiety as a general reaction of the ego under

conditions of unpleasure. I always sought to justify its appearance on

economic  grounds  and  I  assumed,  on  the  strength  of  myinvestigations into the ‘actual’ neuroses, that libido (sexual excitation)

which was rejected or not utilized by the ego found direct discharge in

the form of anxiety. It cannot be denied that these various assertions

did not go very well together, or at any rate did not necessarily follow

from one another. Moreover, they gave the impression of there being

a specially intimate connection between anxiety and libido and this did

not  accord  with  the  general  character  of  anxiety  as  a  reaction  to

unpleasure.

   The objection to this view arose from our coming to regard the ego

as the sole seat of anxiety. It was one of the results of the attempt at a

structural division of the mental apparatus which I made in The Ego

and the Id.  Whereas  the  old  view  made  it  natural  to  suppose  that

anxiety  arose  from  the  libido  belonging  to  the  repressed  instinctual

impulses, the new one, on the contrary, made the ego the source of

anxiety. Thus it is a question of instinctual (id-) anxiety or ego-anxiety.

Since  the  energy  which  the  ego  employs  is  desexualized,  the  new

view also tended to weaken the close connection between anxiety and

libido. I hope I have at least succeeded in making the contradiction

plain and in giving a clear idea of the point in doubt.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4315

 

   Rank’s contention - which was originally my own -, that the affect of

anxiety is a consequence of the event of birth and a repetition of the

situation  then  experienced,  obliged  me  to  review  the  problem  of

anxiety once more. But I could make no headway with his idea that

birth is a trauma, states of anxiety a reaction of discharge to it and all

subsequent affects of anxiety an attempt to ‘abreact’ it more and more

completely. I was obliged to go back from the anxiety reaction to the

situation of danger that lay behind it. The introduction of this element

opened  up  new  aspects  of  the  question.  Birth  was  seen  to  be  the

prototype of all later situations of danger which overtook the individual

under the new conditions arising from a changed mode of life and a

growing mental development. On the other hand its own significance

was reduced to this prototypic relationship to danger. The anxiety feltat  birth  became  the  prototype  of  an  affective  state  which  had  to

undergo the same vicissitudes as the other affects. Either the state of

anxiety reproduced itself automatically in situations analogous to the

original situation and was thus an inexpedient form of reaction instead

of an expedient one as it had been in the first situation of danger; or

the  ego  acquired  power  over  this  affect,  reproduced  it  on  its  own

initiative, and employed it as a warning of danger and as a means of

setting the pleasure-unpleasure mechanism in motion. We thus gave

the  biological  aspect  of  the  anxiety  affect  its  due  importance  by

recognizing anxiety as the general reaction to situations of danger;

while we endorsed the part played by the ego as the seat of anxiety by

allocating to it the function of producing the anxiety affect according to

its needs. Thus we attributed two modes of origin to anxiety in later

life. One was involuntary, automatic and always justified on economic

grounds, and arose whenever a danger situation analogous to birth

had established itself. The other was produced by the ego as soon as

a situation of this kind merely threatened to occur, in order to call for

its avoidance. In the second case the ego subjects itself to anxiety as

a sort of inoculation, submitting to a slight attack of the illness in order

to escape its full strength. It vividly imagines the danger situation, as it

were,  with  the  unmistakable  purpose  of  restricting  that  distressing

experience to a mere indication, a signal. We have already seen in

detail how the various situations of danger arise one after the other,

retaining at the same time a genetic connection.

      We  shall  perhaps  be  able  to  proceed  a  little  further  in  our

understanding of anxiety when we turn to the problem of the relation

between neurotic anxiety and realistic anxiety.

   Our former hypothesis of a direct transformation of libido into anxiety

possesses  less  interest  for  us  now  than  it  did.  But  if  we  do

nevertheless consider it, we shall have to distinguish different cases.

As regards anxiety evoked by the ego as a signal, it does not come

into  consideration;  nor  does  it,  therefore,  in  any  of  those  danger-

situations which move the ego to bring on repression. The libidinal

cathexis of the repressed instinctual impulse is employed otherwise

than in being transformed into anxiety and discharged as such - as is

most clearly seen in conversion hysteria. On the other hand, further

enquiry into the question of the danger-situation will bring to our noticean instance of the production of anxiety which will, I think, have to be

accounted for in a different way.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4316

 

(c) Repression and Defence

   In the course of discussing the problem of anxiety I have revived a

concept or, to put it more modestly, a term, of which I made exclusive

use thirty years ago when I first began to study the subject but which I

later abandoned. I refer to the term ‘defensive process’.¹ I afterwards

replaced it by the word ‘repression’, but the relation between the two

remained  uncertain.  It  will  be  an  undoubted  advantage,  I  think,  to

revert to the old concept of ‘defence’, provided we employ it explicitly

as a general designation for all the techniques which the ego makes

use of in conflicts which may lead to a neurosis, while we retain the

word ‘repression’ for the special method of defence which the line of

approach taken by our investigations made us better acquainted with

in the first instance.

   Even a purely terminological innovation ought to justify its adoption;

it  ought  to  reflect  some  new  point  of  view  or  some  extension  of

knowledge. The revival of the concept of defence and the restriction of

that of repression takes into account a fact which has long since been

known but which has received added importance owing to some new

discoveries. Our first observations of repression and of the formation

of symptoms were made in connection with hysteria. We found that

the  perceptual  content  of  exciting  experiences  and  the  ideational

content  of  pathogenic  structures  of  thought  were  forgotten  and

debarred  from  being  reproduced  in  memory,  and  we  therefore

concluded  that  the  keeping  away  from  consciousness  was  a  main

characteristic  of  hysterical  repression.  Later  on,  when  we  came  to

study  the  obsessional  neuroses,  we  found  that  in  that  illness

pathogenic occurrences are not forgotten. They remain conscious but

they are ‘isolated’ in some way that we cannot as yet grasp, so that

much  the  same  result  is  obtained  as  in  hysterical  amnesia.

Nevertheless the difference is great enough to justify the belief thatthe process by which instinctual demands are set aside in obsessional

neurosis  cannot  be  the  same  as  in  hysteria.  Further  investigations

have  shown  that  in  obsessional  neurosis  a  regression  of  the

instinctual  impulses  to  an  earlier  libidinal  stage  is  brought  about

through the opposition of the ego, and that this regression, although it

does  not  make  repression  unnecessary,  clearly  works  in  the  same

sense as repression. We have seen, too, that in obsessional neurosis

anticathexis,  which  is  also  presumably  present  in  hysteria,  plays  a

specially  large  part  in  protecting  the  ego  by  effecting  a  reactive

alteration in it. Our attention has, moreover, been drawn to a process

of  ‘isolation’  (whose  technique  cannot  as  yet  be  elucidated)  which

finds direct symptomatic manifestation, and to a procedure, that may

be  called  magical,  of  ‘undoing’  what  has  been  done  -  a  procedure

about whose defensive purpose there can be no doubt, but which has

no  longer  any  resemblance  to  the  process  of  ‘repression’.  These

observations provide good enough grounds for re-introducing the old

concept of defence, which can cover all these processes that have the

same purpose - namely, the protection of the ego against instinctual

demands - and for subsuming repression under it as a special case.

The importance of this nomenclature is heightened if we consider the

possibility  that  further  investigations  may  show  that  there  is  an

intimate connection between special forms of defence and particular

illnesses,  as,  for  instance,  between  repression  and  hysteria.  In

addition we may look forward to the possible discovery of yet another

important correlation. It may well be that before its sharp cleavage into

an ego and an id, and before the formation of a super-ego, the mental

apparatus  makes  use  of  different  methods  of  defence  from  those

which it employs after it has reached these stages of organization.

 

   ¹ Cf. ‘The Neuro-Psychoses of Defence’ (1894a).

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4317

 

                                            B

 

                SUPPLEMENTARY REMARKS ON ANXIETY 

   The affect of anxiety exhibits one or two features the study of which

promises  to  throw  further  light  on  the  subject.  Anxiety  has  an

unmistakable relation to expectation: it is anxiety about something. It

has a quality of indefiniteness and lack of object. In precise speech we

use  the  word  ‘fear’  rather  than  ‘anxiety’  if  it  has  found  an  object.

Moreover, in addition to its relation to danger, anxiety has a relation to

neurosis which we have long been trying to elucidate. The question

arises:  why  are  not  all  reactions  of  anxiety  neurotic  -  why  do  we

accept so many of them as normal? And finally the problem of the

difference  between  realistic  anxiety  and  neurotic  anxiety  awaits  a

thorough examination.

   To begin with the last problem. The advance we have made is that

we have gone behind reactions of anxiety to situations of danger. If we

do the same thing with realistic anxiety we shall have no difficulty in

solving  the  question.  Real  danger  is  a  danger  that  is  known,  and

realistic anxiety is anxiety about a known danger of this sort. Neurotic

anxiety is anxiety about an unknown danger. Neurotic danger is thus a

danger that has still to be discovered. Analysis has shown that it is an

instinctual danger. By bringing this danger which is not known to the

ego  into  consciousness,  the  analyst  makes  neurotic  anxiety  no

different from realistic anxiety, so that it can be dealt with in the same

way.

   There are two reactions to real danger. One is an affective reaction,

an outbreak of anxiety. The other is a protective action. The same will

presumably  be  true  of  instinctual  danger.  We  know  how  the  two

reactions  can  co-operate  in  an  expedient  way,  the  one  giving  the

signal for the other to appear. But we also know that they can behave

in an inexpedient way: paralysis from anxiety may set in, and the one

reaction spread at the cost of the other.

   In some cases the characteristics of realistic anxiety and neurotic

anxiety are mingled. The danger is known and real but the anxiety in

regard to it is over-great, greater than seems proper to us. It is this

surplus of anxiety which betrays the presence of a neurotic element.

Such cases, however, introduce no new principle; for analysis shows

that to the known real danger an unknown instinctual one is attached.

                           Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4318

 

   We can find out still more about this if, not content with tracing

anxiety back to danger, we go on to enquire what the essence and

meaning of a danger-situation is. Clearly, it consists in the subject’s

estimation  of  his  own  strength  compared  to  the  magnitude  of  the

danger and in his admission of helplessness in the face of it - physical

helplessness if the danger is real and psychical helplessness if it is

instinctual. In doing this he will be guided by the actual experiences he

has had. (Whether he is wrong in his estimation or not is immaterial

for the outcome.) Let us call a situation of helplessness of this kind

that  has  been  actually  experienced  a traumatic  situation.  We  shall

then have good grounds for distinguishing a traumatic situation from a

danger-situation.

   The individual will have made an important advance in his capacity

for self-preservation if he can foresee and expect a traumatic situation

of this kind which entails helplessness, instead of simply waiting for it

to happen. Let us call a situation which contains the determinant for

such an expectation a danger-situation. It is in this situation that the

signal of anxiety is given. The signal announces: ‘I am expecting a

situation of helplessness to set in’, or: ‘The present situation reminds

me of one of the traumatic experiences I have had before. Therefore I

will anticipate the trauma and behave as though it had already come,

while there is yet time to turn it aside.’ Anxiety is therefore on the one

hand an expectation of a trauma, and on the other a repetition of it in a

mitigated form. Thus the two features of anxiety which we have noted

have a different origin. Its connection with expectation belongs to the

danger-situation, whereas its indefiniteness and lack of object belong

to  the  traumatic  situation  of  helplessness  -  the  situation  which  is

anticipated in the danger-situation.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4319

 

   Taking this sequence, anxiety - danger - helplessness (trauma), wecan  now  summarize  what  has  been  said.  A  danger-situation  is  a

recognized, remembered, expected situation of helplessness. Anxiety

is  the  original  reaction  to  helplessness  in  the  trauma  and  is

reproduced later on in the danger-situation as a signal for help. The

ego, which experienced the trauma passively, now repeats it actively

in a weakened version, in the hope of being able itself to direct its

course. It is certain that children behave in this fashion towards every

distressing impression they receive, by reproducing it in their play. In

thus changing from passivity to activity they attempt to master their

experiences  psychically.  If  this  is  what  is  meant  by  ‘abreacting  a

trauma’ we can no longer have anything to urge against the phrase.

But  what  is  of  decisive  importance  is  the  first  displacement  of  the

anxiety-reaction from its origin in the situation of helplessness to an

expectation of that situation - that is, to the danger-situation. After that

come the later displacements, from the danger to the determinant of

the danger - loss of the object and the modifications of that loss with

which we are already acquainted.

   The undesirable result of ‘spoiling’ a small child is to magnify the

importance  of  the  danger  of  losing  the  object  (the  object  being  a

protection against every situation of helplessness) in comparison with

every other danger. It therefore encourages the individual to remain in

the  state  of  childhood,  the  period  of  life  which  is  characterized  by

motor and psychical helplessness.

   So far we have had no occasion to regard realistic anxiety in any

different light from neurotic anxiety. We know what the distinction is. A

real danger is a danger which threatens a person from an external

object,  and  a  neurotic  danger  is  one  which  threatens  him  from  an

instinctual demand. In so far as the instinctual demand is something

real,  his  neurotic  anxiety,  too,  can  be  admitted  to  have  a  realistic

basis.  We  have  seen  that  the  reason  why  there  seems  to  be  a

specially close connection between anxiety and neurosis is that the

ego defends itself against an instinctual danger with the help of the

anxiety reaction just as it does against an external real danger, but

that this line of defensive activity eventuates in a neurosis owing to an

imperfection  of  the  mental  apparatus.  We  have  also  come  to  the

conclusion  that  an  instinctual  demand  often  only  becomes  an

(internal) danger because its satisfaction would bring on an externaldanger - that is, because the internal danger represents an external

one.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4320

 

      On  the  other  hand,  the  external  (real)  danger  must  also  have

managed to become internalized if it is to be significant for the ego. It

must  have  been  recognized  as  related  to  some  situation  of

helplessness  that  has  been  experienced.¹  Man  seems  not  to  have

been endowed, or to have been endowed to only a very small degree,

with an instinctive recognition of the dangers that threaten him from

without.  Small  children  are  constantly  doing  things  which  endanger

their lives, and that is precisely why they cannot afford to be without a

protecting object. In relation to the traumatic situation, in which the

subject is helpless, external and internal dangers, real dangers and

instinctual demands converge. Whether the ego is suffering from a

pain which will not stop or experiencing an accumulation of instinctual

needs which cannot obtain satisfaction, the economic situation is the

same,  and  the  motor  helplessness  of  the  ego  finds  expression  in

psychical helplessness.

   In this connection the puzzling phobias of early childhood deserve to

be  mentioned  once  again.  We  have  been  able  to  explain  some  of

them, such as the fear of being alone or in the dark or with strangers,

as reactions to the danger of losing the object. Others, like the fear of

small animals, thunder storms, etc., might perhaps be accounted for

as  vestigial  traces  of  the  congenital  preparedness  to  meet  real

dangers which is so strongly developed in other animals. In man, only

that part of this archaic heritage is appropriate which has reference to

the loss of the object. If childhood phobias become fixated and grow

stronger and persist into later years, analysis shows that their content

has  become  associated  with  instinctual  demands  and  has  come  to

stand for internal dangers as well.

 

   ¹ It may quite often happen that although a danger-situation is correctly estimated in itself, a

certain  amount  of  instinctual  anxiety  is  added  to  the  realistic  anxiety.  In  that  case  the
instinctual demand before whose satisfaction the ego recoils is a masochistic one: the instinctof destruction directed against the subject himself. Perhaps an addition of this kind explains
cases in which reactions of anxiety are exaggerated, inexpedient or paralysing. Phobias of
heights (windows, towers, precipices and so on) may have some such origin. Their hidden
feminine significance is closely connected with masochism.
 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4321

 

                                            C

 

                      ANXIETY, PAIN AND MOURNING

 

   So little is known about the psychology of emotional processes that

the tentative remarks I am about to make on the subject may claim a

very  lenient  judgement.  The  problem  before  us  arises  out  of  the

conclusion we have reached that anxiety comes to be a reaction to the

danger of a loss of an object. Now we already know one reaction to

the loss of an object, and that is mourning. The question therefore is,

when  does  that  loss  lead  to  anxiety  and  when  to  mourning?  In

discussing the subject of mourning on a previous occasion I found that

there was one feature about it which remained quite unexplained. This

was  its  peculiar  painfulness.¹  And  yet  it  seems  self-evident  that

separation  from  an  object  should  be  painful.  Thus  the  problem

becomes  more  complicated:  when  does  separation  from  an  object

produce anxiety, when does it produce mourning and when does it

produce, it may be, only pain?

   Let me say at once that there is no prospect in sight of answering

these  questions.  We  must  content  ourselves  with  drawing  certain

distinctions and adumbrating certain possibilities.

   Our starting-point will again be the one situation which we believe

we understand - the situation of the infant when it is presented with a

stranger instead of its mother. It will exhibit the anxiety which we have

attributed to the danger of loss of object. But its anxiety is undoubtedly

more complicated than this and merits a more thorough discussion.

That it does have anxiety there can be no doubt; but the expression of

its face and its reaction of crying indicate that it is feeling pain as well.

Certain things seem to be joined together in it which will later on be

separated  out.  It  cannot  as  yet  distinguish  between  temporaryabsence and permanent loss. As soon as it loses sight of its mother it

behaves  as  if  it  were  never  going  to  see  her  again;  and  repeated

consoling experiences to the contrary are necessary before it learns

that her disappearance is usually followed by her re-appearance. Its

mother encourages this piece of knowledge which is so vital to it by

playing the familiar game of hiding her face from it with her hands and

then, to its joy, uncovering it again. In these circumstances it can, as it

were, feel longing unaccompanied by despair.

 

   ¹ ‘Mourning and Melancholia’ (1917e).

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4322

 

   In consequence of the infant’s misunderstanding of the facts, the

situation of missing its mother is not a danger-situation but a traumatic

one. Or, to put it more correctly, it is a traumatic situation if the infant

happens at the time to be feeling a need which its mother should be

the one to satisfy. It turns into a danger-situation if this need is not

present at the moment. Thus, the first determinant of anxiety, which

the ego itself introduces, is loss of perception of the object (which is

equated with loss of the object itself). There is as yet no question of

loss of love. Later on, experience teaches the child that the object can

be present but angry with it; and then loss of love from the object

becomes a new and much more enduring danger and determinant of

anxiety.

      The  traumatic  situation  of  missing  the  mother  differs  in  one

important  respect  from  the  traumatic  situation  of  birth.  At  birth  no

object existed and so no object could be missed. Anxiety was the only

reaction that occurred. Since then repeated situations of satisfaction

have created an object out of the mother; and this object, whenever

the infant feels a need, receives an intense cathexis which might be

described as a ‘longing’ one. It is to this new aspect of things that the

reaction of pain is referable. Pain is thus the actual reaction to loss of

object,  while  anxiety  is  the  reaction  to  the  danger  which  that  loss

entails and, by a further displacement, a reaction to the danger of the

loss of object itself.   We know very little about pain either. The only fact we are certain of

is  that  pain  occurs  in  the  first  instance  and  as  a  regular  thing

whenever a stimulus which impinges on the periphery breaks through

the devices of the protective shield against stimuli and proceeds to act

like a continuous instinctual stimulus, against which muscular action,

which  is  as  a  rule  effective  because  it  withdraws  the  place  that  is

being stimulated from the stimulus, is powerless. If the pain proceeds

not from a part of the skin but from an internal organ, the situation is

still  the  same.  All  that  has  happened  is  that  a  portion  of  the  inner

periphery  has  taken  the  place  of  the  outer  periphery.  The  child

obviously has occasion to undergo experiences of pain of this sort,

which are independent of its experiences of need. This determinant of

the generating of pain seems, however, to have very little similarity

with the loss of an object. And besides, the element which is essential

to pain, peripheral stimulation, is entirely absent in the child’s situation

of  longing.  Yet  it  cannot  be  for  nothing  that  the  common  usage  of

speech should have created the notion of internal, mental pain and

have  treated  the  feeling  of  loss  of  object  as  equivalent  to  physical

pain.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4323

 

   When there is physical pain, a high degree of what may be termed

narcissistic  cathexis  of  the  painful  place  occurs.  This  cathexis

continues to increase and tends, as it were, to empty the ego. It is well

known that when internal organs are giving us pain we receive spatial

and other presentations of parts of the body which are ordinarily not

represented at all in conscious ideation. Again, the remarkable fact

that, when there is a psychical diversion brought about by some other

interest, even the most intense physical pains fail to arise (I must not

say ‘remain unconscious’ in this case) can be accounted for by there

being a concentration of cathexis on the psychical representative of

the part of the body which is giving pain. I think it is here that we shall

find  the  point  of  analogy  which  has  made  it  possible  to  carry

sensations of pain over to the mental sphere. For the intense cathexisof  longing  which  is  concentrated  on  the  missed  or  lost  object  (a

cathexis which steadily mounts up because it cannot be appeased)

creates the same economic conditions as are created by the cathexis

of pain which is concentrated on the injured part of the body. Thus the

fact  of  the  peripheral  causation  of  physical  pain  can  be  left  out  of

account. The transition from physical pain to mental pain corresponds

to a change from narcissistic cathexis to object-cathexis. An object-

presentation which is highly cathected by instinctual need plays the

same role as a part of the body which is cathected by an increase of

stimulus.  The  continuous  nature  of  the  cathectic  process  and  the

impossibility  of  inhibiting  it  produce  the  same  state  of  mental

helplessness. If the feeling of unpleasure which then arises has the

specific character of pain (a character which cannot be more exactly

described) instead of manifesting itself in the reactive form of anxiety,

we  may  plausibly  attribute  this  to  a  factor  which  we  have  not

sufficiently made use of in our explanations - the high level of cathexis

and  ‘binding’  that  prevails  while  these  processes  which  lead  to  a

feeling of unpleasure take place.

 


                          Inhibitions, Symptoms And Anxiety

                                                                                      4324

 

   We know of yet another emotional reaction to the loss of an object,

and  that  is  mourning.  But  we  have  no  longer  any  difficulty  in

accounting  for  it.  Mourning  occurs  under  the  influence  of  reality-

testing;  for  the  latter  function  demands  categorically  from  the

bereaved  person  that  he  should  separate  himself  from  the  object,

since  it  no  longer  exists.  Mourning  is  entrusted  with  the  task  of

carrying out this retreat from the object in all those situations in which

it was the recipient of a high degree of cathexis. That this separation

should be painful fits in with what we have just said, in view of the high

and  unsatisfiable  cathexis  of  longing  which  is  concentrated  on  the

object  by  the  bereaved  person  during  the  reproduction  of  the

situations in which he must undo the ties that bind him to it.

                                                                                       4325

 

                      THE QUESTION OF LAY ANALYSIS

 

                      Conversations with an Impartial Person

 

                                        (1926)

 


                                                                                      4326

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4327

 

                      THE QUESTION OF LAY ANALYSIS

 

              CONVERSATIONS WITH AN IMPARTIAL PERSON

 

                                    INTRODUCTION

 

The title of this small work is not immediately intelligible. I will therefore

explain it. ‘Layman’ = ‘Non-doctor’; and the question is whether non-

doctors as well as doctors are to be allowed to practise analysis. This

question has its limitations both in time and place. In time, because up

to  now  no  one  has  been  concerned  as  to who  practises  analysis.

Indeed, people have been much too little concerned about it - the one

thing they were agreed on was a wish that no one should practise it.

Various reasons were given for this, but they were based on the same

underlying  distaste.  Thus  the  demand  that  only  doctors  should

analyse corresponds to a new and apparently more friendly attitude to

analysis - if, that is, it can escape the suspicion of being after all only a

slightly modified derivative of the earlier attitude. It is conceded that in

some circumstances an analytic treatment shall be undertaken; but, if

so, only doctors are to undertake it. The reason for this restriction then

becomes a matter for enquiry.   The question is limited in place because it does not arise in all

countries with equal significance. In Germany and America it would be

no more than an academic discussion; for in those countries every

patient can have himself treated how and by whom he chooses, and

anyone who chooses can, as a ‘quack’, handle any patients, provided

only that he undertakes the responsibility for his actions. The law does

not intervene until it is called in to expiate some injury done to the

patient. But in Austria, in which and for which I am writing, there is a

preventive  law,  which  forbids  non-doctors  from  undertaking  the

treatment  of  patients,  without  waiting  for  its  outcome.¹  So  here  the

question  whether  laymen  (=  non-doctors)  may  treat  patients  by

psycho-analysis  has  a  practical  sense.  As  soon  as  it  is  raised,

however, it appears to be settled by the wording of the law. Neurotics

are patients, laymen are non-doctors, psycho-analysis is a procedure

for curing or improving nervous disorders, and all such treatments are

reserved to doctors. It follows that laymen are not permitted to practise

analysis on neurotics, and are punishable if they nevertheless do so.

The  position  being  so  simple,  one  hardly  ventures  to  take  up  the

question of lay analysis. All the same, there are some complications,

which the law does not trouble about, but which nevertheless call for

consideration. It may perhaps turn out that in this instance the patients

are not like other patients, that the laymen are not really laymen, and

that the doctors have not exactly the qualities which one has a right to

expect of doctors and on which their claims should be based. If this

can be proved, there will be justifiable grounds for demanding that the

law shall not be applied without modification to the instance before us.

 

   ¹ The same holds good in France.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4328

 

                                            I

 

   Whether this happens will depend on people who are not obliged to

be familiar with the peculiarities of an analytic treatment. It is our task

to give information on the subject to these impartial persons, whom weshall  assume  to  be,  at  the  moment,  still  in  ignorance.  It  is  to  be

regretted  that  we  cannot  let  them  be  present  as  an  audience  at  a

treatment  of  this  kind.  But  the  ‘analytic  situation’  allows  of  the

presence of no third person. Moreover the different sessions are of

very unequal value. An unauthorized listener who hit upon a chance

one of them would as a rule form no useful impression; he would be in

danger of not understanding what was passing between the analyst

and the patient, or he would be bored. For good or ill, therefore, he

must be content with our information, which we shall try to make as

trustworthy as possible.

   A patient, then, may be suffering from fluctuations in his moods

which he cannot control, or from a sense of despondency by which his

energy feels paralysed because he thinks he is incapable of doing

anything  properly,  or  from  a  nervous  embarrassment  among

strangers. He may perceive, without understanding the reason for it,

that he has difficulties in carrying out his professional work, or indeed

any comparatively important decision or any undertaking. He may one

day have suffered from a distressing attack - unknown in its origin - of

feelings  of  anxiety,  and  since  then  have  been  unable,  without  a

struggle, to walk along the street alone, or to travel by train; he may

perhaps  have  had  to  give  up  both  entirely.  Or,  a  very  remarkable

thing, his thoughts may go their own way and refuse to be directed by

his will. They pursue problems that are quite indifferent to him, but

from which he cannot get free. Quite ludicrous tasks, too, are imposed

on him, such as counting up the windows on the fronts of houses. And

when  he  has  performed  simple  actions  such  as  posting  a  letter  or

turning off a gas-jet, he finds himself a moment later doubting whether

he has really done so. This may be no more than an annoyance and a

nuisance. But his state becomes intolerable if he suddenly finds he is

unable  to  fend  off  the  idea  that  he  has  pushed  a  child  under  the

wheels of a car or has thrown a stranger off the bridge into the water,

or if he has to ask himself whether he is not the murderer whom the

police are looking for in connection with a crime that was discovered

that day. It is obvious nonsense, as he himself knows; he has never

done any harm to anyone; but if he were really the murderer who is

being looked for, his feeling - his sense of guilt - could not be stronger.

                             The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4329

 

   Or again our patient - and this time let us make her a woman - may

suffer in another way and in a different field. She is a pianist, but her

fingers are overcome by cramp and refuse to serve her. Or when she

thinks of going to a party she promptly becomes aware of a call of

nature the satisfaction of which would be incompatible with a social

gathering.  She  has  therefore  given  up  going  to  parties,  dances,

theatres or concerts. She is overcome by violent headaches or other

painful sensations at times when they are most inconvenient. She may

even be unable to keep down any meal she eats which can become

dangerous in the long run. And, finally, it is a lamentable fact that she

cannot tolerate any agitations, which after all are inevitable in life. On

such occasions she falls in a faint, often accompanied by muscular

spasms that recall sinister pathological states.

   Other patients, again, suffer from disturbances in a particular field in

which emotional life converges with demands of a bodily sort. If they

are men, they find they are incapable of giving physical expression to

their tenderest feelings towards the opposite sex, while towards less

loved  objects  they  may  perhaps  have  every  reaction  at  their

command. Or their sensual feelings attach them to people whom they

despise and from whom they would like to get free; or those same

feelings  impose  requirements  on  them  whose  fulfilment  they

themselves find repulsive. If they are women, they feel prevented by

anxiety  or  disgust  or  by  unknown  obstructions  from  meeting  the

demands of sexual life; or, if they have surrendered to love, they find

themselves cheated of the enjoyment which nature has provided as a

reward for such compliance.

   All these people recognize that they are ill and go to doctors, by

whom people expect nervous disorders like these to be removed. The

doctors, too, lay down the categories into which these complaints are

divided. They diagnose them, each according to his own standpoint,

under  different  names:  neurasthenia,  psychasthenia,  phobias,

obsessional  neurosis,  hysteria.  They  examine  the  organs  which

produce  the  symptoms,  the  heart,  the  stomach,  the  bowels,  the

genitals, and find them healthy. They recommend interruptions in thepatient’s accustomed mode of life, holidays, strengthening exercises,

tonics, and by these means bring about temporary improvements - or

no result at all. Eventually the patients hear that there are people who

are concerned quite specially with the treatment of such complaints

and start an analysis with them.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4330

 

   During this disquisition on the symptoms of neurotics, the Impartial

Person, whom I imagine as being present, has been showing signs of

impatience.  At  this  point,  however,  he  becomes  attentive  and

interested. ‘So now’, he says, ‘we shall learn what the analyst does

with the patient whom the doctor has not been able to help.’

   Nothing takes place between them except that they talk to each

other.  The  analyst  makes  use  of  no  instruments  not  even  for

examining the patient - nor does he prescribe any medicines. If it is at

all possible, he even leaves the patient in his environment and in his

usual  mode  of  life  during  the  treatment.  This  is  not  a  necessary

condition, of course, and may not always be practicable. The analyst

agrees upon a fixed regular hour with the patient, gets him to talk,

listens to him, talks to him in his turn and gets him to listen.

   The Impartial Person’s features now show signs of unmistakable

relief and relaxation, but they also clearly betray some contempt. It is

as though he were thinking: ‘Nothing more than that? Words, words,

words, as Prince Hamlet says.’ And no doubt he is thinking too of

Mephistopheles’  mocking  speech  on  how  comfortably  one  can  get

along with words - lines that no German will ever forget.

   ‘So it is a kind of magic,’ he comments: ‘you talk, and blow away his

ailments.’

   Quite true. It would be magic if it worked rather quicker. An essential

attribute  of  a  magician  is  speed  -  one  might  say  suddenness  -  of

success. But analytic treatments take months and even years: magic

that is so slow loses its miraculous character. And incidentally do not

let us despise the word. After all it is a powerful instrument; it is the

means by which we convey our feelings to one another, our method ofinfluencing other people. Words can do unspeakable good and cause

terrible wounds. No doubt ‘in the beginning was the deed’ and the

word  came  later;  in  some  circumstances  it  meant  an  advance  in

civilization when deeds were softened into words. But originally the

word  was  magic  -  a  magical  act;  and  it  has  retained  much  of  its

ancient power.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4331

 

   The Impartial Person proceeds: ‘Let us suppose that the patient is

no better prepared to understand analytic treatment than I am; then

how are you going to make him believe in the magic of the word or of

the speech that is to free him from his sufferings?’

   Some preparation must of course be given to him; and there is a

simple way of doing it. We call on him to be completely straightforward

with his analyst, to keep nothing back intentionally that comes into his

head, and then to put aside every reservation that might prevent his

reporting certain thoughts or memories. Everyone is aware that there

are some things in himself that he would be very unwilling to tell other

people or that he considers it altogether out of the question to tell.

These are his ‘intimacies’. He has a notion too - and this represents a

great advance in psychological self-knowledge - that there are other

things that one would not care to admit to oneself: things that one likes

to conceal from oneself and which for that reason one breaks off short

and drives out of one’s thoughts if, in spite of everything, they turn up.

Perhaps he may himself notice that a very remarkable psychological

problem begins to appear in this situation - of a thought of his own

being kept secret from his own self. It looks as though his own self

were no longer the unity which he had always considered it to be, as

though there were something else as well in him that could confront

that self. He may become obscurely aware of a contrast between a

self  and  a  mental  life  in  the  wider  sense.  If  now  he  accepts  the

demand made by analysis that he shall say everything, he will easily

become  accessible  to  an  expectation  that  to  have  relations  and

exchanges of thought with someone under such unusual conditionsmight also lead to peculiar results.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4332

 

   ‘I understand,’ says our Impartial Person. ‘You assume that every

neurotic has something oppressing him, some secret. And by getting

him to tell you about it you relieve his oppression and do him good.

That,  of  course,  is  the  principle  of  Confession,  which  the  Catholic

Church has used from time immemorial in order to make secure its

dominance over people’s minds.’

   We must reply: ‘Yes and no!’ Confession no doubt plays a part in

analysis - as an introduction to it, we might say. But it is very far from

constituting the essence of analysis or from explaining its effects. In

Confession the sinner tells what he knows; in analysis the neurotic

has  to  tell  more.  Nor  have  we  heard  that  Confession  has  ever

developed enough power to get rid of actual pathological symptoms.

   ‘Then, after all, I do not understand,’ comes the rejoinder. ‘What can

you possibly mean by "telling more than he knows"? But I can well

believe  that  as  an  analyst  you  gain  a  stronger  influence  over  your

patients  than  a  Father  Confessor  over  his  penitents,  since  your

contacts with him are so much longer, more intensive and also more

individual, and since you use this increased influence to divert him

from his sick thoughts, to talk him out of his fears, and so on. It would

certainly be strange if it were possible by such means to control purely

physical  phenomena  as  well,  such  as  vomiting,  diarrhoea,

convulsions; but I know that influence like that is in fact quite possible

if a person is put into a state of hypnosis. By the trouble you take with

the patient you probably succeed in bringing about a hypnotic relation

of  that  sort  with  him  -  a  suggestive  attachment  to  yourself  -  even

though you may not intend to; and in that case the miraculous results

of your treatment are the effect of hypnotic suggestion. But, so far as I

know,  hypnotic  treatment  works  much  faster  than  your  analysis,

which, as you tell me, lasts for months and years.’

   Our Impartial Person cannot be either so ignorant or so perplexed

as we thought to begin with. There are unmistakable signs that he istrying  to  understand  psycho-analysis  with  the  help  of  his  previous

knowledge, that he is trying to link it up with something he already

knows. The difficult task now lies ahead of us of making it clear to him

that  he  will  not  succeed  in  this:  that  analysis  is  a  procedure sui

generis, something novel and special, which can only be understood

with the help of new insights - or hypotheses, if that sounds better. But

he is still waiting for our answer to his last remarks.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4333

 

   What you say about the special personal influence of the analyst

certainly deserves great attention. An influence of the kind exists and

plays a large part in analysis - but not the same part as in hypnotism.

It ought to be possible to convince you that the situations in the two

cases are quite different. It may be enough to point out that we do not

use this personal influence, the factor of ‘suggestion’, to suppress the

symptoms  of  the  illness,  as  happens  with hypnotic  suggestion.

Further, it would be a mistake to believe that this factor is the vehicle

and promoter of the treatment throughout its length. At its beginning,

no doubt. But later on it opposes our analytic intentions and forces us

to adopt the most far-reaching counter-measures. And I should like to

show by an example how far diverting a patient’s thoughts and talking

him out of things are from the technique of analysis. If a patient of ours

is  suffering  from  a  sense  of  guilt,  as  though  he  had  committed  a

serious crime, we do not recommend him to disregard his qualms of

conscience  and  do  not  emphasize  his  undoubted  innocence;  he

himself has often tried to do so without success. What we do is to

remind him that such a strong and persistent feeling must after all be

based  on  something  real,  which  it  may  perhaps  be  possible  to

discover.

   ‘It would surprise me’, comments the Impartial Person, ‘if you were

able to soothe your patients by agreeing with their sense of guilt in

that way. But what are your analytic intentions? and what

do you do with your patients?’

                             The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4334

 

                                            II

 

   If I am to say anything intelligible to you, I shall no doubt have to tell

you something of a psychological theory which is not known or not

appreciated outside analytic circles. It will be easy to deduce from this

theory what we want from our patients and how we obtain it. I shall

expound  it  to  you  dogmatically,  as  though  it  were  a  complete

theoretical structure. But do not suppose that it came into being as

such a structure, like a philosophical system. We have developed it

very slowly, we have wrestled over every small detail of it, we have

unceasingly  modified  it,  keeping  a  continuous  contact  with

observation, till it has finally taken a shape in which it seems to suffice

for our purposes. Only a few years ago I should have had to clothe

this theory in other terms. Nor, of course, can I guarantee to you that

the  form  in  which  it  is  expressed  to-day  will  remain  the  final  one.

Science, as you know, is not a revelation; long after its beginnings it

still lacks the attributes of definiteness, immutability and infallibility for

which human thought so deeply longs. But such as it is, it is all that we

can  have.  If  you  will  further  bear  in  mind  that  our  science  is  very

young, scarcely as old as the century, and that it is concerned with

what is perhaps the most difficult material that can be the subject of

human research, you will easily be able to adopt the correct attitude

towards my exposition. But interrupt me whenever you feel inclined, if

you cannot follow me or if you want further explanations.

   ‘I will interrupt you before you have even begun. You say that you

intend to expound a new psychology to me; but I should have thought

that psychology was no new science. There have been psychologies

and psychologists enough; and I heard of great achievements in that

field while I was at college.’

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4335

 

   I should not dream of disputing them. But if you look into the mattermore  closely  you  will  have  to  class  these  great  achievements  as

belonging rather to the physiology of the sense organs. The theory of

mental  life  could  not  be  developed,  because  it  was  inhibited  by  a

single essential misunderstanding. What does it comprise to-day, as it

is  taught  at  college?  Apart  from  those  valuable  discoveries  in  the

physiology of the senses, a number of classifications and definitions of

our mental processes which, thanks to linguistic usage, have become

the common property of every educated person. That is clearly not

enough to give a view of our mental life. Have you not noticed that

every philosopher, every imaginative writer, every historian and every

biographer makes up his own psychology for himself, brings forward

his  own  particular  hypotheses  concerning  the  interconnections  and

aims  of  mental  acts  -  all  more  or  less  plausible  and  all  equally

untrustworthy? There is an evident lack of any common foundation.

And it is for that reason too that in the field of psychology there is, so

to speak, no respect and no authority. In that field everyone can ‘run

wild’ as he chooses. If you raise a question in physics or chemistry,

anyone who knows he possesses no ‘technical knowledge’ will hold

his  tongue.  But  if  you  venture  upon  a  psychological  assertion,  you

must be prepared to meet judgements and contradictions from every

quarter.  In  this  field,  apparently,  there  is  no  ‘technical  knowledge’.

Everyone  has  a  mental  life,  so  everyone  regards  himself  as  a

psychologist.  But  that  strikes  me  as  an  inadequate  legal  title.  The

story is told of how someone who applied for a post as a children’s

nurse was asked if she knew how to look after babies. ‘Of course,’ she

replied, ‘why, after all, I was a baby once myself.’

   ‘And you claim that you have discovered this "common foundation"

of mental life, which has been overlooked by every psychologist, from

observations on sick people?’

   The source of our findings does not seem it me to deprive them of

their value. Embryology, to take an example, would not deserve to be

trusted if it could not give a plain explanation of the origin of innate

malformations. I have told you of people whose thoughts go their own

way, so that they are obliged to worry over problems to which they are

perfectly  indifferent.  Do  you  think  that  academic  psychology  could

ever make the smallest contribution towards explaining an abnormality

such as that? And, after all, we all of us have the experience at night-time of our thoughts going their own way and creating things which we

do  not  understand,  which  puzzle  us,  and  which  are  suspiciously

reminiscent  of  pathological  products.  Our  dreams,  I  mean.  The

common  people  have  always  firmly  believed  that  dreams  have  a

sense and a value - that they mean something. Academic psychology

has never been able to inform us what this meaning is. It could make

nothing of dreams. If it attempted to produce explanations, they were

non-psychological - such as tracing them to sensory stimuli, or to an

unequal depth of sleep in different portions of the brain, and so on. But

it is fair to say that a psychology which cannot explain dreams is also

useless for an understanding of normal mental life, that it has no claim

to be called a science.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4336

 

   ‘You are becoming aggressive; so you have evidently got on to a

sensitive spot. I have heard, it is true, that in analysis great value is

attached to dreams, that they are interpreted, and that memories of

real events are looked for behind them, and so on. But I have heard

as  well  that  the  interpretation  of  dreams  is  left  to  the  caprice  of

analysts, and that they themselves have never ceased disputing over

the  way  of  interpreting  dreams  and  the  justification  for  drawing

conclusions from them. If that is so, you ought not to underline so

heavily  the  advantage  that  analysis  has  won  over  academic

psychology.’

   There is really a great deal of truth in what you say. It is true that the

interpretation  of  dreams  has  come  to  have  unequalled  importance

both  for  the  theory  and  the  practice  of  analysis.  If  I  seem  to  be

aggressive, that is only a way of defending myself. And when I think of

all the mischief some analysts have done with the interpretation of

dreams I might lose heart and echo the pessimistic pronouncement of

our great satirist Nestroy when he says that every step forward is only

half as big as it looks at first. But have you ever found that men do

anything but confuse and distort what they get hold of? By the help of

a  little  foresight  and  self-discipline  most  of  the  dangers  of  dream-interpretation can be avoided with certainty. But you will agree that I

shall never come to my exposition if we let ourselves be led aside like

this.

      ‘Yes.  If  I  understood  rightly,  you  wanted  to  tell  me  about  the

fundamental postulate of the new psychology.’

   That was not what I wanted to begin with. My purpose is to let you

hear  what  pictures  we  have  formed  of  the  structure  of  the  mental

apparatus in the course of our analytic studies.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4337

 

   ‘What do you mean by the "mental apparatus"? and what, may I ask,

is it constructed of?’

   It will soon be clear what the mental apparatus is; but I must beg you

not to ask what material it is constructed of. That is not a subject of

psychological interest. Psychology can be as indifferent to it as, for

instance,  optics  can  be  to  the  question  of  whether  the  walls  of  a

telescope are made of metal or cardboard. We shall leave entirely on

one side the material line of approach, but not so the spatial one. For

we picture the unknown apparatus which serves the activities of the

mind as being really like an instrument constructed of several parts

(which we speak of as ‘agencies’), each of which performs a particular

function and which have a fixed spatial relation to one another: it being

understood  that  by  spatial  relation  -  ‘in  front  of’  and  ‘behind’,

‘superficial’  and  ‘deep’-  we  merely  mean  in  the  first  instance  a

representation of the regular succession of the functions. Have I made

myself clear?

   ‘Scarcely. Perhaps I shall understand it later. But, in any case, here

is a strange anatomy of the soul - a thing which, after all, no longer

exists at all for the scientists.’

   What do you expect? It is a hypothesis like so many others in the

sciences: the very earliest ones have always been rather rough. ‘Open

to revision’ we can say in such cases. It seems to me unnecessary for

me to appeal here to the ‘as if’ which has become so popular. The

value of a ‘fiction’ of this kind (as the philosopher Vaihinger would callit) depends on how much one can achieve with its help.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4338

 

      But  to  proceed.  Putting  ourselves  on  the  footing  of  everyday

knowledge,  we  recognize  in  human  beings  a  mental  organization

which is interpolated between their sensory stimuli and the perception

of their somatic needs on the one hand and their motor acts on the

other, and which mediates between them for a particular purpose. We

call this organization their ‘Ich’. Now there is nothing new in this. Each

one of us makes this assumption without being a philosopher, and

some people even in spite of being philosophers. But this does not, in

our opinion, exhaust the description of the mental apparatus. Besides

this  ‘I’,  we  recognize  another  mental  region,  more  extensive,  more

imposing and more obscure than the ‘I’, and this we call the ‘Es’. The

relation between the two must be our immediate concern.

   You will probably protest at our having chosen simple pronouns to

describe our two agencies or provinces instead of giving them orotund

Greek names. In psycho-analysis, however, we like to keep in contact

with  the  popular  mode  of  thinking  and  prefer  to  make  its  concepts

scientifically serviceable rather than to reject them. There is no merit

in  this;  we  are  obliged  to  take  this  line;  for  our  theories  must  be

understood  by  our  patients,  who  are  often  very  intelligent,  but  not

always  learned.  The  impersonal  ‘it’  is  immediately  connected  with

certain forms of expression used by normal people. ‘It shot through

me,’ people say; ‘there was something in me at that moment that was

stronger than me.’ ‘C’était plus fort que moi.’

   In psychology we can only describe things by the help of analogies.

There is nothing peculiar in this; it is the case elsewhere as well. But

we  have  constantly  to  keep  changing  these  analogies,  for  none  of

them lasts us long enough. Accordingly, in trying to make the relation

between the ego and the id clear, I must ask you to picture the ego as

a kind of façade of the id, as a frontage, like an external, cortical, layer

of it. We can hold on to this last analogy. We know that cortical layers

owe  their  peculiar  characteristics  to  the  modifying  influence  of  theexternal medium on which they abut. Thus we suppose that the ego is

the layer of the mental apparatus (of the id) which has been modified

by the influence of the external world (of reality). This will show you

how  in  psycho-analysis  we  take  spatial  ways  of  looking  at  things

seriously.  For  us  the  ego  is  really  something  superficial  and  the  id

something deeper - looked at from outside, of course. The ego lies

between reality and the id, which is what is truly mental.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4339

 

   ‘I will not ask any questions yet as to how all this can be known. But

tell me first what you gain from this distinction between an ego and an

id? What leads you to make it?’

   Your question shows me the right way to proceed. For the important

and valuable thing is to know that the ego and the id differ greatly from

each  other  in  several  respects.  The  rules  governing  the  course  of

mental  acts  are  different  in  the  ego  and  the  id;  the  ego  pursues

different purposes and by other methods. A great deal could be said

about this; but perhaps you will be content with a fresh analogy and an

example. Think of the difference between ‘the front’ and ‘behind the

lines’, as things were during the war. We were not surprised then that

some things were different at the front from what they were behind the

lines, and that many things were permitted behind the lines which had

to be forbidden at the front. The determining influence was, of course,

the proximity of the enemy; in the case of mental life it is the proximity

of the external world. There was a time when ‘outside’, ‘strange’ and

‘hostile’ were identical concepts. And now we come to the example. In

the id there are no conflicts; contradictions and antitheses persist side

by side in it unconcernedly, and are often adjusted by the formation of

compromises. In similar circumstances the ego feels a conflict which

must be decided; and the decision lies in one urge being abandoned

in favour of the other. The ego is an organization characterized by a

very  remarkable  trend  towards  unification,  towards  synthesis.  This

characteristic is lacking in the id; it is, as we might say, ‘all to pieces’;

its  different  urges  pursue  their  own  purposes  independently  andregardless of one another.

   ‘And if such an important mental region "behind the lines" exists,

how  can  you  explain  its  having  been  overlooked  till  the  time  of

analysis?’

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4340

 

   That brings us back to one of your earlier questions. Psychology had

barred its own access to the region of the id by insisting on a postulate

which is plausible enough but untenable: namely, that all mental acts

are conscious to us - that being conscious is the criterion of what is

mental, and that, if there are processes in our brain which are not

conscious, they do not deserve to be called mental acts and are no

concern of psychology.

   ‘But I should have thought that was obvious.’

   Yes, and that is what psychologists think. Nevertheless it can easily

be shown to be false - that is, to be a quite inexpedient distinction. The

idlest self-observation shows that ideas may occur to us which cannot

have come about without preparation. But you experience nothing of

these  preliminaries  of  your  thought,  though  they  too  must  certainly

have been of a mental nature; all that enters your consciousness is

the ready-made result. Occasionally you can make these preparatory

thought-structures  conscious in  retrospect,  as  though  in  a

reconstruction.

   ‘Probably one’s attention was distracted, so that one failed to notice

the preparations.’

   Evasions! You cannot in that way get around the fact that acts of a

mental  nature,  and  often  very  complicated  ones,  can  take  place  in

you, of which your consciousness learns nothing and of which you

know  nothing.  Or  are  you  prepared  to  suppose  that  a  greater  or

smaller amount of your ‘attention’ is enough to transform a non-mental

act into a mental one? But what is the use of disputing? There are

hypnotic experiments in which the existence of such non-conscious

thoughts are irrefutably demonstrated to anyone who cares to learn.

   ‘I shall not retract; but I believe I understand you at last. What youcall  "ego"  is  consciousness;  and  your  "id"  is  the  so-called

subconscious that people talk about so much nowadays. But why the

masquerading with the new names?’

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4341

 

   It is not masquerading. The other names are of no use. And do not

try  to  give  me  literature  instead  of  science.  If  someone  talks  of

subconsciousness,  I  cannot  tell  whether  he  means  the  term

topographically  -  to  indicate  something  lying  in  the  mind  beneath

consciousness - or qualitatively - to indicate another consciousness, a

subterranean one, as it were. He is probably not clear about any of it.

The  only  trustworthy  antithesis  is  between  conscious  and

unconscious.  But  it  would  be  a  serious  mistake  to  think  that  this

antithesis coincides with the distinction between ego and id. Of course

it would be delightful if it were as simple as that: our theory would

have a smooth passage. But things are not so simple. All that is true is

that everything that happens in the id is and remains unconscious,

and  that  processes  in  the  ego,  and  they  alone, can  become

conscious. But not all of them are, nor always, nor necessarily; and

large portions of the ego can remain permanently unconscious.

   The becoming conscious of a mental process is a complicated affair.

I cannot resist telling you - once again, dogmatically - our hypotheses

about it. The ego, as you will remember, is the external, peripheral

layer of the id. Now, we believe that on the outermost surface of this

ego  there  is  a  special  agency  directed  immediately  to  the  external

world, a system, an organ, through the excitation of which alone the

phenomenon that we call consciousness comes about. This organ can

be equally well excited from outside - thus receiving (with the help of

the sense-organs) the stimuli from the external world - and from inside

- thus becoming aware, first, of the sensations in the id, and then also

of the processes in the ego.

   ‘This is getting worse and worse and I can understand it less and

less. After all, what you invited me to was a discussion of the question

whether  laymen  (=  non-doctors)  ought  to  undertake  analytictreatments. What is the point, then, of all these disquisitions on daring

and obscure theories which you cannot convince me are justified?’

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4342

 

   I know I cannot convince you. That is beyond any possibility and for

that reason beyond my purpose. When we give our pupils theoretical

instruction in psycho-analysis, we can see how little impression we are

making on them to begin with. They take in the theories of analysis as

coolly as other abstractions with which they are nourished. A few of

them may perhaps wish to be convinced, but there is not a trace of

their  being  so.  But  we  also  require  that  everyone  who  wants  to

practise  analysis  on  other  people  shall  first  himself  submit  to  an

analysis.  It  is  only  in  the  course  of  this  ‘self-analysis’  (as  it  is

misleadingly termed), when they actually experience as affecting their

own person - or rather, their own mind - the processes asserted by

analysis,  that  they  acquire  the  convictions  by  which  they  are  later

guided  as  analysts.  How  then  could  I  expect  to  convince  you,  the

Impartial Person, of the correctness of our theories, when I can only

put before you an abbreviated and therefore unintelligible account of

them, without confirming them from your own experiences?

   I am acting with a different purpose. The question at issue between

us  is  not  in  the  least  whether  analysis  is  sensible  or  nonsensical,

whether it is right in its hypotheses or has fallen into gross errors. I am

unrolling our theories before you since that is the best way of making

clear to you what the range of ideas is that analysis embraces, on the

basis of what hypotheses it approaches a patient and what it does

with  him.  In  this  way  a  quite  definite  light  will  be  thrown  on  the

question of lay analysis. And do not be alarmed. If you have followed

me so far you have got over the worst. Everything that follows will be

easier for you. - But now, with your leave, I will pause to take breath.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4343

                                             III

 

   ‘I expect you will want to tell me how, on the basis of the theories of

psycho-analysis, the origin of a neurotic illness can be pictured.’

   I will try to. But for that purpose we must study our ego and our id

from  a  fresh  angle,  from  the dynamic  one  -  that  is  to  say,  having

regard to the forces at work in them and between them. Hitherto we

have been content with a description of the mental apparatus.

   ‘My only fear is that it may become unintelligible again!’

   I hope not. You will soon find your way about in it. Well then, we

assume that the forces which drive the mental apparatus into activity

are  produced  in  the  bodily  organs  as  an  expression  of  the  major

somatic needs. You will recollect the words of our poet-philosopher:

‘Hunger and love.’ Incidentally, quite a formidable pair of forces! We

give these bodily needs, in so far as they represent an instigation to

mental activity, the name of ‘Triebe’, a word for which we are envied

by  many  modern  languages.  Well,  these  instincts  fill  the  id:  all  the

energy in the id, as we may put it briefly, originates from them. Nor

have  the  forces  in  the  ego  any  other  origin;  they  are  derived  from

those in the id. What, then, do these instincts want? Satisfaction - that

is, the establishment of situations in which the bodily needs can be

extinguished. A lowering of the tension of need is felt by our organ of

consciousness  as  pleasurable;  an  increase  of  it  is  soon  felt  as

unpleasure.  From  these  oscillations  arises  the  series  of  feelings  of

pleasure-unpleasure,  in  accordance  with  which  the  whole  mental

apparatus  regulates  its  activity.  In  this  connection  we  speak  of  a

‘dominance of the pleasure principle’.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4344

 

   If the id’s instinctual demands meet with no satisfaction, intolerable

conditions  arise.  Experience  soon  shows  that  these  situations  of

satisfaction can only be established with the help of the external world.

At that point the portion of the id which is directed towards the external

world - the ego - begins to function. If all the driving force that sets thevehicle  in  motion  is  derived  from  the  id,  the  ego,  as  it  were,

undertakes the steering, without which no goal can be reached. The

instincts in the id press for immediate satisfaction at all costs, and in

that  way  they  achieve  nothing  or  even  bring  about  appreciable

damage. It is the task of the ego to guard against such mishaps, to

mediate  between  the  claims  of  the  id  and  the  objections  of  the

external world. It carries on its activity in two directions. On the one

hand, it observes the external world with the help of its sense-organ,

the system of consciousness, so as to catch the favourable moment

for harmless satisfaction; and on the other hand it influences the id,

bridles  its  ‘passions’,  induces  its  instincts  to  postpone  their

satisfaction, and indeed, if the necessity is recognized, to modify its

aims, or, in return for some compensation, to give them up. In so far

as  it  tames  the  id’s  impulses  in  this  way,  it  replaces  the  pleasure

principle, which was formerly alone decisive, by what is known as the

‘reality  principle’,  which,  though  it  pursues  the  same  ultimate  aims,

takes into account the conditions imposed by the real external world.

Later,  the  ego  learns  that  there  is  yet  another  way  of  securing

satisfaction besides the adaption to the external world which I have

described.  It  is  also  possible  to  intervene  in  the  external  world  by

changing  it,  and  to  establish  in  it  intentionally  the  conditions  which

make  satisfaction  possible.  This  activity  then  becomes  the  ego’s

highest function; decisions as to when it is more expedient to control

one’s passions and bow before reality, and when it is more expedient

to side with them and to take arms against the external world - such

decisions make up the whole essence of worldly wisdom.

   ‘And does the id put up with being dominated like this by the ego, in

spite of being, if I understand you aright, the stronger party?’

      Yes,  all  will  be  well  if  the  ego  is  in  possession  of  its  whole

organization and efficiency, if it has access to all parts of the id and

can exercise its influence on them. For there is no natural opposition

between  ego  and  id;  they  belong  together,  and  under  healthy

conditions cannot in practice be distinguished from each other.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4345 

   ‘That sounds very pretty; but I cannot see how in such an ideal

relation there can be the smallest room for a pathological disturbance.’

   You are right. So long as the ego and its relations to the id fulfil

these ideal conditions, there will be no neurotic disturbance. The point

at which the illness makes its breach is an unexpected one, though no

one  acquainted  with  general  pathology  will  be  surprised  to  find  a

confirmation  of  the  principle  that  it  is  precisely  the  most  important

developments  and  differentiations  that  carry  in  them  the  seeds  of

illness, of failure of function.

   ‘You are becoming too learned. I cannot follow you.’

   I must go back a little bit further. A small living organism is a truly

miserable, powerless thing, is it not? compared with the immensely

powerful  external  world,  full  as  it  is  of  destructive  influences.  A

primitive  organism,  which  has  not  developed  any  adequate  ego-

organization, is at the mercy of all these ‘traumas’. It lives by the ‘blind’

satisfaction  of  its  instinctual  wishes  and  often  perishes  in

consequence. The differentiation of an ego is above all a step towards

self-preservation.  Nothing,  it  is  true,  can  be  learnt  from  being

destroyed; but if one has luckily survived a trauma one takes notice of

the  approach  of  similar  situations  and  signalizes  the  danger  by  an

abbreviated  repetition  of  the  impressions  one  has  experienced  in

connection with the trauma - by an affect of anxiety. This reaction to

the perception of the danger now introduces an attempt at flight, which

can have a life-saving effect till one has grown strong enough to meet

the  dangers  of  the  external  world  in  a  more  active  fashion  -  even

aggressively, perhaps.

   ‘All this is very far away from what you promised to tell me.’

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4346

 

   You have no notion how close I am to fulfilling my promise. Even in

organisms which later develop an efficient ego-organization, their ego

is feeble and little differentiated from their id to begin with, during their

first  years  of  childhood.  Imagine  now  what  will  happen  if  thispowerless ego experiences an instinctual demand from the id which it

would  already  like  to  resist  (because  it  senses  that  to  satisfy  it  is

dangerous and would conjure up a traumatic situation, a collision with

the external world) but which it cannot control, because it does not yet

possess enough strength to do so. In such a case the ego treats the

instinctual danger as if it was an external one; it makes an attempt at

flight, draws back from this portion of the id and leaves it to its fate,

after withholding from it all the contributions which it usually makes to

instinctual impulses. The ego, as we put it, institutes a repression of

these  instinctual  impulses.  For  the  moment  this  has  the  effect  of

fending  off  the  danger;  but  one  cannot  confuse  the  inside  and  the

outside  with  impunity.  One  cannot  run  away  from  oneself.  In

repression  the  ego  is  following  the  pleasure  principle,  which  it  is

usually in the habit of correcting; and it is bound to suffer damage in

revenge.  This  lies  in  the  ego’s  having  permanently  narrowed  its

sphere of influence. The repressed instinctual impulse is now isolated,

left  to  itself,  inaccessible,  but  also  uninfluenceable.  It  goes  its  own

way. Even later, as a rule, when the ego has grown stronger, it still

cannot lift the repression; its synthesis is impaired, a part of the id

remains forbidden ground to the ego. Nor does the isolated instinctual

impulse remain idle; it understands how to make up for being denied

normal  satisfaction;  it  produces  psychical  derivatives  which  take  its

place; it links itself to other processes which by its influence it likewise

tears away from the ego; and finally it breaks through into the ego and

into  consciousness  in  the  form  of  an  unrecognizably  distorted

substitute, and creates what we call a symptom. All at once the nature

of a neurotic disorder becomes clear to us: on the one hand an ego

which is inhibited in its synthesis, which has no influence on parts of

the id, which must renounce some of its activities in order to avoid a

fresh  collision  with  what  has  been  repressed,  and  which  exhausts

itself in what are for the most part vain acts of defence against the

symptoms, the derivatives of the repressed impulses; and on the other

hand  an  id  in  which  individual  instincts  have  made  themselves

independent,  pursue  their  aims  regardless  of  the  interests  of  the

person as a whole and henceforth obey the laws only of the primitive

psychology that rules in the depths of the id. If we survey the whole

situation we arrive at a simple formula for the origin of a neurosis: theego has made an attempt to suppress certain portions of the id in an

inappropriate manner, this attempt has failed and the id has taken its

revenge. A neurosis is thus the result of a conflict between the ego

and the id, upon which the ego has embarked because, as careful

investigation shows, it wishes at all costs to retain its adaptability in

relation to the real external world. The disagreement is between the

external world and the id; and it is because the ego, loyal to its inmost

nature, takes sides with the external world that it becomes involved in

a  conflict  with  its  id.  But  please  observe  that  what  creates  the

determinant  for  the  illness  is  not  the  fact  of  this  conflict  -  for

disagreements of this kind between reality and the id are unavoidable

and it is one of the ego’s standing tasks to mediate in them - but the

circumstance that the ego has made use of the inefficient instrument

of repression for dealing with the conflict. But this in turn is due to the

fact  that  the  ego,  at  the  time  at  which  it  was  set  the  task,  was

undeveloped and powerless. The decisive repressions all take place

in early childhood.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4347

 

   ‘What a remarkable business! I shall follow your advice and not

make  criticisms,  since  you  only  want  to  show  me  what  psycho-

analysis believes about the origin of neurosis so that you can go on to

say how it sets about combating it. I should have various questions to

ask  and  later  on  I  shall  raise  some  of  them.  But  at  the  moment  I

myself feel tempted for once to carry your train of thought further and

to venture upon a theory of my own. You have expounded the relation

between external world, ego and id, and you have laid it down as the

determinant  of  a  neurosis  that  the  ego  in  its  dependence  on  the

external  world  struggles  against  the  id.  Is  not  the  opposite  case

conceivable of the ego in a conflict of this kind allowing itself to be

dragged  away  by  the  id  and  disavowing  its  regard  for  the  external

world? What happens in a case like that? From my lay notions of the

nature of insanity I should say that such a decision on the part of the

ego might be the determinant of insanity. After all, a turning-away ofthat kind from reality seems to be the essence of insanity.’

   Yes. I myself have thought of that possibility, and indeed I believe it

meets the facts - though to prove the suspicion true would call for a

discussion of some highly complicated considerations. Neuroses and

psychoses are evidently intimately related, but they must nevertheless

differ in some decisive respect. That might well be the side taken by

the ego in a conflict of this kind. In both cases the id would retain its

characteristic of blind inflexibility.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4348

 

   ‘Well, go on! What hints on the treatment of neurotic illnesses does

your theory give?’

   It is easy now to describe our therapeutic aim. We try to restore the

ego, to free it from its restrictions, and to give it back the command

over the id which it has lost owing to its early repressions. It is for this

one  purpose  that  we  carry  out  analysis,  our  whole  technique  is

directed to this aim. We have to seek out the repressions which have

been set up and to urge the ego to correct them with our help and to

deal  with  conflicts  better  than  by  an  attempt  at  flight.  Since  these

repressions belong to the very early years of childhood, the work of

analysis leads us, too, back to that period. Our path to these situations

of conflict, which have for the most part been forgotten and which we

try  to  revive  in  the  patient’s  memory,  is  pointed  out  to  us  by  his

symptoms, dreams and free associations. These must, however, first

be interpreted - translated - for, under the influence of the psychology

of the id, they have assumed forms of expression that are strange to

our  comprehension.  We  may  assume  that  whatever  associations,

thoughts and memories the patient is unable to communicate to us

without  internal  struggles  are  in  some  way  connected  with  the

repressed material or are its derivatives. By encouraging the patient to

disregard his resistances to telling us these things, we are educating

his ego to overcome its inclination towards attempts at flight and to

tolerate an approach to what is repressed. In the end, if the situation

of the repression can be successfully reproduced in his memory, hiscompliance will be brilliantly rewarded. The whole difference between

his age then and now works in his favour; and the thing from which his

childish ego fled in terror will often seem to his adult and strengthened

ego no more than child’s play.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4349

 

                                            IV

 

   ‘Everything you have told me so far has been psychology. It has

often sounded strange, difficult, or obscure; but it has always been - if

I may put it so - "pure". I have known very little hitherto, no doubt,

about your psycho-analysis; but the rumour has nevertheless reached

my  ears  that  you  are  principally  occupied  with  things  that  have  no

claim  to  that  predicate.  The  fact  that  you  have  not  yet  touched  on

anything of the kind makes me feel that you are deliberately keeping

something back. And there is another doubt that I cannot suppress.

After all, as you yourself say, neuroses are disturbances of mental life.

Is  it  possible,  then,  that  such  important  things  as  our  ethics,  our

conscience,  our  ideals,  play  no  part  at  all  in  these  profound

disturbances?’

   So you feel that a consideration both of what is lowest and of what is

highest  has  been  missing  from  our  discussions  up  till  now?  The

reason  for  that  is  that  we  have  not  yet  considered  the contents of

mental life at all. But allow me now for once myself to play the part of

an interrupter who holds up the progress of the conversation. I have

talked so much psychology to you because I wanted you to get the

impression that the work of analysis is a part of applied psychology -

and, moreover, of a psychology that is unknown outside analysis. An

analyst must therefore first and foremost have learnt this psychology,

this depth-psychology or psychology of the unconscious, or as much

of it at least as is known to-day. We shall need this as a basis for our

later conclusions. But now, what was it you meant by your allusion to

‘purity’?

   ‘Well, it is generally reported that in analyses the most intimate - andthe nastiest - events in sexual life come up for discussion in every

detail.  If  that  is  so  -  I  have  not  been  able  to  gather  from  your

psychological  discussions  that  it  is  necessarily  so  -  it  would  be  a

strong argument in favour of restricting these treatments to doctors.

How could one dream of allowing such dangerous liberties to people

of whose discretion one was not sure and of whose character one had

no guarantee?’

   It is true that doctors enjoy certain privileges in the sphere of sex:

they are even allowed to inspect people’s genitals - though they were

not allowed to in the East and though some idealistic reformers (you

know whom I have in mind) have disputed this privilege. But you want

to know in the first place whether it is so in analysis and why it must

be so. - Yes, it is so.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4350

 

   And it must be so, firstly, because analysis is entirely founded on

complete  candour.  Financial  circumstances,  for  instance,  are

discussed with equal detail and openness: things are said that are

kept back from every fellow-citizen, even if he is not a competitor or a

tax-collector. I will not dispute - indeed, I will myself insist with energy -

that this obligation to candour puts a grave moral responsibility on the

analyst as well. And it must be so, secondly, because factors from

sexual life play an extremely important, a dominating, perhaps even a

specific part among the causes and precipitating factors of neurotic

illnesses.  What  else  can  analysis  do  but  keep  close  to  its  subject-

matter, to the material brought up by the patient? The analyst never

entices his patient on to the ground of sex. He does not say to him in

advance: ‘We shall be dealing with the intimacies of your sexual life!’

He allows him to begin what he has to say whenever he pleases, and

quietly waits until the patient himself touches on sexual things. I used

always to warn my pupils: ‘Our opponents have told us that we shall

come upon cases in which the factor of sex plays no part. Let us be

careful not to introduce it into our analyses and so spoil our chance of

finding such a case.’ But so far none of us has had that good fortune.   I am aware, of course, that our recognition of sexuality has become -

whether  admittedly  or  not  -  the  strongest  motive  for  other  people’s

hostility to analysis. Can that shake our confidence? It merely shows

us  how  neurotic  our  whole  civilized  life  is,  since  ostensibly  normal

people do not behave very differently from neurotics. At a time when

psycho-analysis  was  solemnly  put  on  its  trial  before  the  learned

societies of Germany - to-day things have grown altogether quieter -

one of the speakers claimed to possess peculiar authority because, so

he said, he even allowed his patients to talk: for diagnostic purposes,

clearly, and to test the assertions of analysts. ‘But’, he added, ‘if they

begin to talk about sexual matters I shut their mouths.’ What do you

think  of  that  as  a  method  of  demonstration?  The  learned  society

applauded  the  speaker  to  the  echo  instead  of  feeling  suitably

ashamed on his account. Only the triumphant certainty afforded by the

consciousness  of  prejudices  held  in  common  can  explain  this

speaker’s want of logical thought. Years later a few of those who had

at  that  time  been  my  followers  gave  in  to  the  need  to  free  human

society from the yoke of sexuality which psycho-analysis was seeking

to impose on it. One of them explained that what is sexual does not

mean  sexuality  at  all,  but  something  else,  something  abstract  and

mystical. And another actually declared that sexual life is merely one

of  the  spheres  in  which  human  beings  seek  to  put  in  action  their

driving  need  for  power  and  domination.  They  have  met  with  much

applause, for the moment at least.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4351

 

   ‘I shall venture, for once in a way, to take sides on that point. It

strikes me as extremely bold to assert that sexuality is not a natural,

primitive  need  of  living  organisms,  but  an  expression  of  something

else. One need only take the example of animals.’

   That makes no difference. There is no mixture, however absurd, that

society will not willingly swallow down if it is advertised as an antidote

to the dreaded predominance of sexuality.

   I confess, moreover, that the dislike that you yourself have betrayedof assigning to the factor of sexuality so great a part in the causation

of neurosis - I confess that this scarcely seems to me consistent with

your task as an Impartial Person. Are you not afraid that this antipathy

may interfere with your passing a just judgement?

   ‘I am sorry to hear you say that. Your reliance on me seems to be

shaken. But in that case why not have chosen someone else as your

Impartial Person?’

   Because that someone else would not have thought any differently

from you. But if he had been prepared from the first to recognize the

importance of sexual life, everyone would have exclaimed: ‘Why, that

is no Impartial Person, he is one of your supporters!’ No, I am far from

abandoning the expectation of being able to influence your opinions. I

must  admit,  however,  that  from  my  point  of  view  this  situation  is

different  from  the  one  we  dealt  with  earlier.  As  regards  our

psychological discussions it is a matter of indifference to me whether

you believe me or not, provided only that you get an impression that

what we are concerned with are purely psychological problems. But

here, as regards the question of sexuality, I should nevertheless be

glad  if  you  were  accessible  to  the  realization  that  your  strongest

motive for contradiction is precisely the ingrained hostility which you

share with so many other people.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4352

 

   ‘But after all I am without the experience that has given you your

unshakeable certainty.’

   Very well. I can now proceed with my exposition. Sexual life is not

simply something spicy; it is also a serious scientific problem. There

was much that was novel to be learnt about it, many strange things to

be explained. I told you just now that analysis has to go back into the

early  years  of  the  patient’s  childhood,  because  the  decisive

repressions  have  taken  place  then,  while  his  ego  was  feeble.  But

surely  in  childhood  there  is  no  sexual  life?  surely  it  only  starts  at

puberty?  On  the  contrary.  We  have  to  learn  that  sexual  instinctual

impulses accompany life from birth onwards, and that it is precisely inorder  to  fend  off  those  instincts  that  the  infantile  ego  institutes

repressions. A remarkable coincidence, is it not? that small children

should already be struggling against the power of sexuality, just as the

speaker  in  the  learned  society  was  to  do  later,  and  later  still  my

followers who have set up their own theories. How does that come

about? The most general explanation would be that our civilization is

built up entirely at the expense of sexuality; but there is much more to

be said on the subject.

   The discovery of infantile sexuality is one of those of which we have

reason to feel ashamed. A few paediatricians have, it seems, always

known  about  it,  and  a  few  children’s  nurses.  Clever  men,  who  call

themselves  child  psychologists,  have  thereupon  spoken  in  tones  of

reproach of a ‘desecration of the innocence of childhood’. Once again,

sentiment  instead  of  argument!  Events  of  that  kind  are  of  daily

occurrence in political bodies. A member of the Opposition rises and

denounces some piece of maladministration in the Civil Service, in the

Army,  in  the  Judiciary  and  so  on.  Upon  this  another  member,

preferably one of the Government, declares that such statements are

an affront to the sense of honour of the body politic, of the army, of the

dynasty,  or  even  of  the  nation.  So  they  are  as  good  as  untrue.

Feelings such as these can tolerate no affronts.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4353

 

   The sexual life of children is of course different from that of adults.

The sexual function, from its beginnings to the definitive form in which

it  is  so  familiar  to  us,  undergoes  a  complicated  process  of

development. It grows together from numerous component instincts

with different aims and passes through several phases of organization

till  at  last  it  comes  into  the  service  of  reproduction.  Not  all  the

component instincts are equally serviceable for the final outcome; they

must  be  diverted,  remodelled  and  in  part  suppressed.  Such  a  far-

reaching course of development is not always passed through without

a flaw; inhibitions in development take place, partial fixations at early

stages of development. If obstacles arise later on to the exercise ofthe sexual function, the sexual urge - the libido, as we call it - is apt to

hark back to these earlier points of fixation. The study of the sexuality

of children and its transformations up to maturity has also given us the

key to an understanding of what are known as the sexual perversions,

which people used always to describe with all the requisite indications

of disgust but whose origin they were never able to explain. The whole

topic  is  of  uncommon  interest,  but  for  the  purposes  of  our

conversation there is not much sense in telling you more about it. To

find  one’s  way  about  in  it  one  of  course  needs  anatomical  and

physiological  knowledge,  all  of  which  is  unfortunately  not  to  be

acquired  in  medical  schools.  But  a  familiarity  with  the  history  of

civilization and with mythology is equally indispensable.

   ‘After all that, I still cannot form any picture of the sexual life of

children.’

   Then I will pursue the subject further; in any case it is not easy for

me to get away from it. I will tell you, then, that the most remarkable

thing  about  the  sexual  life  of  children  seems  to  me  that  it  passes

through the whole of its very far-reaching development in the first five

years of life. From then onwards until puberty there stretches what is

known as the period of latency. During it sexuality normally advances

no further; on the contrary, the sexual urges diminish in strength and

many things are given up and forgotten which the child did and knew.

During that period of life, after the early efflorescence of sexuality has

withered, such attitudes of the ego as shame, disgust and morality

arise,  which  are  destined  to  stand  up  against  the  later  tempest  of

puberty  and  to  lay  down  the  path  of  the  freshly  awakening  sexual

desires. This ‘diphasic onset’, as it is named, of sexual life has a great

deal to do with the genesis of neurotic illnesses. It seems to occur only

in human beings, and it is perhaps one of the determinants of the

human privilege of becoming neurotic. The prehistory of sexual life

was just as much overlooked before psycho-analysis as, in another

department, the background to conscious mental life. You will rightly

suspect that the two are intimately connected.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4354 

      There  is  much  to  be  told,  for  which  our  expectations  have  not

prepared us, about the contents, manifestations and achievements of

this  early  period  of  sexuality.  For  instance,  you  will  no  doubt  be

surprised to hear how often little boys are afraid of being eaten up by

their father. (And you may also be surprised at my including this fear

among the phenomena of sexual life.) But I may remind you of the

mythological tale which you may still recall from your schooldays of

how the god Kronos swallowed his children. How strange this must

have sounded to you when you first heard it! But I suppose none of us

thought about it at the time. To-day we can also call to mind a number

of fairy tales in which some ravenous animal like a wolf appears, and

we  shall  recognize  it  as  a  disguise  of  the  father.  And  this  is  an

opportunity of assuring you that it was only through the knowledge of

infantile  sexuality  that  it  became  possible  to  understand  mythology

and the world of fairy tales. Here then something has been gained as

a by-product of analytic studies.

   You will be no less surprised to hear that male children suffer from a

fear of being robbed of their sexual organ by their father, so that this

fear  of  being  castrated  has  a  most  powerful  influence  on  the

development  of  their  character  and  in  deciding  the  direction  to  be

followed by their sexuality. And here again mythology may give you

the  courage  to  believe  psycho-analysis.  The  same  Kronos  who

swallowed his children also emasculated his father Uranus, and was

afterwards himself emasculated in revenge by his son Zeus, who had

been rescued though his mother’s cunning. If you have felt inclined to

suppose that all that psycho-analysis reports about the early sexuality

of children is derived from the disordered imagination of the analysts,

you must at least admit that their imagination has created the same

product as the imaginative activities of primitive man, of which myths

and  fairy  tales  are  the  precipitate.  The  alternative  friendlier,  and

probably also the more pertinent view would be that in the mental life

of children to-day we can still detect the same archaic factors which

were  once  dominant  generally  in  the  primaeval  days  of  human

civilization. In his mental development the child would be repeating the

history of his race in an abbreviated form, just as embryology long

since recognized was the case with somatic development. 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4355

 

   Another characteristic of early infantile sexuality is that the female

sexual organ proper as yet plays no part in it: the child has not yet

discovered it. Stress falls entirely on the male organ, all the child’s

interest is directed towards the question of whether it is present or not.

We know less about the sexual life of little girls than of boys. But we

need not feel ashamed of this distinction; after all, the sexual life of

adult women is a ‘dark continent’ for psychology. But we have learnt

that girls feel deeply their lack of a sexual organ that is equal in value

to the male one; they regard themselves on that account as inferior,

and  this  ‘envy  for  the  penis’  is  the  origin  of  a  whole  number  of

characteristic feminine reactions.

   It is also characteristic of children that their two excretory needs are

cathected  with  sexual  interest.  Later  on,  education  draws  a  sharp

distinction  here,  which  is  once  more  obliterated  in  the  practice  of

joking. It may seem to us an unsavoury fact, but it takes quite a long

time for children to develop feelings of disgust. This is not disputed

even  by  people  who  insist  otherwise  on  the  seraphic  purity  of  the

child’s mind.

   Nothing, however, deserves more notice than the fact that children

regularly direct their sexual wishes towards their nearest relatives - in

the  first  place,  therefore,  towards  their  father  and  mother,  and

afterwards  towards  their  brothers  and  sisters.  The  first  object  of  a

boy’s love is his mother, and of a girl’s her father (except in so far as

an innate bisexual disposition favours the simultaneous presence of

the contrary attitude). The other parent is felt as a disturbing rival and

not infrequently viewed with strong hostility. You must understand me

aright. What I mean to say is not that the child wants to be treated by

its favourite parent merely with the kind of affection which we adults

like to regard as the essence of the parent-child relation. No, analysis

leaves  us  in  no  doubt  that  the  child’s  wishes  extend  beyond  such

affection to all that we understand by sensual satisfaction - so far, that

is, as the child’s powers of imagination allow. It is easy to see that thechild never guesses the actual facts of sexual intercourse; he replaces

them by other notions derived from his own experience and feelings.

As a rule his wishes culminate in the intention to bear, or in some in

definable way, to procreate a baby. Boys, too, in their ignorance, do

not exclude themselves from the wish to bear a baby. We give the

whole of this mental structure the name of ‘Oedipus complex’, after

the familiar Greek legend. With the end of the early sexual period it

should normally be given up, should radically disintegrate and become

transformed;  and  the  results  of  this  transformation  are  destined  for

important functions in later mental life. But as a rule this is not effected

radically enough, in which case puberty brings about a revival of the

complex, which may have serious consequences.

      I  am  surprised  that  you  are  still  silent.  That  can  scarcely  mean

consent. - In asserting that a child’s first choice of an object is, to use

the technical term, an incestuous one, analysis no doubt once more

hurt the most sacred feelings of humanity, and might well be prepared

for a corresponding amount of disbelief, contradiction and attack. And

these it has received in abundance. Nothing has damaged it more in

the  good  opinion  of  its  contemporaries  than  its  hypothesis  of  the

Oedipus complex as a structure universally bound to human destiny.

The Greek myth, incidentally, must have had the same meaning; but

the  majority  of  men  to-day,  learned  and  unlearned  alike,  prefer  to

believe that Nature has laid down an innate abhorrence in us as a

guard against the possibility of incest.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4356

 

   But let us first summon history to our aid. When Caius Julius Caesar

landed in Egypt, he found the young Queen Cleopatra (who was soon

to become so important to him) married to her still younger brother

Ptolemy. In an Egyptian dynasty there was nothing peculiar in this; the

Ptolemies,  who  were  of  Greek  origin,  had  merely  carried  on  the

custom which had been practised by their predecessors, the ancient

Pharaohs,  for  a  few  thousand  years.  This,  however,  was  merely

brother-and-sister incest, which even at the present time is not judgedso harshly. So let us turn to our chief witness in matters concerning

primaeval  times  -  mythology.  It  informs  us  that  the  myths  of  every

people, and not only of the Greeks, are filled with examples of love-

affairs between fathers and daughters and even between mothers and

sons.  Cosmology,  no  less  than  the  genealogy  of  royal  races,  is

founded upon incest. For what purpose do you suppose these legends

were created? To brand gods and kings as criminals? to fasten on

them  the  abhorrence  of  the  human  race?  Rather,  surely,  because

incestuous wishes are a primordial human heritage and have never

been fully overcome, so that their fulfilment was still granted to gods

and their descendants when the majority of common humans were

already  obliged  to  renounce  them.  It  is  in  complete  harmony  with

these lessons of history and mythology that we find incestuous wishes

still present and operative in the childhood of the individual.

      ‘I  might  take  it  amiss  that  you  tried  to  keep  back  all  this  about

infantile  sexuality  from  me.  It  seems  to  me  most  interesting,

particularly on account of its connection with human prehistory.’

   I was afraid it might take us too far from our purpose. But perhaps

after all it will be of use.

   ‘Now tell me, though, what certainty can you offer for your analytic

findings on the sexual life of children? Is your conviction based solely

on points of agreement with mythology and history?’

   Oh, by no means. It is based on direct observation. What happened

was this. We had begun by inferring the content of sexual childhood

from the analysis of adults - that is to say, some twenty to forty years

later. Afterwards, we undertook analyses on children themselves, and

it was no small triumph when we were thus able to confirm in them

everything that we had been able to divine, in spite of the amount to

which it had been overlaid and distorted in the interval.

   ‘What? You have had small children in analysis? children of less

than six years? Can that be done? And is it not most risky for the

children?’

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4357

    It can be done very well. It is hardly to be believed what goes on in a

child of four or five years old. Children are very active-minded at that

age; their early sexual period is also a period of intellectual flowering. I

have  an  impression  that  with  the  onset  of  the  latency  period  they

become mentally inhibited as well, stupider. From that time on, too,

many children lose their physical charm. And, as regards the damage

done by early analysis, I may inform you that the first child on whom

the experiment was ventured, nearly twenty years ago, has since then

grown  into  a  healthy  and  capable  young  man,  who  has  passed

through his puberty irreproachably, in spite of some severe psychical

traumas. It may be hoped that things will turn out no worse for the

other ‘victims’ of early analysis. Much that is of interest attaches to

these child analyses; it is possible that in the future they will become

still more important. From the point of view of theory, their value is

beyond  question.  They  give  unambiguous  information  on  problems

which remain unsolved in the analyses of adults; and they thus protect

the analyst from errors that might have momentous consequences for

him. One surprises the factors that lead to the formation of a neurosis

while they are actually at work and one cannot then mistake them. In

the child’s interest, it is true, analytic influence must be combined with

educational measures. The technique has still to receive its shaping.

But practical interest is aroused by the observation that a very large

number of our children pass through a plainly neurotic phase in the

course of their development. Since we have learnt how to look more

sharply, we are tempted to say that neurosis in children is not the

exception but the rule, as though it could scarcely be avoided on the

path from the innate disposition of infancy to civilized society. In most

cases  this  neurotic  phase  in  childhood  is  overcome  spontaneously.

But may it not also regularly leave its traces in the average healthy

adult? On the other hand in those who are neurotics in later life we

never fail to find links with the illness in childhood, though at the time it

need not have been very noticeable. In a precisely analogous way

physicians to-day, I believe, hold the view that each one of us has

gone through an attack of tuberculosis in his childhood. It is true that

in  the  case  of  the  neuroses  the  factor  of  immunization  does  not

operate, but only the factor of predisposition.

                             The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4358

 

   Let me return to your question about certainty. We have become

quite  generally  convinced  from  the  direct  analytic  examination  of

children that we were right in our interpretation of what adults told us

about their childhood. In a number of cases, however, another sort of

confirmation  has  become  possible.  The  material  of  the  analysis  of

some  patients  has  enabled  us  to  reconstruct  certain  external

happenings,  certain  impressive  events  of  their  childhood  years,  of

which they have preserved no conscious memory. Lucky accidents,

information  from  parents  or  nurses,  have  afterwards  provided

irrefutable  evidence  that  these  occurrences  which  we  had  inferred

really  did  take  place.  This,  of  course,  has  not  happened  often,  but

when  it  has  it  has  made  an  overwhelming  impression.  The  correct

reconstruction,  you  must  know,  of  such  forgotten  experiences  of

childhood always has a great therapeutic effect, whether they permit

of objective confirmation or not. These events owe their importance, of

course, to their having occurred at such an early age, at a time when

they could still produce a traumatic effect on the feeble ego.

   ‘And what sort of events can these be, that have to be discovered by

analysis?’

   Various sorts. In the first place, impressions capable of permanently

influencing the child’s budding sexual life - such as observations of

sexual activities between adults, or sexual experiences of his own with

an  adult  or  another  child  (no  rare  events);  or,  again,  overhearing

conversations, understood either at the time or retrospectively, from

which the child thought it could draw conclusions about mysterious or

uncanny  matters;  or  again,  remarks  or  actions  by  the  child  himself

which  give  evidence  of  significant  attitudes  of  affection  or  enmity

towards  other  people.  It  is  of  special  importance  in  an  analysis  to

induce a memory of the patient’s own forgotten sexual activity as a

child and also of the intervention by the adults which brought it to an

end.

   ‘That gives me an opportunity of bringing up a question that I have

long wanted to ask. What, then, is the nature of this "sexual activity" of

children at an early age, which, as you say, was overlooked before thedays of analysis?’

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4359

 

   It is an odd thing that the regular and essential part of this sexual

activity was not overlooked. Or rather, it is by no means odd; for it was

impossible to overlook it. Children’s sexual impulses find their main

expressions  in  self-gratification  by  friction  of  their  own  genitals,  or,

more precisely, of the male portion of them. The extraordinarily wide

distribution of this form of childish ‘naughtiness’ was always known to

adults, and it was regarded as a grave sin and severely punished. But

please do not ask me how people could reconcile these observations

of  the  immoral  inclinations  of  children  -  for  children  do  it,  as  they

themselves say, because it gives them pleasure - with the theory of

their innate purity and non-sensuality. You must get our opponents to

solve this riddle. We have a more important problem before us. What

attitude  should  we  adopt  towards  the  sexual  activity  of  early

childhood? We know the responsibility we are incurring if we suppress

it; but we do not venture to let it take its course without restriction.

Among races at a low level of civilization, and among the lower strata

of civilized races, the sexuality of children seems to be given free rein.

This probably provides a powerful protection against the subsequent

development of neuroses in the individual. But does it not at the same

time  involve  an  extraordinary  loss  of  the  aptitude  for  cultural

achievements?  There  is  a  good  deal  to  suggest  that  here  we  are

faced by a new Scylla and Charybdis.

   But whether the interests which are stimulated by the study of the

sexual  life  of  neurotics  create  an  atmosphere  favourable  to  the

encouragement of lasciviousness - that is a question which I venture

to leave to your own judgement.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4360

 

                                            V 

   ‘I believe I understand your purpose. You want to show me what

kind of knowledge is needed in order to practise analysis, so that I

may be able to judge whether only doctors should have a right to do

so. Well, so far very little to do with medicine has turned up: a great

deal of psychology and a little biology or sexual science. But perhaps

we have not got to the end?’

      Decidedly  not.  There  are  still  gaps  to  be  filled.  May  I  make  a

request?  Will  you  describe  how  you  now  picture  an  analytic

treatment? - just as though you had to undertake one yourself.

   ‘A fine idea, to be sure! No, I have not the least intention of settling

our controversy by an experiment of that sort. But just to oblige, I will

do  what  you  ask  -  the  responsibility  will  be  yours.  Very  well.  I  will

suppose that the patient comes to me and complains of his troubles. I

promise him recovery or improvement if he will follow my directions. I

call on him to tell me with perfect candour everything that he knows

and that occurs to him, and not to be deterred from that intention even

if  some  things  are  disagreeable  to  say.  Have  I  taken  in  the  rule

properly?’

   Yes. You should add: ‘even if what occurs to him seems unimportant

or senseless.’

   ‘I will add that. Thereupon he begins to talk and I listen. And what

then?  I  infer  from  what  he  tells  me  the  kind  of  impressions,

experiences and wishes which he has repressed because he came

across them at a time when his ego was still feeble and was afraid of

them instead of dealing with them. When he has learnt this from me,

he  puts  himself  back  in  the  old  situations  and  with  my  help  he

manages  better.  The  limitations  to  which  his  ego  was  tied  then

disappear, and he is cured. Is that right?’

   Bravo! bravo! I see that once again people will be able to accuse me

of having made an analyst of someone who is not a doctor. You have

mastered it all admirably.

   ‘I have done no more than repeat what I have heard from you - as

though it was something I had learnt by heart. All the same, I cannot

form any picture of how I should do it, and I am quite at a loss to

understand why a job like that should take an hour a day for so many

months. After all, an ordinary person has not as a rule experiencedsuch a lot, and what was repressed in childhood is probably in every

case the same.’

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4361

 

   When one really practises analysis one learns all kinds of things

besides. For instance: you would not find it at all such a simple matter

to  deduce  from  what  the  patient  tells  you  the  experiences  he  has

forgotten  and  the  instinctual  impulses  he  has  repressed.  He  says

something to you which at first means as little to you as it does to him.

You will have to make up your mind to look at the material which he

delivers  to  you  in  obedience  to  the  rule  in  a  quite  special  way:  as

though it were ore, perhaps, from which its content of precious metal

has to be extracted by a particular process. You will be prepared, too,

to  work  over  many  tons  of  ore  which  may  contain  but  little  of  the

valuable material you are in search of. Here we should have a first

reason for the prolonged character of the treatment.

   ‘But how does one work over this raw material - to keep to your

simile?’

   By assuming that the patient’s remarks and associations are only

distortions  of  what  you  are  looking  for  -  allusions,  as  it  were,  from

which you have to guess what is hidden behind them. In a word, this

material, whether it consists of memories, associations or dreams, has

first to be interpreted. You will do this, of course, with an eye to the

expectations you have formed as you listened, thanks to your special

knowledge.

   ‘"Interpret!" A nasty word! I dislike the sound of it; it robs me of all

certainty.  If  everything  depends  on  my  interpretation  who  can

guarantee that I interpret right? So after all everything is left to my

caprice.’

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4362

 

   Just a moment! Things are not quite as bad as that. Why do youchoose  to  except  your  own  mental  processes  from  the  rule  of  law

which you recognize in other people’s? When you have attained some

degree of self-discipline and have certain knowledge at your disposal,

your  interpretations  will  be  independent  of  your  personal

characteristics and will hit the mark. I am not saying that the analyst’s

personality is a matter of indifference for this portion of his task. A kind

of sharpness of hearing for what is unconscious and repressed, which

is not possessed equally by everyone, has a part to play. And here,

above all, we are brought to the analyst’s obligation to make himself

capable,  by  a  deep-going  analysis  of  his  own,  of  the  unprejudiced

reception of the analytic material. Something, it is true, still remains

over: something comparable to the ‘personal equation’ in astronomical

observations.  This  individual  factor  will  always  play  a  larger  part  in

psycho-analysis than elsewhere. An abnormal person can become an

accurate  physicist;  as  an  analyst  he  will  be  hampered  by  his  own

abnormality from seeing the pictures of mental life undistorted. Since it

is impossible to demonstrate to anyone his own abnormality, general

agreement in matters of depth-psychology will be particularly hard to

reach.  Some  psychologists,  indeed,  think  it  is  quite  impossible  and

that every fool has an equal right to give out his folly as wisdom. I

confess  that  I  am  more  of  an  optimist  about  this.  After  all,  our

experiences show that fairly satisfactory agreements can be reached

even in psychology. Every field of research has its particular difficulty

which  we  must  try  to  eliminate.  And,  moreover,  even  in  the

interpretative art of analysis there is much that can be learnt like any

other material of study: for instance, in connection with the peculiar

method of indirect representation through symbols.

   ‘Well, I no longer have any desire to undertake an analytic treatment

even in my imagination. Who can say what other surprises I might

meet with?’

   You are quite right to give up the notion. You see how much more

training and practice would be needed. When you have found the right

interpretation,  another  task  lies  ahead.  You  must  wait  for  the  right

moment  at  which  you  can  communicate  your  interpretation  to  the

patient with some prospect of success.

   ‘How can one always tell the right moment?’

   That is a question of tact, which can become more refined withexperience. You will be making a bad mistake if, in an effort, perhaps,

at  shortening  the  analysis,  you  throw  your  interpretations  at  the

patient’s head as soon as you have found them. In that way you will

draw  expressions  of  resistance,  rejection  and  indignation  from  him;

but you will not enable his ego to master his repressed material. The

formula is: to wait till he has come so near to the repressed material

that  he  has  only  a  few  more  steps  to  take  under  the  lead  of  the

interpretation you propose.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4363

 

   ‘I believe I should never learn to do that. And if I carry out these

precautions in making my interpretation, what next?’

   It will then be your fate to make a discovery for which you were not

prepared.

   ‘And what may that be?’

   That you have been deceived in your patient; that you cannot count

in the slightest on his collaboration and compliance; that he is ready to

place every possible difficulty in the way of your common work - in a

word, that he has no wish whatever to be cured.

   ‘Well! that is the craziest thing you have told me yet. And I do not

believe it either. The patient who is suffering so much, who complains

so movingly about his troubles, who is making so great a sacrifice for

the treatment - you say he has no wish to be cured! But of course you

do not mean what you say.’

   Calm yourself! I do mean it. What I said was the truth - not the whole

truth, no doubt, but a very noteworthy part of it. The patient wants to

be cured - but he also wants not to be. His ego has lost its unity, and

for that reason his will has no unity either. If that were not so, he would

be no neurotic.

   ‘"Were I sagacious, I should not be Tell!"’

   The derivatives of what is repressed have broken into his ego and

established themselves there; and the ego has as little control over

trends from that source as it has over what is actually repressed, and

as a rule it knows nothing about them. These patients, indeed, are of apeculiar nature and raise difficulties with which we are not accustomed

to reckon. All our social institutions are framed for people with a united

and normal ego, which one can classify as good or bad, which either

fulfils  its  function  or  is  altogether  eliminated  by  an  overpowering

influence. Hence the juridical alternative: responsible or irresponsible.

None of these distinctions apply to neurotics. It must be admitted that

there  is  difficulty  in  adapting  social  demands  to  their  psychological

condition. This was experienced on a large scale during the last war.

Were  the  neurotics  who  evaded  service  malingerers  or  not?  They

were both. If they were treated as malingerers and if their illness was

made highly uncomfortable, they recovered; if after being ostensibly

restored they were sent back into service, they promptly took flight

once  more  into  illness.  Nothing  could  be  done  with  them.  And  the

same is true of neurotics in civil life. They complain of their illness but

exploit it with all their strength; and if someone tries to take it away

from them they defend it like the proverbial lioness with her young. Yet

there would be no sense in reproaching them for this contradiction.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4364

 

   ‘But would not the best plan be not to give these difficult people any

treatment at all, but to leave them to themselves! I cannot think it is

worth while to expend such great efforts over each of them as you

lead me to suppose that you make.’

   I cannot approve of your suggestion. It is undoubtedly a more proper

line  to  accept  the  complications  of  life  rather  than  struggle  against

them. It may be true that not every neurotic whom we treat is worth

the  expenditure  of  an  analysis;  but  there  are  some  very  valuable

individuals among them as well. We must set ourselves the goal of

bringing it about that as few human beings as possible enter civilized

life with such a defective mental equipment. And for that purpose we

must collect much experience and learn to understand many things.

Every  analysis  can  be  instructive  and  bring  us  a  yield  of  new

understanding  quite  apart  from  the  personal  value  of  the  individual

patient.   ‘But if a volitional impulse has been formed in the patient’s ego

which wishes to retain the illness, it too must have its reasons and

motives and be able in some way to justify itself. But it is impossible to

see why anyone should want to be ill or what he can get out of it.’

   Oh, that is not so hard to understand. Think of the war neurotics,

who do not have to serve, precisely because they are ill. In civil life

illness can be used as a screen to gloss over incompetence in one’s

profession or in competition with other people; while in the family it

can serve as a means for sacrificing the other members and extorting

proofs of their love or for imposing one’s will upon them. All of this lies

fairly near the surface; we sum it up in the term ‘gain from illness’. It is

curious,  however,  that  the  patient  -  that  is,  his  ego  -  nevertheless

knows nothing of the whole concatenation of these motives and the

actions which they involve. One combats the influence of these trends

by compelling the ego to take cognizance of them. But there are other

motives, that lie still deeper, for holding on to being ill, which are not

so easily dealt with. But these cannot be understood without a fresh

journey into psychological theory.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4365

 

   ‘Please go on. A little more theory will make no odds now.’

   When I described the relation between the ego and the id to you, I

suppressed an important part of the theory of the mental apparatus.

For  we  have  been  obliged  to  assume  that  within  the  ego  itself  a

particular  agency  has  become  differentiated,  which  we  name  the

super-ego. This super-ego occupies a special position between the

ego and the id. It belongs to the ego and shares its high degree of

psychological organization; but it has a particularly intimate connection

with the id. It is in fact a precipitate of the first object-cathexes of the id

and is the heir to the Oedipus complex after its demise. This super-

ego can confront the ego and treat it like an object; and it often treats

it very harshly. It is as important for the ego to remain on good terms

with the super-ego as with the id. Estrangements between the ego

and  the  super-ego  are  of  great  significance  in  mental  life.  You  willalready  have  guessed  that  the  super-ego  is  the  vehicle  of  the

phenomenon  that  we  call  conscience.  Mental  health  very  much

depends on the super-ego’s being normally developed - that is, on its

having become sufficiently impersonal. And that is precisely what it is

not in neurotics, whose Oedipus complex has not passed through the

correct process of transformation. Their super-ego still confronts their

ego as a strict father confronts a child; and their morality operates in a

primitive fashion in that the ego gets itself punished by the super-ego.

Illness is employed as an instrument for this ‘self-punishment’, and

neurotics have to behave as though they were governed by a sense of

guilt which, in order to be satisfied, needs to be punished by illness.

   ‘That really sounds most mysterious. The strangest thing about it is

that apparently even this mighty force of the patient’s conscience does

not reach his consciousness.’

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4366

 

   Yes, we are only beginning to appreciate the significance of all these

important circumstances. That is why my description was bound to

turn out so obscure. But now I can proceed. We describe all the forces

that oppose the work of recovery as the patient’s ‘resistances’. The

gain from illness is one such resistance. The ‘unconscious sense of

guilt’  represents  the  super-ego’s  resistance;  it  is  the  most  powerful

factor,  and  the  one  most  dreaded  by  us.  We  meet  with  still  other

resistances during the treatment. If the ego during the early period has

set  up  a  repression  out  of  fear,  then  the  fear  still  persists  and

manifests itself as a resistance if the ego approaches the repressed

material.  And  finally,  as  you  can  imagine,  there  are  likely  to  be

difficulties  if  an  instinctual  process  which  has  been  going  along  a

particular path for whole decades is suddenly expected to take a new

path that has just been made open for it. That might be called the id’s

resistance. The struggle against all these resistances is our main work

during  an  analytic  treatment;  the  task  of  making  interpretations  is

nothing  compared  to  it.  But  as  a  result  of  this  struggle  and  of  the

overcoming of the resistances, the patient’s ego is so much alteredand  strengthened  that  we  can  look  forward  calmly  to  his  future

behaviour when the treatment is over. On the other hand, you can

understand now why we need such long treatments. The length of the

path  of  development  and  the  wealth  of  the  material  are  not  the

decisive factors. It is more a question of whether the path is clear. An

army can be held up for weeks on a stretch of country which in peace

time an express train crosses in a couple of hours - if the army has to

overcome the enemy’s resistance there. Such battles call for time in

mental life too. I am unfortunately obliged to tell you that every effort to

hasten  analytic  treatment  appreciably  has  hitherto  failed.  The  best

way of shortening it seems to be to carry it out according to the rules.

   ‘If I ever felt any desire to poach on your preserves and try my hand

at analysing someone else, what you tell me about the resistances

would  have  cured  me  of  it.  But  how  about  the  special  personal

influence  that  you  yourself  have  after  all  admitted?  Does  not  that

come into action against the resistances?’

   It is a good thing you have asked me about that. This personal

influence is our most powerful dynamic weapon. It is the new element

which we introduce into the situation and by means of which we make

it fluid. The intellectual content of our explanations cannot do it, for the

patient, who shares all the prejudices of the world around him, need

believe us as little as our scientific critics do. The neurotic sets to work

because he has faith in the analyst, and he believes him because he

acquires a special emotional attitude towards the figure of the analyst.

Children, too, only believe people they are attached to. I have already

told  you  what  use  we  make  of  this  particularly  large  ‘suggestive’

influence. Not for suppressing the symptoms - this distinguishes the

analytic method from other psychotherapeutic procedures - but as a

motive force to induce the patient to overcome his resistances.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4367

 

   ‘Well, and if that succeeds, does not everything then go smoothly?’

      Yes,  it  ought  to.  But  there  turns  out  to  be  an  unexpected

complication. It was perhaps the greatest of the analyst’s surprises tofind that the emotional relation which the patient adopts towards him is

of  a  quite  peculiar  nature.  The  very  first  doctor  who  attempted  an

analysis - it was not myself - came up against this phenomenon and

did not know what to make of it. For this emotional relation is, to put it

plainly, in the nature of falling in love. Strange, is it not? Especially

when you take into account that the analyst does nothing to provoke it

but  on  the  contrary  rather  keeps  at  a  distance  from  the  patient,

speaking  humanly,  and  surrounds  himself  with  some  degree  of

reserve  -  when  you  learn  besides  that  this  odd  love-relationship

disregards anything else that is really propitious and every variation in

personal  attraction,  age,  sex  or  class.  This  love  is  of  a  positively

compulsive  kind.  Not  that  that  characteristic  need  be  absent  from

spontaneous falling in love. As you know, the contrary is often the

case.  But  in  the  analytic  situation  it  makes  its  appearance  with

complete regularity without there being any rational explanation for it.

One would have thought that the patient’s relation to the analyst called

for  no  more  than  a  certain  amount  of  respect,  trust,  gratitude  and

human  sympathy.  Instead,  there  is  this  falling  in  love,  which  itself

gives the impression of being a pathological phenomenon.

   ‘I should have thought all the same that it would be favourable for

your analytic purposes. If someone is in love, he is amenable, and he

will do anything in the world for the sake of the other person.’

   Yes. It is favourable to start with. But when this falling in love has

grown  deeper,  its  whole  nature  comes  to  light,  much  of  which  is

incompatible  with  the  task  of  analysis.  The  patient’s  love  is  not

satisfied with being obedient; it grows exacting, calls for affectionate

and  sensual  satisfactions,  it  demands  exclusiveness,  it  develops

jealousy,  and  it  shows  more  and  more  clearly  its  reverse  side,  its

readiness to become hostile and revengeful if it cannot obtain its ends.

At the same time, like all falling in love, it drives away all other mental

material; it extinguishes interest in the treatment and in recovery - in

short, there can be no doubt that it has taken the place of the neurosis

and that our work has had the result of driving out one form of illness

with another.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis                                                                                      4368

 

      ‘That  does  sound  hopeless!  What  can  be  done  about  it?  The

analysis would have to be given up. But if, as you say, the same thing

happens in every case, it would be impossible to carry through any

analyses at all.’

   We will begin by using the situation in order to learn something from

it. What we learn may then perhaps help us to master it. Is it not an

extremely  noteworthy  fact  that  we  succeed  in  transforming  every

neurosis, whatever its content, into a condition of pathological love?

   Our conviction that a portion of erotic life that has been abnormally

employed  lies  at  the  basis  of  neuroses  must  be  unshakeably

strengthened  by  this  experience.  With  this  discovery  we  are  once

more on a firm footing and can venture to make this love itself the

object  of  analysis.  And  we  can  make  another  observation.  Analytic

love is not manifested in every case as clearly and blatantly as I have

tried to depict it. Why not? We can soon see. In proportion as the

purely  sensual  and  the  hostile  sides  of  his  love  try  to  show

themselves, the patient’s opposition to them is aroused. He struggles

against them and tries to repress them before our very eyes. And now

we understand what is happening. The patient is repeating in the form

of falling in love with the analyst mental experiences which he has

already  been  through  once  before;  he  has transferred  on  to  the

analyst  mental  attitudes  that  were  lying  ready  in  him  and  were

intimately connected with his neurosis. He is also repeating before our

eyes  his  old  defensive  actions;  he  would  like  best  to  repeat  in  his

relation to the analyst all the history of that forgotten period of his life.

So what he is showing us is the kernel of his intimate life history: he is

reproducing it tangibly, as though it were actually happening, instead

of remembering it. In this way the riddle of the transference-love is

solved and the analysis can proceed on its way - with the help of the

new situation which had seemed such a menace to it.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4369

 

   ‘That is very cunning. And is the patient so easy to convince that heis not in love but only obliged to stage a revival of an old piece!’

   Everything now depends on that. And the whole skill in handling the

‘transference’  is  devoted  to  bringing  it  about.  As  you  see,  the

requirements of analytic technique reach their maximum at this point.

Here the gravest mistakes can be made or the greatest successes be

registered.  It  would  be  folly  to  attempt  to  evade  the  difficulties  by

suppressing or neglecting the transference; whatever else had been

done in the treatment, it would not deserve the name of an analysis.

To  send  the  patient  away  as  soon  as  the  inconveniences  of  his

transference  neurosis  make  their  appearance  would  be  no  more

sensible, and would moreover be cowardly. It would be as though one

had  conjured  up  spirits  and  run  away  from  them  as  soon  as  they

appeared. Sometimes, it is true, nothing else is possible. There are

cases in which one cannot master the unleashed transference and the

analysis has to be broken of; but one must at least have struggled with

the evil spirits to the best of one’s strength. To yield to the demands of

the  transference,  to  fulfil  the  patient’s  wishes  for  affectionate  and

sensual  satisfaction,  is  not  only  justly  forbidden  by  moral

considerations but is also completely ineffective as a technical method

for attaining the purpose of the analysis. A neurotic cannot be cured

by  being  enabled  to  reproduce  uncorrected  an  unconscious

stereotype  plate  that  is  ready  to  hand  in  him.  If  one  engages  in

compromises with him by offering him partial satisfactions in exchange

for his further collaboration in the analysis, one must beware of falling

into the ridiculous situation of the cleric who was supposed to convert

a sick insurance agent. The sick man remained unconverted but the

cleric  took  his  leave  insured.  The  only  possible  way  out  of  the

transference situation is to trace it back to the patient’s past, as he

really  experienced  it  or  as  he  pictured  it  through  the  wish-fulfilling

activity of his imagination. And this demands from the analyst much

skill, patience, calm and self-abnegation.

   ‘And where do you suppose the neurotic experienced the prototype

of his transference-love?’

   In his childhood: as a rule in his relation with one of his parents. You

will remember what importance we had to attribute to these earliest

emotional ties. So here the circle closes.

                             The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4370

 

   ‘Have you finished at last? I am feeling just a little bewildered with all

I have heard from you. Only tell me one thing more: how and where

can one learn what is necessary for practising analysis?’

      There  are  at  the  moment  two  Institutes  at  which  instruction  in

psycho-analysis is given. The first has been founded in Berlin by Dr.

Max Eitingon, who is a member of the Society there. The second is

maintained  by  the  Vienna  Psycho-Analytical  Society  at  its  own

expense  and  at  considerable  sacrifice.  The  part  played  by  the

authorities is at present limited to the many difficulties which they put

in the way of the young undertaking. A third training Institute is at this

moment  being  opened  in  London  by  the  Society  there,  under  the

direction  of  Dr.  Ernest  Jones.  At  these  Institutes  the  candidates

themselves are taken into analysis, receive theoretical instruction by

lectures on all the subjects that are important for them, and enjoy the

supervision of older and more experienced analysts when they are

allowed  to  make  their  first  trials  with  comparatively  slight  cases.  A

period of some two years is calculated for this training. Even after this

period,  of  course,  the  candidate  is  only  a  beginner  and  not  yet  a

master. What is still needed must be acquired by practice and by an

exchange of ideas in the psycho-analytical societies in which young

and old members meet together. Preparation for analytic activity is by

no means so easy and simple. The work is hard, the responsibility

great.  But  anyone  who  has  passed  through  such  a  course  of

instruction, who has been analysed himself, who has mastered what

can be taught to-day of the psychology of the unconscious, who is at

home  in  the  science  of  sexual  life,  who  has  learnt  the  delicate

technique  of  psycho-analysis,  the  art  of  interpretation,  of  fighting

resistances  and  of  handling  the  transference  -  anyone  who  has

accomplished all this is  no  longer  a  layman  in  the  field  of  psycho-

analysis.  He  is  capable  of  undertaking  the  treatment  of  neurotic

disorders, and will be able in time to achieve in that field whatever can

be required from this form of therapy.

                             The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4371

 

                                            VI

 

   ‘You have expended a great deal of effort on showing me what

psycho-analysis is and what sort of knowledge is needed in order to

practise it with some prospect of success. Very well. Listening to you

can have done me no harm. But I do not know what influence on my

judgement you expect your explanations to have. I see before me a

case  which  has  nothing  unusual  about  it.  The  neuroses  are  a

particular kind of illness and analysis is a particular method of treating

them - a specialized branch of medicine. It is the rule in other cases as

well for a doctor who has chosen a special branch of medicine not to

be  satisfied  with  the  education  that  is  confirmed  by  his  diploma:

particularly if he intends to set up in a fairly large town, such as can

alone  offer  a  livelihood  to  specialists.  Anyone  who  wants  to  be  a

surgeon tries to work for a few years at a surgical clinic, and similarly

with oculists, laryngologists and so on - to say nothing of psychiatrists,

who are perhaps never able to get away from a state institution or a

sanatorium. And the same will happen in the case of psycho-analysts:

anyone  who  decides  in  favour  of  this  new  specialized  branch  of

medicine will, when his studies are completed, take on the two years’

training you spoke of in a training institute, if it really requires so much

time. He will realize afterwards, too, that it is to his advantage to keep

up his contact with his colleagues in a psycho-analytical society, and

everything will go along swimmingly. I cannot see where there is a

place in this for the question of lay analysis.’

   A doctor who does what you have promised on his behalf will be

welcome  to  all  of  us.  Four-fifths  of  those  whom  I  recognize  as  my

pupils are in any case doctors. But allow me to point out to you how

the relations of doctors to analysis have really developed and how

they  will  probably  continue  to  develop.  Doctors  have  no  historical

claim to the sole possession of analysis. On the contrary, until recently

they have met it with everything possible that could damage it, from

the shallowest ridicule to the gravest calumny. You will justly reply that

that belongs to the past and need not affect the future. I agree, but Ifear the future will be different from what you have foretold.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4372

 

   Permit me to give the word ‘quack’ the meaning it ought to have

instead of the legal one. According to the law a quack is anyone who

treats patients without possessing a state diploma to prove he is a

doctor.  I  should  prefer  another  definition:  a  quack  is  anyone  who

undertakes  a  treatment  without  possessing  the  knowledge  and

capacities  necessary  for  it.  Taking  my  stand  on  this  definition,  I

venture to assert that - not only in European countries - doctors form a

preponderating contingent of quacks in analysis. They very frequently

practise  analytic  treatment  without  having  learnt  it  and  without

understanding it.

   It is no use your objecting that that is unconscientious and that you

cannot believe doctors capable of it; that after all a doctor knows that

a medical diploma is not a letter of marque and that a patient is not an

outlaw; and that one must always grant to a doctor that he is acting in

good faith even if he may perhaps be in error.

   The facts remain; we will hope that they can be accounted for as

you think. I will try to explain to you how it becomes possible for a

doctor to act in connection with psycho-analysis in a manner which he

would carefully avoid in every other field.

   The first consideration is that in his medical school a doctor receives

a training which is more or less the opposite of what he would need as

a preparation for psycho-analysis. His attention has been directed to

objectively ascertainable facts of anatomy, physics and chemistry, on

the correct appreciation and suitable influencing of which the success

of medical treatment depends. The problem of life is brought into his

field of vision so far as it has hitherto been explained to us by the play

of forces which can also be observed in inanimate nature. His interest

is not aroused in the mental side of vital phenomena; medicine is not

concerned with the study of the higher intellectual functions, which lies

in the sphere of another faculty. Only psychiatry is supposed to deal

with  the  disturbances  of  mental  functions;  but  we  know  in  whatmanner  and  with  what  aims  it  does  so.  It  looks  for  the  somatic

determinants of mental disorders and treats them like other causes of

illness.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4373

 

      Psychiatry  is  right  to  do  so  and  medical  education  is  clearly

excellent. If it is described as one-sided, one must first discover the

standpoint  from  which  one  is  making  that  characteristic  into  a

reproach. In itself every science is one-sided. It must be so, since it

restricts itself to particular subjects, points of view and methods. It is a

piece  of  nonsense  in  which  I  would  take  no  part  to  play  off  one

science against another. After all, physics does not diminish the value

of chemistry; it cannot take its place but on the other hand cannot be

replaced  by  it.  Psycho-analysis  is  certainly  quite  particularly  one-

sided, as being the science of the mental unconscious. We must not

therefore dispute to the medical sciences their right to be one-sided.

   We shall only find the standpoint we are in search of if we turn from

scientific  medicine  to  practical  therapeutics.  A  sick  person  is  a

complicated  organism.  He  may  remind  us  that  even  the  mental

phenomena which are so hard to grasp should not be effaced from the

picture of life. Neurotics, indeed, are an undesired complication, an

embarrassment as much to therapeutics as to jurisprudencc and to

military  service.  But  they  exist  and  are  a  particular  concern  of

medicine. Medical education, however, does nothing, literally nothing,

towards  their  understanding  and  treatment.  In  view  of  the  intimate

connection  between  the  things  that  we  distinguish  as  physical  and

mental, we may look forward to a day when paths of knowledge and,

let  us  hope,  of  influence  will  be  opened  up,  leading  from  organic

biology and chemistry to the field of neurotic phenomena. That day

still  seems  a  distant  one,  and  for  the  present  these  illnesses  are

inaccessible to us from the direction of medicine.

      It  would  be  tolerable  if  medical  education  merely  failed  to  give

doctors any orientation in the field of the neuroses. But it does more: it

gives them a false and detrimental attitude. Doctors whose interesthas not been aroused in the psychical factors of life are all too ready

to form a low estimate of them and to ridicule them as unscientific. For

that reason they are unable to take anything really seriously which has

to  do  with  them  and  do  not  recognize  the  obligations  which  derive

from them. They therefore fall into the layman’s lack of respect for

psychological research and make their own task easy for themselves.

- No doubt neurotics have to be treated, since they are sick people

and come to the doctor; and one must always be ready to experiment

with  something  new.  But  why  burden  oneself  with  a  tedious

preparation? We shall manage all right; who can tell if what they teach

in  the  analytic  institutes  is  any  good?  -  The  less  such  doctors

understand  about  the  matter,  the  more  venturesome  they  become.

Only a man who really knows is modest, for he knows how insufficient

his knowledge is.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4374

 

      The  comparison  which  you  brought  up  to  pacify  me,  between

specialization in analysis and in other branches of medicine, is thus

not applicable. For surgery, ophthalmology, and so on, the medical

school itself offers an opportunity for further education. The analytic

training  institutes  are  few  in  number,  young  in  years,  and  without

authority. The medical schools have not recognized them and take no

notice of them. The young doctor, who has had to take so much on

trust from his teachers that he has had little occasion for educating his

judgement, will gladly seize an occasion for playing the part of a critic

for once in a field in which there is as yet no recognized authority.

   There are other things too that favour his appearing as an analytic

quack.  If  he  tried  to  undertake  eye-operations  without  sufficient

preparation, the failure of his cataract extractions and iridectomies and

the absence of patients would soon bring his hazardous enterprise to

an end. The practice of analysis is comparatively safe for him. The

public is spoilt by the average successful outcome of eye-operations

and expects cure from the surgeon. But if a ‘nerve-specialist’ fails to

restore his patients no one is surprised. People have not been spoiltby successes in the therapy of the neuroses; the nerve-specialist has

at least ‘taken a lot of trouble with them’. Indeed, there is not much

that can be done; nature must help, or time. With women there is first

menstruation,  then  marriage,  and  later  on  the  menopause.  Finally

death is a real help. Moreover, what the medical analyst has done with

his neurotic patient is so inconspicuous that no reproach can attach to

it. He has made use of no instruments or medicines; he has merely

conversed  with  him  and  tried  to  talk  him  into  or  out  of  something.

Surely  that  can  do  no  harm,  especially  if  he  avoids  touching  on

distressing  or  agitating  subjects.  The  medical  analyst,  who  has

avoided any strict teaching, will, no doubt, not have omitted an attempt

to improve analysis, to pull out its poison fangs and make it pleasant

for the patient. And it will be wise for him to stop there; for if he really

ventures to call up resistances and then does not know how to meet

them, he may in true earnest make himself unpopular.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4375

 

      Honesty  compels  me  to  admit  that  the  activity  of  an  untrained

analyst  does  less  harm  to  his  patients  than  that  of  an  unskilled

surgeon. The possible damage is limited to the patient having been

led  into  useless  expenditure  and  having  his  chances  of  recovery

removed  or  diminished.  Furthermore,  the  reputation  of  analytic

therapy has been lowered. All this is most undesirable, but it bears no

comparison with the dangers that threaten from the knife of a surgical

quack.  In  my  judgement,  severe  or  permanent  aggravations  of  a

pathological condition are not to be feared even with an unskilled use

of analysis. The unwelcome reactions cease after a while. Compared

with  the  traumas  of  life  which  have  provoked  the  illness,  a  little

mishandling  by  the  doctor  is  of  no  account.  It  is  simply  that  the

unsuitable attempt at a cure has done the patient no good.

   ‘I have listened to your account of the medical quack in analysis

without interrupting you, though I formed an impression that you are

dominated  by  a  hostility  against  the  medical  profession  to  the

historical explanation of which you yourself have pointed the way. ButI will grant you one thing: if analyses are to be carried out, it should be

by people who have been thoroughly trained for it. And do you not

think that with time the doctors who turn to analysis will do everything

to obtain that training?’

      I  fear  not.  So  long  as  the  attitude  of  the  medical  school  to  the

analytic  training  institute  remains  unaltered,  doctors  will  find  the

temptation to make things easier for themselves too great.

   ‘But you seem to be consistently evading any direct pronouncement

on the question of lay analysis. What I guess now is that, because it is

impossible to keep a check on doctors who want to analyse, you are

proposing,  out  of  revenge,  as  it  were,  to  punish  them  by  depriving

them of their monopoly in analysis and by throwing open this medical

activity to laymen as well.’

      I  cannot  say  whether  you  have  guessed  my  motives  correctly.

Perhaps I shall be able later on to put evidence before you of a less

partial attitude. But I lay stress on the demand that no one should

practise  analysis  who  has  not  acquired  the  right  to  do  so  by  a

particular training. Whether such a person is a doctor or not seems to

me immaterial.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4376

 

   ‘Then what definite proposals have you to make?’

   I have not got so far as that yet; and I cannot tell whether I shall get

there at all. I should like to discuss another question with you, and first

of all to touch on one special point. It is said that the authorities, at the

instigation  of  the  medical  profession,  want  to  forbid  the  practice  of

analysis by laymen altogether. Such a prohibition would also affect the

non-medical  members  of  the  Psycho-Analytical  Society,  who  have

enjoyed an excellent training and have perfected themselves greatly

by practice. If the prohibition were enacted, we should find ourselves

in a position in which a number of people are prevented from carrying

out an activity which one can safely feel convinced they can perform

very well, while the same activity is opened to other people for whom

there is no question of a similar guarantee. That is not precisely thesort of result to which legislation should lead. However, this special

problem is neither very important nor difficult to solve. Only a handful

of people are concerned, who cannot be seriously damaged. They will

probably emigrate to Germany where no legislation will prevent them

from finding recognition for their proficiency. If it is desired to spare

them this and to mitigate the law’s severity, that can easily be done on

the  basis  of  some  well-known  precedents.  Under  the  Austrian

Monarchy  it  repeatedly  happened  that  permission  was  given  to

notorious  quacks, ad  personam,  to  carry  out  medical  activities  in

certain  fields,  because  people  were  convinced  of  their  real  ability.

Those concerned were for the most part peasant healers, and their

recommendation seems regularly to have been made by one of the

Archduchesses  who  were  once  so  numerous;  but  it  ought  to  be

possible for it also to be done in the case of town-dwellers and on the

basis of a different and merely expert guarantee. Such a prohibition

would  have  more  important  effects  on  the  Vienna  analytic  training

institute,  which  would  thenceforward  be  unable  to  accept  any

candidates for training from non-medical circles. Thus once again in

our country a line of intellectual activity would be suppressed which is

allowed to develop freely elsewhere. I am the last person to claim any

competence in judging laws and regulations. But this much I can see:

that to lay emphasis on our quackery law does not lead in the direction

of the approach to conditions in Germany which is so much aimed at

to-day,  and  that  the  application  of  that  law  to  the  case  of  psycho-

analysis has something of an anachronism about it, since at the time

of its enactment there was as yet no such thing as analysis and the

peculiar nature of neurotic illnesses was not yet recognized.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4377

 

   I come now to a question the discussion of which seems to me more

important. Is the practice of psycho-analysis a matter which should in

general  be  subject  to  official  interference,  or  would  it  be  more

expedient to leave it to follow its natural development? I shall certainly

not come to any decision on this point here and now, but I shall takethe liberty of putting the problem before you for your consideration. In

our country from of old a positive furor prohibendi has been the rule, a

tendency  to  keep  people  under  tutelage,  to  interfere  and  to  forbid,

which, as we all know, has not borne particularly good fruit. In our new

republican Austria, it seems, things have not yet changed very much. I

fancy you will have an important word to say in deciding the case of

psycho-analysis which we are now considering; I do not know whether

you  have  the  wish  or  the  influence  with  which  to  oppose  these

bureaucratic  tendencies.  At  all  events,  I  shall  not  spare  you  my

unauthoritative  thoughts  on  the  subject.  In  my  opinion  a

superabundance of regulations and prohibitions injures the authority of

the law. It can be observed that where only a few prohibitions exist

they  are  carefully  observed,  but  where  one  is  accompanied  by

prohibitions at every step, one feels definitely tempted to disregard

them. Moreover, it does not mean one is quite an anarchist if one is

prepared to realize that laws and regulations cannot from their origin

claim to possess the attribute of being sacred and untransgressable,

that  they  are  often  inadequately  framed  and  offend  our  sense  of

justice, or will do so after a time, and that, in view of the sluggishness

of the authorities, there is often no other means of correcting such

inexpedient  laws  than  by  boldly  violating  them.  Furthermore,  if  one

desires to maintain respect for laws and regulations it is advisable not

to enact any where a watch cannot easily be kept on whether they are

obeyed or transgressed. Much of what I have quoted above on the

practice of analysis by doctors could be repeated here in regard to

genuine analysis by laymen which the law is seeking to suppress. The

course  of  an  analysis  is  most  inconspicuous,  it  employs  neither

medicines  nor  instruments  and  consists  only  in  talking  and  an

exchange of information; it will not be easy to prove that a layman is

practising  ‘analysis’,  if  he  asserts  that  he  is  merely  giving

encouragement  and  explanations  and  trying  to  establish  a  healthy

human influence on people who are in search of mental assistance. It

would surely not be possible to forbid that merely because doctors

sometimes  do  the  same  thing.  In  English-speaking  countries  the

practices of Christian Science have become very widespread: a kind

of  dialectical  denial  of  the  evils  in  life,  based  on  an  appeal  to  the

doctrines of the Christian religion. I do not hesitate to assert that thatprocedure represents a regrettable aberration of the human spirit; but

who in America or England would dream of forbidding it and making it

punishable? Are the authorities so certain of the right path to salvation

that they venture to prevent each man from trying ‘to be saved after

his  own  fashion’.  And  granted  that  many  people  if  they  are  left  to

themselves  run  into  danger  and  come  to  grief,  would  not  the

authorities do better carefully to mark the limits of the regions which

are to be regarded as not to be trespassed upon, and for the rest, so

far as possible, to allow human beings to be educated by experience

and  mutual  influence?  Psycho-analysis  is  something  so  new  in  the

world, the mass of mankind is so little instructed about it, the attitude

of official science to it is still so vacillating, that it seems to me over-

hasty to intervene in its development with legislative regulations. Let

us allow patients themselves to discover that it is damaging to them to

look for mental assistance to people who have not learnt how to give

it. If we explain this to them and warn them against it, we shall have

spared ourselves the need to forbid it. On the main roads of Italy the

pylons that carry high-tension cables bear the brief and impressive

inscription: ‘Chi tocca, muore.’ This is perfectly calculated to regulate

the behaviour of passers-by to any wires that may be hanging down.

The  corresponding  German  notices  exhibit  an  unnecessary  and

offensive  verbosity:  ‘Das  Berühren  der  Leitungsdrähte  ist,  weil

lebensgefährlich, stregstens verboten.’ Why the prohibition? Anyone

who  holds  his  life  dear  will  make  the  prohibition  for  himself;  and

anyone  who  wants  to  kill  himself  in  that  way  will  not  ask  for

permission.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4378

 

   ‘But there are instances that can be quoted as legal precedents

against allowing lay analysis; I mean the prohibition against laymen

practising  hypnotism  and  the  recently  enacted  prohibition  against

holding spiritualist seances or founding spiritualist societies.’

   I cannot say that I am an admirer of these measures. The second

one is a quite undisguised encroachment of police supervision to thedetriment  of  intellectual  freedom.  I  am  beyond  suspicion  of  having

much belief in what are known as ‘occult phenomena’ or of feeling any

desire that they should be recognized. But prohibitions like these will

not stifle people’s interest in that supposedly mysterious world. They

may on the contrary have done much harm and have closed the door

to an impartial curiosity which might have arrived at a judgement that

would have set us free from these harassing possibilities. But once

again this only applies to Austria. In other countries ‘para-psychical’

researches are not met by any legal obstacles. The case of hypnotism

is somewhat different from that of analysis. Hypnotism is the evoking

of an abnormal mental state and is used by laymen to-day only for the

purpose of public shows. If hypnotic therapy had maintained its very

promising beginnings, a position would have been arrived at similar to

that of analysis. And incidentally the history of hypnotism provides a

precedent  for  that  of  analysis  in  another  direction.  When  I  was  a

young lecturer in neuropathology, the doctors inveighed passionately

against hypnotism, declared that it was a swindle, a deception of the

Devil’s  and  a  highly  dangerous  procedure.  To-day  they  have

monopolized  this  same  hypnotism  and  they  make  use  of  it

unhesitatingly as a method of examination; for some nerve specialists

it is still their chief therapeutic instrument.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4379

 

      But  I  have  already  told  you  that  I  have  no  intention  of  making

proposals which are based on the decision as to whether legal control

or letting things go is to be preferred in the matter of analysis. I know

this is a question of principle on the reply to which the inclinations of

persons  in  authority  will  probably  have  more  influence  than

arguments.  I  have  already  set  out  what  seems  to  me  to  speak  in

favour of a policy of laissez faire. If the other decision is taken - for a

policy of active intervention - then it seems to me that in any case a

lame  and  unjust  measure  of  ruthlessly  forbidding  analysis  by  non-

doctors  will  be  an  insufficient  outcome.  More  will  have  to  be

considered in that case: the conditions will have to be laid down underwhich the practice of analysis shall be permitted to all those who seek

to make use of it, an authority will have to be set up from whom one

can learn what analysis is and what sort of preparation is needed for

it,  and  the  possibilities  for  instruction  in  analysis  will  have  to  be

encouraged. We must therefore either leave things alone or establish

order and clarity; we must not rush into a complicated situation with a

single isolated prohibition derived mechanically from a regulation that

has become inadequate.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4380

 

                                          VII

 

   ‘Yes, but the doctors! the doctors! I cannot induce you to go into the

real subject of our conversations. You still keep on evading me. It is a

question of whether we should not give doctors the exclusive right of

practising  analysis  -  for  all  I  care,  after  they  have  fulfilled  certain

conditions. The majority of doctors are certainly not quacks in analysis

as  you  have  represented  them.  You  say  yourself  that  the  great

majority of your pupils and followers are doctors. It has come to my

ears that they are far from sharing your point of view on the question

of lay analysis. I may no doubt assume that your pupils agree with

your  demands  for  sufficient  preparation  and  so  on;  and  yet  these

pupils think it consistent to close the practice of analysis to laymen. Is

that so? and if so, how do you explain it?’

   I see you are well informed. Yes, it is so. Not all, it is true, but a good

proportion of my medical colleagues do not agree with me over this,

and are in favour of doctors having an exclusive right to the analytic

treatment of neurotics. This will show you that differences of opinion

are allowed even in our camp. The side I take is well known and the

contradiction on the subject of lay analysis does not interfere with our

good understanding. How can I explain the attitude of these pupils of

mine to you? I do not know for certain; I think it must be the power of

professional  feeling.  The  course  of  their  development  has  been

different from mine, they still feel uncomfortable in their isolation fromtheir colleagues, they would like to be accepted by the ‘profession’ as

having  plenary  rights,  and  are  prepared,  in  exchange  for  that

tolerance, to make a sacrifice at a point whose vital importance is not

obvious to them. Perhaps it may be otherwise; to impute motives of

competition  to  them  would  be  not  only  to  accuse  them  of  base

sentiments but also to attribute a strange shortsightedness to them.

They are always ready to introduce other doctors into analysis, and

from a material point of view it must be a matter of indifference to

them whether they have to share the available patients with medical

colleagues or with laymen. But something different probably plays a

part. These pupils of mine may be influenced by certain factors which

guarantee a doctor an undoubted advantage over a layman in analytic

practice.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4381

 

      ‘Guarantee  him  an  advantage?  There  we  have  it.  So  you  are

admitting the advantage at last? This should settle the question.’

   The admission is not hard for me to make. It may show you that I am

not  so  passionately  prejudiced  as  you  suppose.  I  have  put  off

mentioning  these  things  because  their  discussion  will  once  again

make theoretical considerations necessary.

   ‘What are you thinking of now?’

      First  there  is  the  question  of  diagnosis.  When  one  takes  into

analysis  a  patient  suffering  from  what  are  described  as  nervous

disorders, one wishes beforehand to be certain - so far, of course, as

certainty can be attained - that he is suited for this kind of treatment,

that one can help him, that is to say, by this method. That, however, is

only the case if he really has a neurosis.

      ‘I  should  have  thought  that  would  be  recognizable  from  the

phenomena, the symptoms, of which he complains.’

      This  is  where  a  fresh  complication  arises.  It  cannot  always  be

recognized  with  complete  certainty.  The  patient  may  exhibit  the

external picture of a neurosis, and yet it may be something else - the

beginning  of  an  incurable  mental  disease  or  the  preliminary  of  adestructive  process  in  the  brain.  The  distinction  -  the  differential

diagnosis - is not always easy and cannot be made immediately in

every phase. The responsibility for such a decision can of course only

be undertaken by a doctor. As I have said, it is not always easy for

him. The illness may have an innocent appearance for a considerable

time, till in the end it after all displays its evil character. Indeed, it is

one of the regular fears of neurotics that they may become insane.

However, if a doctor has been mistaken for a time over a case of this

sort or has been in uncertainty about it, no harm has been caused and

nothing unnecessary has been done. Nor indeed would the analytic

treatment of this case have done any harm, though it would have been

exposed  as  an  unnecessary  waste.  And  moreover  there  would

certainly  be  enough  people  who  would  blame  the  analysis  for  the

unfortunate outcome. Unjustly, no doubt, but such occasions ought to

be avoided.

   ‘But that sounds hopeless. It strikes at the roots of everything you

have told me about the nature and origin of a neurosis.’

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4382

 

   Not at all. It merely confirms once again the fact that neurotics are a

nuisance  and  an  embarrassment  for  all  concerned  -  including  the

analysts. But perhaps I shall clear up your confusion if I state my new

information in more correct terms. It would probably be more correct to

say  of  the  cases  we  are  now  dealing  with  that  they  have  readily

developed a neurosis, but that it is not psychogenic but somatogenic -

that its causes are not mental but physical. Do you understand?

   ‘Oh, yes, I understand. But I cannot bring it into harmony with the

other side, the psychological one.’

   That can be managed, though, if one bears in mind the complexities

of living substance. In what did we find the essence of a neurosis? In

the fact that the ego, the higher organization of the mental apparatus

(elevated through the influence of the external world), is not able to

fulfil its function of mediating between the id and reality, that in its

feebleness it draws back from some instinctual portions of the id and,to  make  up  for  this,  has  to  put  up  with  the  consequences  of  its

renunciation in the form of restrictions, symptoms and unsuccessful

reaction-formations.

   A feebleness of the ego of this sort is to be found in all of us in

childhood;  and  that  is  why  the  experiences  of  the  earliest  years  of

childhood  are  of  such  great  importance  for  later  life.  Under  the

extraordinary  burden  of  this  period  of  childhood  we  have  in  a  few

years to cover the enormous developmental distance between stone-

age  primitive  men  and  the  participants  in  contemporary  civilization,

and,  at  the  same  time  and  in  particular,  we  have  to  fend  off  the

instinctual  impulses  of  the  early  sexual  period  -  under  this  burden,

then,  our  ego  takes  refuge  in  repression  and  lays  itself  open  to  a

childhood  neurosis,  the  precipitate  of  which  it  carries  with  it  into

maturity as a disposition to a later nervous illness. Everything now

depends  on  how  the  growing  organism  is  treated  by  fate.  If  life

becomes  too  hard,  if  the  gulf  between  instinctual  claims  and  the

demands of reality becomes too great, the ego may fail in its efforts to

reconcile the two, and the more readily, the more it is inhibited by the

disposition carried over by it from infancy. The process of repression

is then repeated, the instincts tear themselves away from the ego’s

domination,  find  their  substitutive  satisfactions  along  the  paths  of

regression, and the poor ego has become helplessly neurotic.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4383

 

   Only let us hold fast to this: the nodal point and pivot of the whole

situation is the relative strength of the ego organization. We shall then

find it easy to complete our aetiological survey. As what may be called

the normal causes of neurotic illness we already know the feebleness

of  the  childhood  ego,  the  task  of  dealing  with  the  early  sexual

impulses and the effects of the more or less chance experiences of

childhood.  Is  it  not  possible,  however,  that  yet  other  factors  play  a

part, derived from the time before the beginning of the child’s life? For

instance, an innate strength and unruliness of the instinctual life in the

id,  which  from  the  outset  sets  the  ego  tasks  too  hard  for  it?  Or  aspecial  developmental  feebleness  of  the  ego  due  to  unknown

reasons?  Such  factors  must  of  course  acquire  an  aetiological

importance, in some cases a transcendent one. We have invariably to

reckon with the instinctual strength of the id; if it has developed to

excess, the prospects of our therapy are poor. We still know too little

of the causes of a developmental inhibition of the ego. These then

would be the cases of neurosis with an essentially constitutional basis.

Without  some  such  constitutional,  congenital  favouring  factors  a

neurosis can, no doubt, scarcely come about.

   But if the relative feebleness of the ego is the decisive factor for the

genesis of a neurosis, it must also be possible for a later physical

illness  to  produce  a  neurosis,  provided  that  it  can  bring  about  an

enfeeblement  of  the  ego.  And  that,  once  again,  is  very  frequently

found. A physical disorder of this kind can affect the instinctual life in

the id and increase the strength of the instincts beyond the limit up to

which the ego is capable of coping with them. The normal model of

such  processes  is  perhaps  the  alteration  in  women  caused  by  the

disturbances of menstruation and the menopause. Or again, a general

somatic  illness,  indeed  an  organic  disease  of  the  nervous  central

organ, may attack the nutritional conditions of the mental apparatus

and compel it to reduce its functioning and to bring to a halt its more

delicate  workings,  one  of  which  is  the  maintenance  of  the  ego

organization.  In  all  these  cases  approximately  the  same  picture  of

neurosis  emerges;  neurosis  always  has  the  same  psychological

mechanism, but, as we see, a most varied and often very complex

aetiology.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4384

 

   ‘You please me better now. You have begun talking like a doctor at

last. And now I expect you to admit that such a complicated medical

affair as a neurosis can only be handled by a doctor.’

      I  fear  you  are  overshooting  the  mark.  What  we  have  been

discussing was a piece of pathology, what we are concerned with in

analysis is a therapeutic procedure. I allow - no, I insist - that in everycase which is under consideration for analysis the diagnosis shall be

established  first  by  a  doctor.  Far  the  greater  number  of  neuroses

which occupy us are fortunately of a psychogenic nature and give no

grounds for pathological suspicions. Once the doctor has established

this, he can confidently hand over the treatment to a lay analyst. In our

analytical societies matters have always been arranged in that way.

Thanks  to  the  intimate  contact  between  medical  and  non-medical

members, mistakes such as might be feared have been as good as

completely avoided. There is a further contingency, again, in which the

analyst  has  to  ask  the  doctor’s  help.  In  the  course  of  an  analytic

treatment, symptoms - most often physical symptoms - may appear

about  which  one  is  doubtful  whether  they  should  be  regarded  as

belonging  to  the  neurosis  or  whether  they  should  be  related  to  an

independent organic illness that has intervened. The decision on this

point must once again be left to a doctor.

   ‘So that even during the course of an analysis a lay analyst cannot

do without a doctor. A fresh argument against their fitness.’

   No. No argument against lay analysts can be manufactured out of

this possibility, for in such circumstances a medical analyst would not

act differently.

   ‘I do not understand that.’

   There is a technical rule that an analyst, if dubious symptoms like

this emerge during the treatment, shall not submit them to his own

judgement but shall get them reported upon by a doctor who is not

connected with analysis - a consultant physician, perhaps - even if the

analyst  himself  is  a  doctor  and  still  well  versed  in  his  medical

knowledge.

   ‘And why should a rule be made that seems to me so uncalled-for?’

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4385

 

   It is not uncalled-for; in fact there are several reasons for it. In the

first  place  it  is  not  a  good  plan  for  a  combination  of  organic  and

psychical treatment to be carried out by one and the same person.

Secondly the relation in the transference may make it inadvisable forthe analyst to examine the patient physically. And thirdly the analyst

has every reason for doubting whether he is unprejudiced, since his

interests are directed so intensely to the psychical factors.

   ‘I now understand your attitude to lay analysis quite clearly. You are

determined  that  there  must  be  lay  analysts.  And  since  you  cannot

dispute  their  inadequacy  for  their  task,  you  are  scraping  together

everything you can to excuse them and make their existence easier.

But I cannot in the least see why there should be lay analysts, who,

after all, can only be therapists of the second class. I am ready, so far

as  I  am  concerned,  to  make  an  exception  in  the  case  of  the  few

laymen who have already been trained as analysts; but no fresh ones

should be created and the training institutes should be put under an

obligation to take no more laymen into training.’

   I am at one with you, if it can be shown that all the interests involved

will be served by this restriction. You will agree that these interests are

of three sorts: that of the patients, that of the doctors and - last not

least  -  that  of  science,  which  indeed  comprises  the  interests  of  all

future patients. Shall we examine these three points together?

      For  the  patient,  then,  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  the

analyst  is  a  doctor  or  not,  provided  only  that  the  danger  of  his

condition being misunderstood is excluded by the necessary medical

report before the treatment begins and on some possible occasions

during the course of it. For him it is incomparably more important that

the  analyst  should  possess  personal  qualities  that  make  him

trustworthy,  and  that  he  should  have  acquired  the  knowledge  and

understanding  as  well  as  the  experience  which  alone  can  make  it

possible  for  him  to  fulfil  his  task.  It  might  be  thought  that  it  would

damage an analyst’s authority if the patient knows that he is not a

doctor and cannot in some situations do without a doctor’s support.

We have, of course, never omitted to inform patients of their analyst’s

qualification,  and  we  have  been  able  to  convince  ourselves  that

professional prejudices find no echo in them and that they are ready to

accept  a  cure  from  whatever  direction  it  is  offered  them  -  which,

incidentally, the medical profession discovered long ago to its deep

mortification. Nor are the lay analysts who practise analysis to-day any

chance  collection  of  riff-raff,  but  people  of  academic  education,

doctors of philosophy, educationalists, together with a few women ofgreat experience in life and outstanding personality. The analysis, to

which all the candidates in an analytic training institute have to submit,

is  at  the  same  time  the  best  means  of  forming  an  opinion  of  their

personal aptitude for carrying out their exacting occupation.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4386

 

   Now as to the interest of the doctors. I cannot think that it would gain

by  the  incorporation  of  psycho-analysis  into  medicine.  The  medical

curriculum  already  lasts  for  five  years  and  the  final  examinations

extend  well  into  a  sixth  year.  Every  few  years  fresh  demands  are

made on the student, without the fulfilment of which his equipment for

the  future  would  have  to  be  declared  insufficient.  Access  to  the

medical  profession  is  very  difficult  and  its  practice  neither  very

satisfying nor very remunerative. If one supports what is certainly a

fully  justified  demand  that  doctors  should  also  be  familiar  with  the

mental  side  of  illness,  and  if  on  that  account  one  extends  medical

education  to  include  some  preparation  for  analysis,  that  implies  a

further increase in the curriculum and a corresponding prolongation of

the period of study. I do not know whether the doctors will be pleased

by this consequence of their claim upon analysis. But it can scarcely

be escaped. And this at a period in which the conditions of material

existence  have  so  greatly  deteriorated  for  the  classes  from  which

doctors are recruited, a period in which the younger generation sees

itself  compelled  to  make  itself  self-supporting  as  early  in  life  as

possible.

   But perhaps you will choose not to burden medical studies with the

preparation for analytic practice but think it more expedient for future

analysts to take up their necessary training only after the end of their

medical studies. You may say the loss of time involved in this is of no

practical account, since after all a young man of less than thirty will

never enjoy his patients’ confidence, which is a sine qua non of giving

mental assistance. It might no doubt be said in reply that a newly-

fledged  physician  for  physical  illnesses  cannot  count  upon  being

treated by his patients with very great respect either, and that a younganalyst might very well fill in his time by working in a psycho-analytic

out-patient clinic under the supervision of experienced practitioners.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4387

 

   But what seems to me more important is that with this proposal of

yours you are giving support to a waste of energy for which, in these

difficult  times,  I  can  really  find  no  economic  justification.  Analytic

training,  it  is  true,  cuts  across  the  field  of  medical  education,  but

neither includes the other. If - which may sound fantastic to-day - one

had to found a college of psycho-analysis, much would have to be

taught in it which is also taught by the medical faculty: alongside of

depth-psychology, which would always remain the principal subject,

there would be an introduction to biology, as much as possible of the

science  of  sexual  life,  and  familiarity  with  the  symptomatology  of

psychiatry.  On  the  other  hand,  analytic  instruction  would  include

branches of knowledge which are remote from medicine and which

the  doctor  does  not  come  across  in  his  practice:  the  history  of

civilization, mythology, the psychology of religion and the science of

literature. Unless he is well at home in these subjects, an analyst can

make  nothing  of  a  large  amount  of  his  material.  By  way  of

compensation, the great mass of what is taught in medical schools is

of no use to him for his purposes. A knowledge of the anatomy of the

tarsal bones, of the constitution of the carbohydrates, of the course of

the cranial nerves, a grasp of all that medicine has brought to light on

bacillary  exciting  causes  of  disease  and  the  means  of  combating

them, on serum reactions and on neoplasms - all of this knowledge,

which is undoubtedly of the highest value in itself, is nevertheless of

no consequence to him; it does not concern him; it neither helps him

directly to understand a neurosis and to cure it nor does it contribute

to  a  sharpening  of  those  intellectual  capacities  on  which  his

occupation makes the greatest demands. It cannot be objected that

the case is much the same when a doctor takes up some other special

branch of medicine - dentistry, for instance: in that case, too, he may

not need some of what he has to pass examinations in, and he willhave  to  learn  much  in  addition,  for  which  his  schooling  has  not

prepared him. But the two cases cannot be put on a par. In dentistry

the  great  principles  of  pathology  -  the  theories  of  inflammation,

suppuration, necrosis, and of the metabolism of the bodily organs -

still retain their importance. But the experience of an analyst lies in

another world, with other phenomena and other laws. However much

philosophy may ignore the gulf between the physical and the mental, it

still exists for our immediate experience and still more for our practical

endeavours.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4388

 

   It is unjust and inexpedient to try to compel a person who wants to

set someone else free from the torment of a phobia or an obsession to

take the roundabout road of the medical curriculum. Nor will such an

endeavour have any success, unless it results in suppressing analysis

entirely. Imagine a landscape in which two paths lead to a hilltop with

a view - one short and straight, the other long, winding and circuitous.

You  try  to  stop  up  the  short  path  by  a  prohibitory  notice,  perhaps

because it passes by some flower-beds that you want to protect. The

only  chance  you  have  of  your  prohibition  being  respected  is  if  the

short path is steep and difficult while the longer one leads gently up. If,

however, that is not so, and the roundabout path is on the contrary the

harder, you may imagine the use of your prohibition and the fate of

your flower-beds! I fear you will succeed in compelling the laymen to

study medicine just as little as I shall be able to induce doctors to learn

analysis. For you know human nature as well as I do.

   ‘If you are right, that analytic treatment cannot be carried out without

special  training,  but  that  the  medical  curriculum  cannot  bear  the

further burden of a preparation for it, and that medical knowledge is to

a great extent unnecessary for an analyst, how shall we achieve the

ideal physician who shall be equal to all the tasks of his calling?’

      I  cannot  foresee  the  way  out  of  these  difficulties,  nor  is  it  my

business to point it out. I see only two things, first that analysis is an

embarrassment to you and that the best thing would be for it not toexist - though neurotics, no doubt, are an embarrassment too; and

secondly, that the interests of everyone concerned would for the time

being be met if the doctors could make up their minds to tolerate a

class of therapists which would relieve them of the tedium of treating

the  enormously  common  psychogenic  neuroses  while  remaining  in

constant touch with them to the benefit of the patients.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4389

 

   ‘Is that your last word on the subject? or have you something more

to say?’

   Yes indeed. I wanted to bring up a third interest - the interest of

science. What I have to say about that will concern you little; but, by

comparison, it is of all the more importance to me.

   For we do not consider it at all desirable for psycho-analysis to be

swallowed up by medicine and to find its last resting-place in a text-

book  of  psychiatry  under  the  heading  ‘Methods  of  Treatment’,

alongside of procedures such as hypnotic suggestion, autosuggestion,

and persuasion, which, born from our ignorance, have to thank the

laziness  and  cowardice  of  mankind  for  their  short-lived  effects.  It

deserves a better fate and, it may be hoped, will meet with one. As a

‘depth-psychology’, a theory of the mental unconscious, it can become

indispensable  to  all  the  sciences  which  are  concerned  with  the

evolution of human civilization and its major institutions such as art,

religion and the social order. It has already, in my opinion, afforded

these sciences considerable help in solving their problems. But these

are only small contributions compared with what might be achieved if

historians of civilization, psychologists of religion, philologists and so

on would agree themselves to handle the new instrument of research

which is at their service. The use of analysis for the treatment of the

neuroses is only one of its applications; the future will perhaps show

that it is not the most important one. In any case it would be wrong to

sacrifice all the other applications to this single one, just because it

touches on the circle of medical interests.

      For  here  a  further  prospect  stretches  ahead,  which  cannot  beencroached upon with impunity. If the representatives of the various

mental sciences are to study psycho-analysis so as to be able to apply

its methods and angles of approach to their own material, it will not be

enough for them to stop short at the findings which are laid down in

analytic literature. They must learn to understand analysis in the only

way  that  is  possible  -  by  themselves  undergoing  an  analysis.  The

neurotics who need analysis would thus be joined by a second class

of persons, who accept analysis from intellectual motives, but who will

no doubt also welcome the increase in their capacities which they will

incidentally achieve. To carry out these analyses a number of analysts

will be needed, for whom any medical knowledge will have particularly

little importance. But these ‘teaching analysts’ - let us call them - will

require to have had a particularly careful education. If this is not to be

stunted, they must be given an opportunity of collecting experience

from instructive and informative cases; and since healthy people who

also  lack  the  motive  of  curiosity  do  not  present  themselves  for

analysis, it is once more only upon neurotics that it will be possible for

the teaching analysts - under careful supervision - to be educated for

their  subsequent  non-medical  activity.  All  this,  however,  requires  a

certain amount of freedom of movement, and is not compatible with

petty restrictions.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4390

 

   Perhaps you do not believe in these purely theoretical interests of

psycho-analysis or cannot allow them to affect the practical question

of lay analysis. Then let me advise you that psycho-analysis has yet

another  sphere  of  application,  which  is  outside  the  scope  of  the

quackery  law  and  to  which  the  doctors  will  scarcely  lay  claim.  Its

application, I mean, to the bringing-up of children. If a child begins to

show  signs  of  an  undesirable  development,  if  it  grows  moody,

refractory and inattentive, the paediatrician and even the school doctor

can  do  nothing  for  it,  even  if  the  child  produces  clear  neurotic

symptoms,  such  as  nervousness,  loss  of  appetite,  vomiting  or

insomnia.  A  treatment  that  combines  analytic  influence  witheducational measures, carried out by people who are not ashamed to

concern  themselves  with  the  affairs  in  a  child’s  world,  and  who

understand how to find their way into a child’s mental life, can bring

about two things at once: the removal of the neurotic symptoms and

the  reversal  of  the  change  in  character  which  had  begun.  Our

recognition  of  the  importance  of  these  inconspicuous  neuroses  of

children as laying down the disposition for serious illnesses in later life

points to these child analyses as an excellent method of prophylaxis.

Analysis undeniably still has its enemies. I do not know whether they

have  means  at  their  command  for  stopping  the  activities  of  these

educational analysts or analytic educationalists. I do not think it very

likely; but one can never feel too secure.

   Moreover, to return to our question of the analytic treatment of adult

neurotics,  even  there  we  have  not  yet  exhausted  every  line  of

approach. Our civilization imposes an almost intolerable pressure on

us and it calls for a corrective. Is it too fantastic to expect that psycho-

analysis  in  spite  of  its  difficulties  may  be  destined  to  the  task  of

preparing  mankind  for  such  a  corrective?  Perhaps  once  more  an

American may hit on the idea of spending a little money to get the

‘social workers’ of his country trained analytically and to turn them into

a band of helpers for combating the neuroses of civilization.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4391

 

   ‘Aha! a new kind of Salvation Army!’

   Why not? Our imagination always follows patterns. The stream of

eager learners who will then flow to Europe will be obliged to pass

Vienna by, for here the development of analysis may have succumbed

to a premature trauma of prohibition. You smile? I am not saying this

as a bribe for your support. Not in the least. I know you do not believe

me; nor can I guarantee that it will happen. But one thing I do know. It

is by no means so important what decision you give on the question of

lay analysis. It may have a local effect. But the things that really matter

-  the  possibilities  in  psycho-analysis  for internal development - can

never be affected by regulations and prohibitions. 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4392

 

                                    POSTSCRIPT

                                        (1927)

 

The immediate occasion of my writing the small volume which was the

starting-point  of  the  present  discussion  was  a  charge  of  quackery

brought against a non-medical member of our Society, Dr. Theodor

Reik, in the Vienna Courts. It is generally known, I think, that after all

the  preliminary  proceedings  had  been  completed  and  a  number  of

expert opinions had been received, the charge was dropped. I do not

believe that this was a result of my book. No doubt the prosecution’s

case was too weak, and the person who brought the charge as an

aggrieved  party  proved  an  untrustworthy  witness.  So  that  the

quashing of the proceedings against Dr. Reik is probably not to be

regarded  as  a  considered  judgement  of  the  Vienna  Courts  on  the

general  question  of  lay  analysis.  When  I  drew  the  figure  of  the

‘Impartial Person’ who was my interlocutor in my tract, I had before my

mind one of our high officials. This was a man with a friendly attitude

and a mind of unusual integrity, to whom I had myself talked about

Reik’s case and for whom I had, at his request, written a confidential

opinion on the subject. I knew I had not succeeded in converting him

to my views, and that was why I made my dialogue with the Impartial

Person end without agreement too.

   Nor did I expect that I should succeed in bringing about unanimity in

the  attitude  of  analysts  themselves  towards  the  problem  of  lay

analysis.  Anyone  who  compares  the  views  expressed  by  the

Hungarian Society in this discussion with those of the New York group

will perhaps conclude that my book has produced no effect whatever

and that everyone persists in his former opinion. But I do not believe

this  either.  I  think  that  many  of  my  colleagues  have  modified  their

extreme parti pris and that the majority have accepted my view that

the problem of lay analysis ought not to be decided along the lines of

traditional usage but that it arises from a novel situation and thereforedemands a fresh judgement.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4393

 

   Again, the turn which I gave to the whole discussion seems to have

met with approval. My main thesis was that the important question is

not whether an analyst possesses a medical diploma but whether he

has had the special training necessary for the practice of analysis.

This served as the starting-point for a discussion, which was eagerly

embarked upon, as to what is the training most suitable for an analyst.

My own view was and still remains that it is not the training prescribed

by  the  University  for  future  doctors.  What  is  known  as  medical

education  appears  to  me  to  be  an  arduous  and  circuitous  way  of

approaching the profession of analysis. No doubt it offers an analyst

much that is indispensable to him. But it burdens him with too much

else of which he can never make use, and there is a danger of its

diverting  his  interest  and  his  whole  mode  of  thought  from  the

understanding  of  psychical  phenomena.  A  scheme  of  training  for

analysts  has  still  to  be  created.  It  must  include  elements  from  the

mental  sciences,  from  psychology,  the  history  of  civilization  and

sociology, as well as from anatomy, biology and the study of evolution.

There is so much to be taught in all this that it is justifiable to omit from

the curriculum anything which has no direct bearing on the practice of

analysis and only serves indirectly (like any other study) as a training

for the intellect and for the powers of observation. It is easy to meet

this suggestion by objecting that analytic colleges of this kind do not

exist and that I am merely setting up an ideal. An ideal, no doubt. But

an ideal which can and must be realized. And in our training institutes,

in spite of all their youthful insufficiencies, that realization has already

begun.

   It will not have escaped my readers that in what I have said I have

assumed as axiomatic something that is still violently disputed in the

discussion. I have assumed, that is to say, that psycho-analysis is not

a specialized branch of medicine. I cannot see how it is possible to

dispute this. Psycho-analysis is a part of psychology; not of medicalpsychology  in  the  old  sense,  not  of  the  psychology  of  morbid

processes, but simply of psychology. It is certainly not the whole of

psychology,  but  its  sub-structure  and  perhaps  even  its  entire

foundation. The possibility of its application to medical purposes must

not lead us astray. Electricity and radiology also have their medical

application, but the science to which they both belong is none the less

physics. Nor can their situation be affected by historical arguments.

The whole theory of electricity had its origin in an observation of a

nerve-muscle  preparation;  yet  no  one  would  dream  to-day  of

regarding it as a part of physiology. It is argued that psycho-analysis

was after all discovered by a physician in the course of his efforts to

assist his patients. But that is clearly neither here nor there. Moreover,

the historical argument is double-edged. We might pursue the story

and recall the unfriendliness and indeed the animosity with which the

medical  profession  treated  analysis  from  the  very  first.  That  would

seem to imply that it can have no claims over analysis to-day. And

though I do not accept that implication, I still feel some doubts as to

whether  the  present  wooing  of  psycho-analysis  by  the  doctors  is

based, from the point of view of the libido theory, upon the first or

upon the second of Abraham’s sub-stages - whether they wish to take

possession  of  their  object  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  or  of

preserving it.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4394

 

   I should like to consider the historical argument a moment longer.

Since it is with me personally that we are concerned, I can throw a

little  light,  for  anyone  who  may  be  interested,  on  my  own  motives.

After forty-one years of medical activity, my self-knowledge tells me

that I have never really been a doctor in the proper sense. I became a

doctor through being compelled to deviate from my original purpose;

and  the  triumph  of  my  life  lies  in  my  having,  after  a  long  and

roundabout journey, found my way back to my earliest path. I have no

knowledge of having had any craving in my early childhood to help

suffering  humanity.  My  innate  sadistic  disposition  was  not  a  verystrong one, so that I had no need to develop this one of its derivatives.

Nor did I ever play the ‘doctor game’; my infantile curiosity evidently

chose  other  paths.  In  my  youth  I  felt  an  overpowering  need  to

understand something of the riddles of the world in which we live and

perhaps  even  to  contribute  something  to  their  solution.  The  most

hopeful means of achieving this end seemed to be to enrol myself in

the medical faculty; but even after that I experimented - unsuccessfully

- with zoology and chemistry, till at last, under the influence of Brücke,

who carried more weight with me than any one else in my whole life, I

settled down to physiology, though in those days it was too narrowly

restricted  to  histology.  By  that  time  I  had  already  passed  all  my

medical  examinations;  but  I  took  no  interest  in  anything  to  do  with

medicine till the teacher whom I so deeply respected warned me that

in  view  of  my  impoverished  material  circumstances  I  could  not

possibly take up a theoretical career. Thus I passed from the histology

of the nervous system to neuropathology and then, prompted by fresh

influences,  I  began  to  be  concerned  with  the  neuroses.  I  scarcely

think, however, that my lack of a genuine medical temperament has

done  much  damage  to  my  patients.  For  it  is  not  greatly  to  the

advantage  of  patients  if  their  doctor’s  therapeutic  interest  has  too

marked an emotional emphasis. They are best helped if he carries out

his task coolly and keeping as closely as possible to the rules.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4395

 

   No doubt what I have just said throws little light on the problem of

lay analysis; it was only intended to exhibit my personal credentials as

being myself a supporter of the inherent value of psycho-analysis and

of  its  independence  of  its  application  to  medicine.  But  it  will  be

objected  at  this  point  that  whether  psycho-analysis,  regarded  as  a

science,  is  a  subdivision  of  medicine  or  of  psychology  is  a  purely

academic question and of no practical interest. The real point at issue,

it will be said, is a different one, namely the application of analysis to

the treatment of patients; in so far as it claims to do this it must be

content, the argument will run, to be accepted as a specialized branchof medicine, like radiology, for instance, and to submit to the rules laid

down for all therapeutic methods. I recognize that that is so; I admit it.

I  only  want  to  feel  assured  that  the  therapy  will  not  destroy  the

science.  Unluckily  analogies  never  carry  one  more  than  a  certain

distance;  a  point  is  soon  reached  at  which  the  subjects  of  the

comparison take divergent paths. The case of analysis differs from

that  of  radiology.  A  physicist  does  not  require  to  have  a  patient  in

order to study the laws that govern X-rays. But the only subject-matter

of psycho-analysis is the mental processes of human beings and it is

only in human beings that it can be studied. For reasons which can

easily be understood, neurotic human beings offer far more instructive

and  accessible  material  than  normal  ones,  and  to  withhold  that

material from anyone who wishes to study and apply analysis is to

dock him of a good half of his training possibilities. I have, of course,

no intention of asking that the interests of neurotic patients should be

sacrificed to those of instruction and scientific research. The aim of my

small volume on the question of lay analysis was precisely to show

that, if certain precautions are observed, the two interests can quite

easily be brought into harmony and that the interests of medicine, as

rightly understood, will not be the last to profit by such a solution.

   I myself brought forward all the necessary precautions and I can

safely say that the discussion added nothing on this point. But I should

like to remark that the emphasis was often placed in a manner which

did not do justice to the facts. What was said about the difficulties of

differential diagnosis and the uncertainty in many cases in deciding

about  somatic  symptoms  -  situations,  that  is,  in  which  medical

knowledge and medical intervention are necessary - this is all of it

perfectly true. Nevertheless, the number of cases in which doubts of

this kind never arise at all and in which a doctor is not required is

surely incomparably greater. These cases may be quite uninteresting

scientifically, but they play an important enough part in life to justify

the activity of lay analysts, who are perfectly competent to deal with

them. Some time ago I analysed a colleague who gave evidence of a

particularly  strong  dislike  of  the  idea  of  anyone  being  allowed  to

engage in a medical activity who was not himself a medical man. I

was in a position to say to him: ‘We have now been working for more

than three months. At what point in our analysis have I had occasionto make use of my medical knowledge?’ He admitted that I had had no

such occasion.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4396

 

      Again,  I  attach  no  great  importance  to  the  argument  that  a  lay

analyst, because he must be prepared to consult a doctor, will have

no authority in the eyes of his patients and will be treated with no more

respect than such people as bone-setters or masseurs. Once again,

the analogy is an imperfect one - quite apart from the fact that what

governs  patients  in  their  recognition  of  authority  is  usually  their

emotional transference and that the possession of a medical diploma

does  not  impress  them  nearly  so  much  as  doctors  believe.  A

professional  lay  analyst  will  have  no  difficulty  in  winning  as  much

respect  as  is  due  to  a  secular  pastoral  worker.  Indeed,  the  words,

‘secular pastoral worker’, might well serve as a general formula for

describing the function which the analyst, whether he is a doctor or a

layman, has to perform in his relation to the public. Our friends among

the protestant clergy, and more recently among the catholic clergy as

well, are often able to relieve their parishioners of the inhibitions of

their daily life by confirming their faith - after having first offered them a

little  analytic  information  about  the  nature  of  their  conflicts.  Our

opponents,  the  Adlerian  ‘individual  psychologists’,  endeavour  to

produce  a  similar  result  in  people  who  have  become  unstable  and

inefficient  by  arousing  their  interest  in  the  social  community  after

having first thrown some light upon a single corner of their mental life

and shown them the part played in their illness by their egoistic and

distrustful  impulses.  Both  of  these  procedures,  which  derive  their

power  from  being  based  on  analysis,  have  their  place  in

psychotherapy. We who are analysts set before us as our aim the

most complete and profoundest possible analysis of whoever may be

our patient. We do not seek to bring him relief by receiving him into

the  catholic,  protestant  or  socialist  community.  We  seek  rather  to

enrich him from his own internal sources, by putting at the disposal of

his ego those energies which, owing to repression, are inaccessiblyconfined in his unconscious, as well as those which his ego is obliged

to  squander  in  the  fruitless  task  of  maintaining  these  repressions.

Such activity as this is pastoral work in the best sense of the words.

Have  we  set  ourselves  too  high  an  aim?  Are  the  majority  of  our

patients worth the pains that this work requires of us? Would it not be

more  economical  to  prop  up  their  weaknesses  from  without  rather

than to rebuild them from within? I cannot say; but there is something

else that I do know. In psycho-analysis there has existed from the very

first  an  inseparable  bond  between  cure  and  research.  Knowledge

brought  therapeutic  success.  It  was  impossible  to  treat  a  patient

without learning something new; it was impossible to gain fresh insight

without perceiving its beneficent results. Our analytic procedure is the

only one in which this precious conjunction is assured. It is only by

carrying  on  our  analytic  pastoral  work  that  we  can  deepen  our

dawning comprehension of the human mind. This prospect of scientific

gain has been the proudest and happiest feature of analytic work. Are

we to sacrifice it for the sake of any considerations of a practical sort?

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4397

 

   Some remarks that have been made in the course of this discussion

have led me to suspect that, in spite of everything, my book on lay

analysis has been misunderstood in one respect. The doctors have

been defended against me, as though I had declared that they were in

general incompetent to practise analysis and as though I had given it

out as a password that medical reinforcements were to be rejected.

That was not my intention. The idea probably arose from my having

been led to declare in the course of my observations (which had a

controversial end in view) that untrained medical analysts were even

more dangerous than laymen. I might make my true opinion on this

question clear by echoing a cynical remark about women that once

appeared  in Simplicissimus.  One  man  was  complaining  to  another

about the weaknesses and troublesome nature of the fair sex. ‘All the

same,’ replied his companion, ‘women are the best thing we have of

the kind.’ I am bound to admit that, so long as schools such as wedesire for the training of analysts are not yet in existence, people who

have had a preliminary education in medicine are the best material for

future analysts. We have a right to demand, however, that they should

not mistake their preliminary education for a complete training, that

they  should  overcome  the  one-sidedness  that  is  fostered  by

instruction  in  medical  schools  and  that  they  should  resist  the

temptation  to  flirt  with  endocrinology  and  the  autonomic  nervous

system,  when  what  is  needed  is  an  apprehension  of  psychological

facts with the help of a framework of psychological concepts. I also

share the view that all those problems which relate to the connection

between  psychical  phenomena  and  their  organic,  anatomical  and

chemical  foundations  can  be  approached  only  by  those  who  have

studied both, that is, by medical analysts. It should not be forgotten,

however, that this is not the whole of psycho-analysis, and that for its

other aspect we can never do without the co-operation of people who

have had a preliminary education in the mental sciences. For practical

reasons we have been in the habit - and this is true, incidentally, of

our  publications  as  well  -  of  distinguishing  between  medical  and

applied analysis. But that is not a logical distinction. The true line of

division  is  between scientific  analysis  and  its applications  alike  in

medical and in non-medical fields.

 


                            The Question Of Lay Analysis

                                                                                      4398

 

   In these discussions the bluntest rejection of lay analysis has been

expressed by our American colleagues. A few words to them in reply

will, I think, not be out of place. I can scarcely be accused of making a

misuse of analysis for controversial purposes if I express an opinion

that their resistance is derived wholly from practical factors. They see

how  in  their  own  country  lay  analysts  put  analysis  to  all  kinds  of

mischievous  and  illegitimate  purposes  and  in  consequence  cause

injury both to their patients and to the good name of analysis. It is

therefore not to be wondered at if in their indignation they give the

widest possible berth to such unscrupulous mischief-makers and try to

prevent any laymen from having a share in analysis. But these factsare  already  enough  to  diminish  the  significance  of  the  American

position;  for  the  question  of  lay  analysis  must  not  be  decided  on

practical considerations alone, and local conditions in America cannot

be the sole determining influence on our views.

      The  resolution  passed  by  our  American  colleagues  against  lay

analysts, based as it essentially is upon practical reasons, appears to

me  nevertheless  to  be  unpractical;  for  it  cannot  affect  any  of  the

factors which govern the situation. It is more or less equivalent to an

attempt at repression. If it is impossible to prevent the lay analysts

from pursuing their activities and if the public does not support the

campaign against them, would it not be more expedient to recognize

the fact of their existence by offering them opportunities for training?

Might it not be possible in this way to gain some influence over them?

And, if they were offered as an inducement the possibility of receiving

the  approval  of  the  medical  profession  and  of  being  invited  to  co-

operate, might they not have some interest in raising their own ethical

and intellectual level?

 

VIENNA, June 1927

                                                                                       4399

 

                                    PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

                                        (1926)

 


                                                                                      4400

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4401

 

                                    PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

Since psycho-analysis was not mentioned in the eleventh edition of

the Encyclopaedia Britannica, it is impossible to restrict this account to

its advances since 1910. The more important and the more interesting

portion of its history lies in the period before that date.

 

                                      PREHISTORY

 

   In the years 1880-2 a Viennese physician, Dr. Josef Breuer (1842-

1925), discovered a new procedure by means of which he relieved a

girl, who was suffering from severe hysteria, of her many and various

symptoms.  The  idea  occurred  to  him  that  the  symptoms  were

connected with impressions which she had received during a period of

agitation while she was nursing her sick father. He therefore induced

her, while she was in a state of hypnotic somnambulism, to search for

these connections in her memory and to live through the ‘pathogenic’

scenes  once  again  without  inhibiting  the  affects  that  arose  in  the

process.  He  found  that  when  she  had  done  this  the  symptom  in

question disappeared for good.

   This was at a date before the investigations of Charcot and Pierre

Janet into the origin of hysterical symptoms, and Breuer’s discovery

was  thus  entirely  uninfluenced  by  them.  But  he  did  not  pursue  the

matter any further at the time, and it was not until some ten years laterthat he took it up again in collaboration with Sigmund Freud. In 1895

they  published  a  book, Studies  on  Hysteria,  in  which  Breuer’s

discoveries were described and an attempt was made to explain them

by the theory of ‘catharsis’. According to that hypothesis, hysterical

symptoms  originate  through  the  energy  of  a  mental  process  being

withheld  from  conscious  influence  and  being  diverted  into  bodily

innervation  (‘conversion’).  A  hysterical  symptom  would  thus  be  a

substitute  for  an  omitted  mental  act  and  a  reminiscence  of  the

occasion which should have given rise to that act. And, on this view,

recovery would be a result of the liberation of the affect that had gone

astray  and  of  its  discharge  along  a  normal  path  (‘abreaction’).

Cathartic treatment gave excellent therapeutic results, but it was found

that they were not permanent and that they were not independent of

the personal relation between the patient and the physician. Freud,

who later proceeded with these investigations by himself, made an

alteration in their technique, by replacing hypnosis by the method of

free association. He invented the term ‘psycho-analysis’, which in the

course of time came to have two meanings: (1) a particular method of

treating nervous disorders and (2) the science of unconscious mental

processes,  which  has  also  been  appropriately  described  as  ‘depth-

psychology’.

 


                                      Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4402

 

                        SUBJECT-MATTER OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

   Psycho-analysis finds a constantly increasing amount of support as

a therapeutic procedure, owing to the fact that it can do more for its

patients than any other method of treatment. The principle field of its

application  is  in  the  milder  neuroses  -  hysteria,  phobias  and

obsessional  states;  and  in  malformations  of  character  and  sexual

inhibitions  or  abnormalities  it  can  also  bring  about  marked

improvements  or  even  recoveries.  Its  influence  upon  dementia

praecox and paranoia is doubtful; on the other hand, in favourable

circumstances it can cope with depressive states, even if they are of a

severe type.   In every instance the treatment makes heavy claims upon both the

physician and the patient: the former requires a special training and

must  devote  a  long  period  of  time  to  exploring  the  mind  of  each

patient,  while  the  latter  must  make  considerable  sacrifices,  both

material and mental. Nevertheless, all the trouble involved is as a rule

rewarded by the results. Psycho-analysis does not act as a convenient

panacea  (‘cito,  tute,  jucunde’)  for  psychological  disorders.  On  the

contrary, its application has been instrumental in making clear for the

first  time  the  difficulties  and  limitations  in  the  treatment  of  such

affections. For the moment it is only in Berlin and Vienna that there

are  voluntary  institutions  which  make  psycho-analytic  treatment

accessible to the wage-earning classes.

 


                                      Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4403

 

      The  therapeutic  influence  of  psycho-analysis  depends  on  the

replacement  of  unconscious  mental  acts  by  conscious  ones  and  is

effective within the limits of that factor. The replacement is effected by

overcoming internal resistances in the patient’s mind. The future will

probably  attribute  far  greater  importance  to  psycho-analysis  as  the

science of the unconscious than as a therapeutic procedure.

      Psycho-analysis,  in  its  character  of  depth-psychology,  considers

mental life from three points of view: the dynamic, the economic and

the topographical.

      From  the  first  of  these  standpoints,  the dynamic  one,  psycho-

analysis  derives  all  mental  processes  (apart  from  the  reception  of

external stimuli) from the interplay of forces, which assist or inhibit one

another, combine with one another, enter into compromises with one

another, etc. All of these forces are originally in the nature of instincts;

thus  they  have  an  organic  origin.  They  are  characterized  by

possessing an immense (somatic) store of power (‘the compulsion to

repeat’); and they are represented mentally as images or ideas with

an  affective  charge.  In  psycho-analysis,  no  less  than  in  other

sciences,  the  theory  of  the  instincts  is  an  obscure  subject.  An

empirical analysis leads to the formulation of two groups of instincts:the  so-called  ‘ego-instincts’,  which  are  directed  towards  self-

preservation,  and  the  ‘object-instincts’,  which  are  concerned  with

relations to an external object. The social instincts are not regarded as

elementary  or  irreducible.  Theoretical  speculation  leads  to  the

suspicion that there are two fundamental instincts which lie concealed

behind  the  manifest  ego-instincts  and  object-instincts:  namely  (a)

Eros,  the  instinct  which  strives  for  ever  closer  union,  and  (b)  the

instinct of destruction, which leads towards the dissolution of what is

living.  In  psycho-analysis  the  manifestation  of  the  force  of  Eros  is

given the name ‘libido’.

 


                                      Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4404

 

   From the economic standpoint psycho-analysis supposes that the

mental  representatives  of  the  instincts  have  a  charge  (cathexis)  of

definite quantities of energy, and that it is the purpose of the mental

apparatus to hinder any damming-up of these energies and to keep as

low  as  possible  the  total  amount  of  the  excitations  with  which  it  is

loaded. The course of mental processes is automatically regulated by

the ‘pleasure-unpleasure principle’; and unpleasure is thus in some

way related to an increase of excitation and pleasure to a decrease. In

the course of development the original pleasure principle undergoes a

modification with reference to the external world, giving place to the

‘reality  principle’,  in  accordance  with  which  the  mental  apparatus

learns  to  postpone  the  pleasure  of  satisfaction  and  to  tolerate

temporarily feelings of unpleasure.

   Topographically, psycho-analysis regards the mental apparatus as a

compound instrument, and endeavours to determine at what points in

it  the  various  mental  processes  take  place.  According  to  the  most

recent psycho-analytic views, the mental apparatus is composed of an

‘id’,  which  is  the  repository  of  the  instinctual  impulses,  of  an  ‘ego’,

which is the most superficial portion of the id and one which has been

modified by the influence of the external world, and of a ‘super-ego’,

which develops out of the id, dominates the ego and represents the

inhibitions  of  instinct  that  are  characteristic  of  man.  The  quality  ofconsciousness, too, has a topographical reference; for processes in

the id are entirely unconscious, while consciousness is the function of

the ego’s outermost layer, which is concerned with the perception of

the external world.

      At  this  point  two  observations  may  be  in  place.  It  must  not  be

supposed  that  these  very  general  ideas  are  presuppositions  upon

which the work of psycho-analysis depends. On the contrary, they are

its latest conclusions and are ‘open to revision’. Psycho-analysis is

founded securely upon the observation of the facts of mental life; and

for  that  very  reason  its  theoretical  superstructure  is  still  incomplete

and subject to constant alteration. Secondly, there is no reason for

surprise that psycho-analysis, which was originally no more than an

attempt  at  explaining  pathological  mental  phenomena,  should  have

developed into a psychology of normal mental life. The justification for

this arose with the discovery that the dreams and mistakes of normal

men have the same mechanism as neurotic symptoms.

 


                                      Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4405

 

   The first task of psycho-analysis was the elucidation of nervous

disorders.  The  analytic  theory  of  the  neuroses  is  based  on  three

corner-stones: the recognition of (1) ‘repression’, of (2) the importance

of the sexual instinct and of (3) ‘transference’.

   (1) There is a force in the mind which exercises the functions of a

censorship,  and  which  excludes  from  consciousness  and  from  any

influence  upon  action  all  tendencies  which  displease  it.  Such

tendencies are described as ‘repressed’. They remain unconscious;

and if one attempts to bring them into the patient’s consciousness one

provokes  a  ‘resistance’.  These  repressed  instinctual  impulses,

however,  have  not  always  become  powerless.  In  many  cases  they

succeed in making their influence felt in the mind by circuitous paths,

and  the  indirect  or  substitutive  satisfactions  of  repressed  impulses

thus achieved are what constitute neurotic symptoms.

   (2) For cultural reasons the most intense repression falls upon the

sexual  instincts;  but  it  is  precisely  in  connection  with  them  thatrepression  most  easily  miscarries,  so  that  neurotic  symptoms  are

found to be substitutive satisfactions of repressed sexuality. The belief

that  in  man  sexual  life  begins  only  at  puberty  is  incorrect.  On  the

contrary,  signs  of  it  can  be  detected  from  the  beginning  of  extra-

uterine existence; it reaches a first culminating point at or before the

fifth  year  (‘early  period’),  after  which  it  is  inhibited  or  interrupted

(‘latency period’) until the age of puberty, which is the second climax

of its development. This diphasic onset of sexual development seems

to be distinctive of the genus Homo. All experiences during the first

period of childhood are of the greatest importance to the individual,

and  in  combination  with  his  inherited  sexual  constitution  form  the

dispositions  for  the  subsequent  development  of  character  and

disease. It is wrong to make sexuality coincide with ‘genitality’. The

sexual instincts pass through a complicated course of development,

and it is only at the end of it that the ‘primacy of the genital zones’ is

attained. Before this there are a number of ‘pregenital’ organizations

of the libido - points at which it may become ‘fixated’ and to which, in

the event of subsequent repression, it will return (‘regression’). The

infantile fixations of the libido are what determine the form of any later

neurosis. Thus the neuroses are to be regarded as inhibitions in the

development of the libido. There are no specific causes of nervous

disorders; the question whether a conflict finds a healthy solution or

leads  to  a  neurotic  inhibition  of  function  depends  upon  quantitative

considerations.

 


                                      Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4406

 

   The most important conflict with which a small child is faced is his

relation to his parents, the ‘Oedipus complex’; it is in attempting to

grapple with this problem that those destined to suffer from a neurosis

habitually come to grief. The reactions against the instinctual demands

of  the  Oedipus  complex  are  the  source  of  the  most  precious  and

socially important achievements of the human mind; and this holds

true not only in the life of individuals but probably also in the history of

the human species as a whole. The super-ego, too, the moral agencywhich dominates the ego, has its origin in the process of overcoming

the Oedipus complex.

   (3) By ‘transference’ is meant a striking peculiarity of neurotics. They

develop  towards  their  physician  emotional  relations,  both  of  an

affectionate  and  hostile  character,  which  are  not  based  upon  the

actual situation but are derived from their relations to their parents (the

Oedipus complex). Transference is a proof of the fact that adults have

not overcome their former childish dependence; it coincides with the

force which has been named ‘suggestion’; and it is only by learning to

make use of it that the physician is enabled to induce the patient to

overcome his internal resistances and do away with his repressions.

Thus  psycho-analytic  treatment  acts  as  a  second  education  of  the

adult, as a corrective to his education as a child.

   Within this narrow compass it has been impossible to mention many

matters of the greatest interest, such as the ‘sublimation’ of instincts,

the part played by symbolism, the problem of ‘ambivalence’, etc. Nor

has there been space to allude to the applications of psycho-analysis,

which originated, as we have seen, in the sphere of medicine, to other

departments of knowledge (such as Social Anthropology, the Study of

Religion,  Literary  History  and  Education)  where  its  influence  is

constantly increasing. It is enough to say that psycho-analysis, in its

character of the psychology of the deepest, unconscious mental acts,

promises to become the link between psychiatry and all of these other

branches of mental science.

 


                                      Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4407

 

                  THE EXTERNAL HISTORY OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

   The beginnings of psycho-analysis may be marked by two dates:

1895,  which  saw  the  publication  of  Breuer  and  Freud’s Studies  on

Hysteria,  and  1900,  which  saw  that  of  Freud’s Interpretation  of

Dreams. At first the new discoveries aroused no interest either in the

medical profession or among the general public. In 1907 the Swiss

psychiatrists,  under  the  leadership  of  E.  Bleuler  and  C.  G.  Jung,

began to concern themselves in the subject; and in 1908 there tookplace  at  Salzburg  a  first  meeting  of  adherents  from  a  number  of

different countries. In 1909 Freud and Jung were invited to America by

G. Stanley Hall to deliver a series of lectures on psycho-analysis at

Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.  From  that  time  forward  interest

grew rapidly in Europe; it expressed itself, however, in a very forcible

rejection of the new teachings - a rejection which often showed an

unscientific colouring.

   The reasons for this hostility were to be found, from the medical

point  of  view,  in  the  fact  that  psycho-analysis  lays  stress  upon

psychical  factors,  and  from  the  philosophical  point  of  view,  in  its

assuming  as  an  underlying  postulate  the  concept  of  unconscious

mental activity; but the strongest reason was undoubtedly the general

disinclination  of  mankind  to  concede  to  the  factor  of  sexuality  the

importance that is assigned to it by psycho-analysis. In spite of this

widespread opposition, however, the movement in favour of psycho-

analysis was not to be checked. Its adherents formed themselves into

an International Association, which passed successfully through the

ordeal of the World War, and at the present time (1925) comprises

local  groups  in  Vienna,  Berlin,  Budapest,  London,  Switzerland,

Holland, Moscow and Calcutta, as well as two in the United States.

There are three periodicals representing the views of these societies:

the Internationale  Zeitschrift  für  Psychoanalyse, Imago  (which  is

concerned  with  the  application  of  psycho-analysis  to  non-medical

fields of knowledge), and the International Journal of Psycho-Analysis.

   During the years 1911-13 two former adherents, Alfred Adler, of

Vienna, and C. G. Jung, of Zurich, seceded from the psycho-analytic

movement and founded schools of thought of their own, which, in view

of  the  general  hostility  to  psycho-analysis,  could  be  certain  of  a

favourable reception, but which remained scientifically sterile. In 1921

Dr. M. Eitingon founded in Berlin the first public psycho-analytic clinic

and  training-school,  and  this  was  soon  followed  by  a  second  in

Vienna.

 

                                      BIBLIOGRAPHY

 

      Breuer  and  Freud, Studies  on  Hysteria  (1895d);  Freud,

Traumdeutung  (1900); Zur  Psychopathologie  des  Alltagslebens(1904); Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie (1905); Vorlesungen zur

Einführung  in  die  Psychoanalyse  (1916).  Freud’s  complete  works

have been published in German (Gesammelte Schriften) (1925), and

in Spanish (Obras completas) (1923); the greater part of them has

been translated into English and other languages. Short accounts of

the  subject-matter  and  history  of  psycho-analysis  will  be  found  in:

Freud, Über  Psychoanalyse  (the  lectures  delivered  at  Worcester,

U.S.A.)  (1909); Zur  Geschichte  der  psychoanalytischen  Bewegung

(1914); Selbstdarstellung  (in  Grote’s  collection Die  Medizin  der

Gegenwart in Selbstdarstellungen) (1925). Particularly accessible to

English readers are: Ernest Jones, Papers on Psycho-Analysis, and

A. A. Brill, Psychoanalysis.

                                                                                       4408

 

                ADDRESS TO THE SOCIETY OF B’NAI B’RITH

                                    (1941 [1926])

 


                                                                                      4409

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4410

 

                ADDRESS TO THE SOCIETY OF B’NAI B’RITH

 

Most  honourable  Grand  President,  honourable  Presidents,  dear

Brethren,-

   I thank you for the honours you have paid me to-day. You know why

it is that you cannot hear the sound of my own voice. You have heard

one  of  my  friends  and  pupils  speak  of  my  scientific  work;  but  a

judgement on such things is hard to form and for a long while yet it

may not be reached with any certainty. Allow me to add something to

what has been said by one who is both my friend and the physician

who cares for me. I should like to tell you shortly how I became a B.B.

and what I have looked for from you.

   It happened that in the years from 1895 onwards I was subjected to

two powerful impressions which combined to produce the same effect

on me. On the one hand, I had gained my first insight into the depths

of the life of the human instincts; I had seen some things that were

sobering  and  even,  at  first,  frightening.  On  the  other  hand,  the

announcement  of  my  unpleasing  discoveries  had  as  its  result  the

severance of the greater part of my human contacts; I felt as though I

were despised and universally shunned. In my loneliness I was seized

with a longing to find a circle of picked men of high character who

would  receive  me  in  a  friendly  spirit  in  spite  of  my  temerity.  Your

society was pointed out to me as the place where such men were to

be found.   That you were Jews could only be agreeable to me; for I was myself

a  Jew,  and  it  had  always  seemed  to  me  not  only  unworthy  but

positively senseless to deny the fact. What bound me to Jewry was (I

am  ashamed  to  admit)  neither  faith  nor  national  pride,  for  I  have

always been an unbeliever and was brought up without any religion

though not without a respect for what are called the ‘ethical’ standards

of  human  civilization.  Whenever  I  felt  an  inclination  to  national

enthusiasm  I  strove  to  suppress  it  as  being  harmful  and  wrong,

alarmed by the warning examples of the peoples among whom we

Jews  live.  But  plenty  of  other  things  remained  over  to  make  the

attraction  of  Jewry  and  Jews  irresistible  -  many  obscure  emotional

forces,  which  were  the  more  powerful  the  less  they  could  be

expressed in words, as well as a clear consciousness of inner identity,

the safe privacy of a common mental construction. And beyond this

there was a perception that it was to my Jewish nature alone that I

owed two characteristics that had become indispensable to me in the

difficult course of my life. Because I was a Jew I found myself free

from  many  prejudices  which  restricted  others  in  the  use  of  their

intellect; and as a Jew I was prepared to join the Opposition and to do

without agreement with the ‘compact majority’.

 


                      Address To The Society Of B'nai B'rith

                                                                                      4411

 

      So  it  was  that  I  became  one  of  you,  took  my  share  in  your

humanitarian  and  national  interests,  gained  friends  among  you  and

persuaded my own few remaining friends to join our society. There

was no question whatever of my convincing you of my new theories;

but at a time when no one in Europe listened to me and I still had no

disciples even in Vienna, you gave me your kindly attention. You were

my first audience.

   For some two thirds of the long period that has elapsed since my

entry I persisted with you conscientiously, and found refreshment and

stimulation in my relations with you. You have been kind enough to-

day not to hold it up against me that during the last third of the time I

have  kept  away  from  you.  I  was  overwhelmed  with  work,  anddemands connected with it forced themselves on me; the day ceased

to be long enough for me to attend your meetings, and soon my body

began to rebel against a late evening meal. Finally came the years of

my illness, which prevents me from being with you even to-day.

   I cannot tell whether I have been a genuine B.B. in your sense. I am

almost inclined to doubt it; so many exceptional circumstances have

arisen in my case. But of this I can assure you - that you meant much

to me and did much for me during the years in which I belonged to

you. I ask you therefore to accept my warmest thanks both for those

years and for to-day.

                                                                    Yours in W. B. & E

                                                                            Sigm. Freud                                                                                      4412

 

                                    KARL ABRAHAM

                                        (1926)

 

Dr. Karl Abraham, President of the Berlin group, of which he was the

founder,  and  President  at  the  time  of  the  International  Psycho-

Analytical  Association,  died  in  Berlin  on  December  25.  He  had  not

reached the age of fifty when he succumbed to an internal complaint

against which his powerful physique had had to contend ever since

the spring. At the Homburg Congress he had seemed, to the great joy

of  us  all,  to  have  recovered;  but  a  relapse  brought  us  painful

disappointment.

   We bury with him - integer vitae scerisque purus - one of the firmest

hopes of our science, young as it is and still so bitterly assailed, and a

part of its future that is now, perhaps, unrealizable. Among all those

who followed me along the dark paths of psycho-analytic research, he

won so pre-eminent a place that only one other name could be set

beside his. It is likely that the boundless trust of his colleagues and

pupils would have called him to the leadership; and he would without

doubt  have  been  a  model  leader  in  the  pursuit  of  truth,  led  astray

neither  by  the  praise  or  blame  of  the  many  nor  by  the  seductive

illusion of his own phantasies.

      I  write  these  lines  for  friends  and  fellow-workers  who  knew  and

valued Abraham as I did. They will find it easy to understand what the

loss of this friend, so much younger than I am, means to me; and they

will forgive me if I make no further attempt to express what it is so

hard to put into words. An account of Abraham’s scientific personality

and an appreciation of his work will be undertaken for our journal by

another hand.

                                                                                       4413

 

                              TO ROMAIN ROLLAND

                                        (1926)

 

Unforgettable  one!  By  what  troubles  and  sufferings  must  you  have

fought your way up to such a height of humanity as yours!

   Long years before I saw you, I had honoured you as an artist and as

an apostle of the love of mankind. I was myself a disciple of the love of

mankind, not from sentimental motives or in pursuit of an ideal, but for

sober, economic reasons, because, our inborn instincts and the world

around us being what they are, I could not but regard that love as no

less essential for the survival of the human race than such things as

technology.

   And when at last I came to know you personally, I was surprised to

find that you can value strength and energy so highly and that you

yourself embody such force of will.

   May the next decade bring you nothing but fulfilments!

                                                                                    Most cordially

yours

                                                                                                Sigm.

Freud, aetat. 70.

                                                                                       4414

 

    PREFATORY NOTE TO A PAPER BY E. PICKWORTH FARROW

                                        (1926)

 

   The author of this paper is known to me as a man of strong and

independent intelligence. Probably through being somewhat self-willed

he  failed  to  get  on  to  good  terms  with  two  analysts  with  whom  he

made  the  attempt.  He  thereupon  proceeded  to  make  a  systematic

application of the procedure of self-analysis which I myself employed

in the past for the analysis of my own dreams. His findings deserve

attention  precisely  on  account  of  the  peculiar  character  of  his

personality and of his technique.

                                                                                       4415

 

                          THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION

                                        (1927)

 

 


                                                                                      4416

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4417

 

                          THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION

 

                                            I

 

When one has lived for quite a long time in a particular civilization and

has often tried to discover what its origins were and along what path it

has developed, one sometimes also feels tempted to take a glance in

the other direction and to ask what further fate lies before it and what

transformations it is destined to undergo. But one soon finds that the

value  of  such  an  enquiry  is  diminished  from  the  outset  by  several

factors.  Above  all,  because  there  are  only  a  few  people  who  can

survey  human  activity  in  its  full  compass.  Most  people  have  been

obliged to restrict themselves to a single, or a few, fields of it. But the

less a man knows about the past and the present the more insecure

must prove to be his judgement of the future. And there is the further

difficulty  that  precisely  in  a  judgement  of  this  kind  the  subjective

expectations of the individual play a part which it is difficult to assess;

and these turn out to be dependent on purely personal factors in his

own experience, on the greater or lesser optimism of his attitude to

life,  as  it  has  been  dictated  for  him  by  his  temperament  or  by  his

success  or  failure.  Finally,  the  curious  fact  makes  itself  felt  that  in

general people experience their present naïvely, as it were, without

being able to form an estimate of its contents; they have first to putthemselves at a distance from it - the present, that is to say, must

have  become  the  past  -  before  it  can  yield  points  of  vantage  from

which to judge the future.

   Thus anyone who gives way to the temptation to deliver an opinion

on the probable future of our civilization will do well to remind himself

of the difficulties I have just pointed out, as well as of the uncertainty

that attaches quite generally to any prophecy. It follows from this, so

far as I am concerned, that I shall make a hasty retreat before a task

that is too great, and shall promptly seek out the small tract of territory

which has claimed my attention hitherto, as soon as I have determined

its position in the general scheme of things.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4418

 

   Human civilization, by which I mean all those respects in which

human life has raised itself above its animal status and differs from the

life  of  beasts  -  and  I  scorn  to  distinguish  between  culture  and

civilization -, presents, as we know, two aspects to the observer. It

includes on the one hand all the knowledge and capacity that men

have acquired in order to control the forces of nature and extract its

wealth for the satisfaction of human needs, and, on the other hand, all

the regulations necessary in order to adjust the relations of men to

one another and especially the distribution of the available wealth. The

two  trends  of  civilization  are  not  independent  of  each  other:  firstly,

because the mutual relations of men are profoundly influenced by the

amount  of  instinctual  satisfaction  which  the  existing  wealth  makes

possible; secondly, because an individual man can himself come to

function as wealth in relation to another one, in so far as the other

person  makes  use  of  his  capacity  for  work,  or  chooses  him  as  a

sexual  object;  and  thirdly,  moreover,  because  every  individual  is

virtually an enemy of civilization, though civilization is supposed to be

an object of universal human interest. It is remarkable that, little as

men are able to exist in isolation, they should nevertheless feel as a

heavy burden the sacrifices which civilization expects of them in order

to  make  a  communal  life  possible.  Thus  civilization  has  to  bedefended against the individual, and its regulations, institutions and

commands are directed to that task. They aim not only at effecting a

certain  distribution  of  wealth  but  at  maintaining  that  distribution;

indeed,  they  have  to  protect  everything  that  contributes  to  the

conquest of nature and the production of wealth against men’s hostile

impulses.  Human  creations  are  easily  destroyed,  and  science  and

technology,  which  have  built  them  up,  can  also  be  used  for  their

annihilation.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4419

 

   One thus gets an impression that civilization is something which was

imposed on a resisting majority by a minority which understood how to

obtain  possession  of  the  means  to  power  and  coercion.  It  is,  of

course, natural to assume that these difficulties are not inherent in the

nature of civilization itself but are determined by the imperfections of

the cultural forms which have so far been developed. And in fact it is

not  difficult  to  indicate  those  defects.  While  mankind  has  made

continual advances in its control over nature and may expect to make

still greater ones, it is not possible to establish with certainty that a

similar advance has been made in the management of human affairs;

and probably at all periods, just as now once again, many people have

asked themselves whether what little civilization has thus acquired is

indeed worth defending at all. One would think that a re-ordering of

human relations should be possible, which would remove the sources

of  dissatisfaction  with  civilization  by  renouncing  coercion  and  the

suppression of the instincts, so that, undisturbed by internal discord,

men  might  devote  themselves  to  the  acquisition  of  wealth  and  its

enjoyment. That would be the golden age, but it is questionable if such

a state of affairs can be realized. It seems rather that every civilization

must be built up on coercion and renunciation of instinct; it does not

even  seem  certain  that  if  coercion  were  to  cease  the  majority  of

human beings would be prepared to undertake to perform the work

necessary for acquiring new wealth. One has, I think, to reckon with

the fact that there are present in all men destructive, and thereforeanti-social  and  anti-cultural,  trends  and  that  in  a  great  number  of

people  these  are  strong  enough  to  determine  their  behaviour  in

human society.

   This psychological fact has a decisive importance for our judgement

of human civilization. Whereas we might at first think that its essence

lies in controlling nature for the purpose of acquiring wealth and that

the dangers which threaten it could be eliminated through a suitable

distribution of that wealth among men, it now seems that the emphasis

has moved over from the material to the mental. The decisive question

is whether and to what extent it is possible to lessen the burden of the

instinctual sacrifices imposed on men, to reconcile men to those which

must necessarily remain and to provide a compensation for them. It is

just as impossible to do without control of the mass by a minority as it

is to dispense with coercion in the work of civilization. For masses are

lazy and unintelligent; they have no love for instinctual renunciation,

and they are not to be convinced by argument of its inevitability; and

the individuals composing them support one another in giving free rein

to their indiscipline. It is only through the influence of individuals who

can set an example and whom masses recognize as their leaders that

they  can  be  induced  to  perform  the  work  and  undergo  the

renunciations on which the existence of civilization depends. All is well

if  these  leaders  are  persons  who  possess  superior  insight  into  the

necessities of life and who have risen to the height of mastering their

own instinctual wishes. But there is a danger that in order not to lose

their influence they may give way to the mass more than it gives way

to  them,  and  it  therefore  seems  necessary  that  they  shall  be

independent of the mass by having means to power at their disposal.

To put it briefly, there are two widespread human characteristics which

are responsible for the fact that the regulations of civilization can only

be maintained by a certain degree of coercion - namely, that men are

not spontaneously fond of work and that arguments are of no avail

against their passions.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4420

    I know the objections which will be raised against these assertions.

It will be said that the characteristic of human masses depicted here,

which is supposed to prove that coercion cannot be dispensed with in

the work of civilization, is itself only the result of defects in the cultural

regulations, owing to which men have become embittered, revengeful

and  inaccessible.  New  generations,  who  have  been  brought  up  in

kindness and taught to have a high opinion of reason, and who have

experienced  the  benefits  of  civilization  at  an  early  age,  will  have  a

different attitude to it. They will feel it as a possession of their very

own and will be ready for its sake to make the sacrifices as regards

work  and  instinctual  satisfaction  that  are  necessary  for  its

preservation. They will be able to do without coercion and will differ

little  from  their  leaders.  If  no  culture  has  so  far  produced  human

masses of such a quality, it is because no culture has yet devised

regulations which will influence men in this way, and in particular from

childhood onwards.

   It may be doubted whether it is possible at all, or at any rate as yet,

at  the  present  stage  of  our  control  over  nature,  to  set  up  cultural

regulations of this kind. It may be asked where the number of superior,

unswerving and disinterested leaders are to come from who are to act

as educators of the future generations, and it may be alarming to think

of the enormous amount of coercion that will inevitably be required

before these intentions can be carried out. The grandeur of the plan

and  its  importance  for  the  future  of  human  civilization  cannot  be

disputed. It is securely based on the psychological discovery that man

is  equipped  with  the  most  varied  instinctual  dispositions,  whose

ultimate course is determined by the experiences of early childhood.

But for the same reason the limitations of man’s capacity for education

set bounds to the effectiveness of such a transformation in his culture.

One may question whether, and in what degree, it would be possible

for  a  different  cultural  environment  to  do  away  with  the  two

characteristics of human masses which make the guidance of human

affairs so difficult. The experiment has not yet been made. Probably a

certain percentage of mankind (owing to a pathological disposition or

an excess of instinctual strength) will always remain asocial; but if it

were  feasible  merely  to  reduce  the  majority  that  is  hostile  towards

civilization  to-day  into  a  minority,  a  great  deal  would  have  beenaccomplished - perhaps all that can be accomplished.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4421

 

   I should not like to give the impression that I have strayed a long

way from the line laid down for my enquiry. Let me therefore give an

express  assurance  that  I  have  not  the  least  intention  of  making

judgements  on  the  great  experiment  in  civilization  that  is  now  in

progress in the vast country that stretches between Europe and Asia. I

have neither the special knowledge nor the capacity to decide on its

practicability, to test the expediency of the methods employed or to

measure  the  width  of  the  inevitable  gap  between  intention  and

execution.  What  is  in  preparation  there  is  unfinished  and  therefore

eludes  an  investigation  for  which  our  own  long-consolidated

civilization affords us material.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4422

 

                                            II

 

We have slipped unawares out of the economic field into the field of

psychology.  At  first  we  were  tempted  to  look  for  the  assets  of

civilization  in  the  available  wealth  and  in  the  regulations  for  its

distribution. But with the recognition that every civilization rests on a

compulsion  to  work  and  a  renunciation  of  instinct  and  therefore

inevitably provokes opposition from those affected by these demands,

it has become clear that civilization cannot consist principally or solely

in wealth itself and the means of acquiring it and the arrangements for

its distribution; for these things are threatened by the rebelliousness

and destructive mania of the participants in civilization. Alongside of

wealth we now come upon the means by which civilization can be

defended  -  measures  of  coercion  and  other  measures  that  are

intended  to  reconcile  men  to  it  and  to  recompense  them  for  their

sacrifices.  These  latter  may  be  described  as  the  mental  assets  ofcivilization.

   For the sake of a uniform terminology we will describe the fact that

an  instinct  cannot  be  satisfied  as  a  ‘frustration’,  the  regulation  by

which this frustration is established as a ‘prohibition’ and the condition

which is produced by the prohibition as a ‘privation’. The first step is to

distinguish between privations which affect everyone and privations

which do not affect everyone but only groups, classes or even single

individuals.  The  former  are  the  earliest;  with  the  prohibitions  that

established  them,  civilization  -  who  knows  how  many  thousands  of

years  ago?  -  began  to  detach  man  from  his  primordial  animal

condition. We have found to our surprise that these privations are still

operative  and  still  form  the  kernel  of  hostility  to  civilization.  The

instinctual wishes that suffer under them are born afresh with every

child; there is a class of people, the neurotics, who already react to

these  frustrations  with  asocial  behaviour.  Among  these  instinctual

wishes are those of incest, cannibalism and lust for killing. It sounds

strange to place alongside one another wishes which everyone seems

united in repudiating and others about which there is so much lively

dispute  in  our  civilization  as  to  whether  they  shall  be  permitted  or

frustrated;  but  psychologically  it  is  justifiable  to  do  so.  Nor  is  the

attitude of civilization to these oldest instinctual wishes by any means

uniform. Cannibalism alone seems to be universally proscribed and -

to  the  non-psycho-analytic  view  -  to  have  been  completely

surmounted.  The  strength  of  the  incestuous  wishes  can  still  be

detected  behind  the  prohibition  against  them;  and  under  certain

conditions  killing  is  still  practised,  and  indeed  commanded,  by  our

civilization. It is possible that cultural developments lie ahead of us in

which  the  satisfaction  of  yet  other  wishes,  which  are  entirely

permissible to-day, will appear just as unacceptable as cannibalism

does now.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4423

 

      These  earliest  instinctual  renunciations  already  involve  a

psychological factor which remains important for all further instinctualrenunciations  as  well.  It  is  not  true  that  the  human  mind  has

undergone  no  development  since  the  earliest  times  and  that,  in

contrast to the advances of science and technology, it is the same to-

day as it was at the beginning of history. We can point out one of

these mental advances at once. It is in keeping with the course of

human  development  that  external  coercion  gradually  becomes

internalized; for a special mental agency, man’s super-ego, takes it

over and includes it among its commandments. Every child presents

this  process  of  transformation  to  us;  only  by  that  means  does  it

become a moral and social being. Such a strengthening of the super-

ego is a most precious cultural asset in the psychological field. Those

in  whom  it  has  taken  place  are  turned  from  being  opponents  of

civilization  into  being  its  vehicles.  The  greater  their  number  is  in  a

cultural  unit  the  more  secure  is  its  culture  and  the  more  it  can

dispense with external measures of coercion. Now the degree of this

internalization  differs  greatly  between  the  various  instinctual

prohibitions. As regards the earliest cultural demands, which I have

mentioned, the internalization seems to have been very extensively

achieved, if we leave out of account the unwelcome exception of the

neurotics. But the case is altered when we turn to the other instinctual

claims. Here we observe with surprise and concern that a majority of

people obey the cultural prohibitions on these points only under the

pressure of external coercion - that is, only where that coercion can

make itself effective and so long as it is to be feared. This is also true

of what are known as the moral demands of civilization, which likewise

apply  to  everyone.  Most  of  one’s  experiences  of  man’s  moral

untrustworthiness fall into this category. There are countless civilized

people who would shrink from murder or incest but who do not deny

themselves the satisfaction of their avarice, their aggressive urges or

their sexual lusts, and who do not hesitate to injure other people by

lies, fraud and calumny, so long as they can remain unpunished for it;

and  this,  no  doubt,  has  always  been  so  though  many  ages  of

civilization.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4424 

   If we turn to those restrictions that apply only to certain classes of

society, we meet with a state of things which is flagrant and which has

always  been  recognized.  It  is  to  be  expected  that  these

underprivileged  classes  will  envy  the  favoured  ones  their  privileges

and will do all they can to free themselves from their own surplus of

privation.  Where  this  is  not  possible,  a  permanent  measure  of

discontent will persist within the culture concerned and this can lead to

dangerous revolts. If, however, a culture has not got beyond a point at

which the satisfaction of one portion of its participants depends upon

the suppression of another, and perhaps larger, portion - and this is

the  case  in  all  present  day  cultures  -  it  is  understandable  that  the

suppressed  people  should  develop  an  intense  hostility  towards  a

culture  whose  existence  they  make  possible  by  their  work,  but  in

whose  wealth  they  have  too  small  a  share.  In  such  conditions  an

internalization  of  the  cultural  prohibitions  among  the  suppressed

people is not to be expected. On the contrary, they are not prepared to

acknowledge the prohibitions, they are intent on destroying the culture

itself, and possibly even on doing away with the postulates on which it

is based. The hostility of these classes to civilization is so obvious that

it  has  caused  the  more  latent  hostility  of  the  social  strata  that  are

better  provided  for  to  be  overlooked.  It  goes  without  saying  that  a

civilization  which  leaves  so  large  a  number  of  its  participants

unsatisfied and drives them into revolt neither has nor deserves the

prospect of a lasting existence.

   The extent to which a civilization’s precepts have been internalized -

to express it popularly and unpsychologically: the moral level of its

participants - is not the only form of mental wealth that comes into

consideration in estimating a civilization’s value. There are in addition

its assets in the shape of ideals and artistic creations - that is, the

satisfactions that can be derived from those sources.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4425

 

      People  will  be  only  too  readily  inclined  to  include  among  thepsychical  assets  of  a  culture  its  ideals  -  its  estimates  of  what

achievements are the highest and the most to be striven after. It will

seem  at  first  as  though  these  ideals  would  determine  the

achievements  of  the  cultural  unit;  but  the  actual  course  of  events

would appear to be that the ideals are based on the first achievements

which  have  been  made  possible  by  a  combination  of  the  culture’s

internal  gifts  and  external  circumstances,  and  that  these  first

achievements are then held on to by the ideal as something to be

carried  further.  The  satisfaction  which  the  ideal  offers  to  the

participants in the culture is thus of a narcissistic nature; it rests on

their pride in what has already been successfully achieved. To make

this satisfaction complete calls for a comparison with other cultures

which  have  aimed  at  different  achievements  and  have  developed

different  ideals.  On  the  strength  of  these  differences  every  culture

claims the right to look down on the rest. In this way cultural ideals

become  a  source  of  discord  and  enmity  between  different  cultural

units, as can be seen most clearly in the case of nations.

   The narcissistic satisfaction provided by the cultural ideal is also

among the forces which are successful in combating the hostility to

culture within the cultural unit. This satisfaction can be shared in not

only by the favoured classes, which enjoy the benefits of the culture,

but also by the suppressed ones, since the right to despise the people

outside it compensates them for the wrongs they suffer within their

own unit. No doubt one is a wretched plebeian, harassed by debts and

military service; but, to make up for it, one is a Roman citizen, one has

one’s share in the task of ruling other nations and dictating their laws.

This identification of the suppressed classes with the class who rules

and exploits them is, however, only part of a larger whole. For, on the

other hand, the suppressed classes can be emotionally attached to

their masters; in spite of their hostility to them they may see in them

their ideals; unless such relations of a fundamentally satisfying kind

subsisted,  it  would  be  impossible  to  understand  how  a  number  of

civilizations have survived so long in spite of the justifiable hostility of

large human masses.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion                                                                                      4426

 

   A different kind of satisfaction is afforded by art to the participants in

a cultural unit, though as a rule it remains inaccessible to the masses,

who  are  engaged  in  exhausting  work  and  have  not  enjoyed  any

personal  education.  As  we  discovered  long  since,  art  offers

substitutive  satisfactions  for  the  oldest  and  still  most  deeply  felt

cultural renunciations, and for that reason it serves as nothing else

does to reconcile a man to the sacrifices he has made on behalf of

civilization.  On  the  other  hand,  the  creations  of  art  heighten  his

feelings of identification, of which every cultural unit stands in so much

need, by providing an occasion for sharing highly valued emotional

experiences. And when those creations picture the achievements of

his particular culture and bring to his mind its ideals in an impressive

manner, they also minister to his narcissistic satisfaction.

      No  mention  has  yet  been  made  of  what  is  perhaps  the  most

important item in the psychical inventory of a civilization. This consists

in its religious ideas in the widest sense - in other words (which will be

justified later) in its illusions.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4427

 

                                            III

 

In what does the peculiar value of religious ideas lie?

   We have spoken of the hostility to civilization which is produced by

the  pressure  that  civilization  exercises,  the  renunciations  of  instinct

which it demands. If one imagines its prohibitions lifted - if, then, one

may  take  any  woman  one  pleases  as  a  sexual  object,  if  one  may

without  hesitation  kill  one’s  rival  for  her  love  or  anyone  else  who

stands in one’s way, if, too, one can carry off any of the other man’s

belongings  without  asking  leave  -  how  splendid,  what  a  string  of

satisfactions one’s life would be! True, one soon comes across the

first difficulty: everyone else has exactly the same wishes as I have

and will treat me with no more consideration than I treat him. And so in

reality only one person could be made unrestrictedly happy by such aremoval of the restrictions of civilization, and he would be a tyrant, a

dictator, who had seized all the means to power. And even he would

have every reason to wish that the others would observe at least one

cultural commandment: ‘thou shalt not kill’.

      But  how  ungrateful,  how  short-sighted  after  all,  to  strive  for  the

abolition of civilization! What would then remain would be a state of

nature,  and  that  would  be  far  harder  to  bear.  It  is  true  that  nature

would not demand any restrictions of instinct from us, she would let us

do as we liked; but she has her own particularly effective method of

restricting us. She destroys us coldly, cruelly, relentlessly, as it seems

to  us,  and  possibly  through  the  very  things  that  occasioned  our

satisfaction.  It  was  precisely  because  of  these  dangers  with  which

nature threatens us that we came together and created civilization,

which is also, among other things, intended to make our communal life

possible. For the principal task of civilization, its actual raison d’être, is

to defend us against nature.

      We  all  know  that  in  many  ways  civilization  does  this  fairly  well

already, and clearly as time goes on it will do it much better. But no

one is under the illusion that nature has already been vanquished; and

few dare hope that she will ever be entirely subjected to man. There

are the elements, which seem to mock at all human control: the earth,

which quakes and is torn apart and buries all human life and its works;

water,  which  deluges  and  drowns  everything  in  a  turmoil;  storms,

which  blow  everything  before  them;  there  are  diseases,  which  we

have  only  recently  recognized  as  attacks  by  other  organisms;  and

finally there is the painful riddle of death, against which no medicine

has yet been found, nor probably will be. With these forces nature

rises up against us, majestic, cruel and inexorable; she brings to our

mind once more our weakness and helplessness, which we thought to

escape through the work of civilization. One of the few gratifying and

exalting impressions which mankind can offer is when, in the face of

an elemental catastrophe, it forgets the discordancies of its civilization

and all its internal difficulties and animosities, and recalls the great

common task of preserving itself against the superior power of nature.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion                                                                                      4428

 

   For the individual, too, life is hard to bear, just as it is for mankind in

general.  The  civilization  in  which  he  participates  imposes  some

amount of privation on him, and other men bring him a measure of

suffering, either in spite of the precepts of his civilization or because of

its imperfections. To this are added the injuries which untamed nature

-  he  calls  it  Fate  -  inflicts  on  him.  One  might  suppose  that  this

condition  of  things  would  result  in  a  permanent  state  of  anxious

expectation in him and a severe injury to his natural narcissism. We

know already how the individual reacts to the injuries which civilization

and other men inflict on him: he develops a corresponding degree of

resistance to the regulations of civilization and of hostility to it. But how

does he defend himself against the superior powers of nature, of Fate,

which threaten him as they threaten all the rest?

   Civilization relieves him of this task; it performs it in the same way

for all alike; and it is noteworthy that in this almost all civilizations act

alike. Civilization does not call a halt in the task of defending man

against  nature,  it  merely  pursues  it  by  other  means.  The  task  is  a

manifold  one.  Man’s  self-regard,  seriously  menaced,  calls  for

consolation;  life  and  the  universe  must  be  robbed  of  their  terrors;

moreover  his  curiosity,  moved,  it  is  true,  by  the  strongest  practical

interest, demands an answer.

   A great deal is already gained with the first step: the humanization of

nature. Impersonal forces and destinies cannot be approached; they

remain eternally remote. But if the elements have passions that rage

as  they  do  in  our  own  souls,  if  death  itself  is  not  something

spontaneous but the violent act of an evil Will, if everywhere in nature

there are Beings around us of a kind that we know in our own society,

then we can breathe freely, can feel at home in the uncanny and can

deal  by  psychical  means  with  our  senseless  anxiety.  We  are  still

defenceless, perhaps, but we are no longer helplessly paralysed; we

can at least react. Perhaps, indeed, we are not even defenceless. We

can apply the same methods against these violent supermen outside

that  we  employ  in  our  own  society;  we  can  try  to  adjure  them,  to

appease them, to bribe them, and, by so influencing them, we may rob

them  of  a  part  of  their  power.  A  replacement  like  this  of  naturalscience  by  psychology  not  only  provides  immediate  relief,  but  also

points the way to a further mastering of the situation.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4429

 

   For this situation is nothing new. It has an infantile prototype, of

which it is in fact only the continuation. For once before one has found

oneself in a similar state of helplessness: as a small child, in relation

to one’s parents. One had reason to fear them, and especially one’s

father; and yet one was sure of his protection against the dangers one

knew. Thus it was natural to assimilate the two situations. Here, too,

wishing played its part, as it does in dream-life. The sleeper may be

seized with a presentiment of death, which threatens to place him in

the grave. But the dream-work knows how to select a condition that

will turn even that dreaded event into a wish-fulfilment: the dreamer

sees himself in an ancient Etruscan grave which he has climbed down

into, happy to find his archaeological interests satisfied. In the same

way, a man makes the forces of nature not simply into persons with

whom he can associate as he would with his equals - that would not

do justice to the overpowering impression which those forces make on

him - but he gives them the character of a father. He turns them into

gods, following in this, as I have tried to show, not only an infantile

prototype but a phylogenetic one.

   In the course of time the first observations were made of regularity

and conformity to law in natural phenomena, and with this the forces

of nature lost their human traits. But man’s helplessness remains and

along with it his longing for his father, and the gods. The gods retain

their threefold task: they must exorcize the terrors of nature, they must

reconcile  men  to  the  cruelty  of  Fate,  particularly  as  it  is  shown  in

death,  and  they  must  compensate  them  for  the  sufferings  and

privations which a civilized life in common has imposed on them.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4430

    But within these functions there is a gradual displacement of accent.

It  was  observed  that  the  phenomena  of  nature  developed

automatically according to internal necessities. Without doubt the gods

were the lords of nature; they had arranged it to be as it was and now

they could leave it to itself. Only occasionally, in what are known as

miracles, did they intervene in its course, as though to make it plain

that they had relinquished nothing of their original sphere of power. As

regards  the  apportioning  of  destinies,  an  unpleasant  suspicion

persisted  that  the  perplexity  and  helplessness  of  the  human  race

could not be remedied. It was here that the gods were most apt to fail.

If they themselves created Fate, then their counsels must be deemed

inscrutable. The notion dawned on the most gifted people of antiquity

that Moira stood above the gods and that the gods themselves had

their own destinies. And the more autonomous nature became and the

more  the  gods  withdrew  from  it,  the  more  earnestly  were  all

expectations directed to the third function of the gods - the more did

morality become their true domain. It now became the task of the gods

to  even  out  the  defects  and  evils  of  civilization,  to  attend  to  the

sufferings which men inflict on one another in their life together and to

watch  over  the  fulfilment  of  the  precepts  of  civilization,  which  men

obey so imperfectly. Those precepts themselves were credited with a

divine  origin;  they  were  elevated  beyond  human  society  and  were

extended to nature and the universe.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4431

 

   And thus a store of ideas is created, born from man’s need to make

his helplessness tolerable and built up from the material of memories

of  the  helplessness  of  his  own  childhood  and  the  childhood  of  the

human race. It can clearly be seen that the possession of these ideas

protects  him  in  two  directions  -  against  the  dangers  of  nature  and

Fate, and against the injuries that threaten him from human society

itself. Here is the gist of the matter. Life in this world serves a higher

purpose; no doubt it is not easy to guess what that purpose is, but it

certainly  signifies  a  perfecting  of  man’s  nature.  It  is  probably  thespiritual  part  of  man,  the  soul,  which  in  the  course  of  time  has  so

slowly and unwillingly detached itself from the body, that is the object

of this elevation and exaltation. Everything that happens in this world

is  an  expression  of  the  intentions  of  an  intelligence  superior  to  us,

which in the end, though its ways and byways are difficult to follow,

orders everything for the best - that is, to make it enjoyable for us.

Over each one of us there watches a benevolent Providence which is

only  seemingly  stern  and  which  will  not  suffer  us  to  become  a

plaything of the overmighty and pitiless forces of nature. Death itself is

not  extinction,  is  not  a  return  to  inorganic  lifelessness,  but  the

beginning  of  a  new  kind  of  existence  which  lies  on  the  path  of

development to something higher. And, looking in the other direction,

this view announces that the same moral laws which our civilizations

have set up govern the whole universe as well, except that they are

maintained  by  a  supreme  court  of  justice  with  incomparably  more

power and consistency. In the end all good is rewarded and all evil

punished, if not actually in this form of life then in the later existences

that begin after death. In this way all the terrors, the sufferings and the

hardships of life are destined to be obliterated. Life after death, which

continues life on earth just as the invisible part of the spectrum joins

on to the visible part, brings us all the perfection that we may perhaps

have missed here. And the superior wisdom which directs this course

of things, the infinite goodness that expresses itself in it, the justice

that achieves its aim in it - these are the attributes of the divine beings

who also created us and the world as a whole, or rather, of the one

divine being into which, in our civilization, all the gods of antiquity have

been  condensed.  The  people  which  first  succeeded  in  thus

concentrating  the  divine  attributes  was  not  a  little  proud  of  the

advance. It had laid open to view the father who had all along been

hidden behind every divine figure as its nucleus. Fundamentally this

was a return to the historical beginnings of the idea of God. Now that

God was a single person, man’s relations to him could recover the

intimacy and intensity of the child’s relation to his father. But if one had

done so much for one’s father, one wanted to have a reward, or at

least to be his only beloved child, his Chosen People. Very much later,

pious  America  laid  claim  to  being  ‘God’s  own  Country’;  and,  as

regards one of the shapes in which men worship the deity, the claim isundoubtedly valid.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4432

 

      The  religious  ideas  that  have  been  summarized  above  have  of

course passed through a long process of development and have been

adhered to in various phases by various civilizations. I have singled

out one such phase, which roughly corresponds to the final form taken

by our present-day white Christian civilization. It is easy to see that not

all the parts of this picture tally equally well with one another, that not

all the questions that press for an answer receive one, and that it is

difficult to dismiss the contradiction of daily experience. Nevertheless,

such as they are, those ideas - ideas which are religious in the widest

sense - are prized as the most precious possession of civilization, as

the most precious thing it has to offer its participants. It is far more

highly prized than all the devices for winning treasures from the earth

or providing men with sustenance or preventing their illnesses, and so

forth. People feel that life would not be tolerable if they did not attach

to  these  ideas  the  value  that  is  claimed  for  them.  And  now  the

question  arises:  what  are  these  ideas  in  the  light  of  psychology?

Whence do they derive the esteem in which they are held? And, to

take a further timid step, what is their real worth?

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4433

 

                                            IV

 

An enquiry which proceeds like a monologue, without interruption, is

not  altogether  free  from  danger.  One  is  too  easily  tempted  into

pushing  aside  thoughts  which  threaten  to  break  into  it,  and  in

exchange one is left with a feeling of uncertainty which in the end one

tries to keep down by over-decisiveness. I shall therefore imagine that

I have an opponent who follows my arguments with mistrust, and here

and there I shall allow him to interject some remarks.      I  hear  him  say:  ‘You  have  repeatedly  used  the  expressions

"civilization creates these religious ideas", "civilization places them at

the  disposal  of  its  participants".  There  is  something  about  this  that

sounds strange to me. I cannot myself say why, but it does not sound

so  natural  as  it  does  to  say  that  civilization  has  made  rules  about

distributing the products of labour or about rights concerning women

and children.’

   I think, all the same, that I am justified in expressing myself in this

way. I have tried to show that religious ideas have arisen from the

same need as have all the other achievements of civilization: from the

necessity of defending oneself against the crushingly superior force of

nature. To this a second motive was added - the urge to rectify the

shortcomings  of  civilization  which  made  themselves  painfully  felt.

Moreover,  it  is  especially  apposite  to  say  that  civilization  gives  the

individual  these  ideas,  for  he  finds  them  there  already;  they  are

presented to him ready-made, and he would not be able to discover

them  for  himself.  What  he  is  entering  into  is  the  heritage  of  many

generations, and he takes it over as he does the multiplication table,

geometry, and similar things. There is indeed a difference in this, but

that difference lies elsewhere and I cannot examine it yet. The feeling

of strangeness that you mention may be partly due to the fact that this

body of religious ideas is usually put forward as a divine revelation.

But this presentation of it is itself a part of the religious system, and it

entirely ignores the known historical development of these ideas and

their differences in different epochs and civilizations.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4434

 

   ‘Here is another point, which seems to me to be more important.

You argue that the humanization of nature is derived from the need to

put  an  end  to  man’s  perplexity  and  helplessness  in  the  face  of  its

dreaded forces, to get into a relation with them and finally to influence

them. But a motive of this kind seems superfluous. Primitive man has

no  choice,  he  has  no  other  way  of  thinking.  It  is  natural  to  him,

something innate, as it were, to project his existence outwards into theworld  and  to  regard  every  event  which  he  observes  as  the

manifestation of beings who at bottom are like himself. It is his only

method of comprehension. And it is by no means self-evident, on the

contrary it is a remarkable coincidence, if by thus indulging his natural

disposition he succeeds in satisfying one of his greatest needs.’

   I do not find that so striking. Do you suppose that human thought

has  no  practical  motives,  that  it  is  simply  the  expression  of  a

disinterested curiosity? That is surely very improbable. I believe rather

that when man personifies the forces of nature he is again following

an  infantile  model.  He  has  learnt  from  the  persons  in  his  earliest

environment that the way to influence them is to establish a relation

with  them;  and  so,  later  on,  with  the  same  end  in  view,  he  treats

everything else that he comes across in the same way as he treated

those persons. Thus I do not contradict your descriptive observation; it

is  in  fact  natural  to  man  to  personify  everything  that  he  wants  to

understand  in  order  later  to  control  it  (psychical  mastering  as  a

preparation for physical mastering); but I provide in addition a motive

and a genesis for this peculiarity of human thinking.

   ‘And now here is yet a third point. You have dealt with the origin of

religion  once  before,  in  your  book Totem  and  Taboo.  But  there  it

appeared  in  a  different  light.  Everything  was  the  son-father

relationship. God was the exalted father, and the longing for the father

was the root of the need for religion. Since then, it seems, you have

discovered the factor of human weakness and helplessness, to which

indeed the chief role in the formation of religion is generally assigned,

and now you transpose everything that was once the father complex

into  terms  of  helplessness.  May  I  ask  you  to  explain  this

transformation?’

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4435

 

   With pleasure. I was only waiting for this invitation. But is it really a

transformation? In Totem and Taboo it was not my purpose to explain

the origin of religions but only of totemism. Can you, from any of the

views known to you, explain the fact that the first shape in which theprotecting deity revealed itself to men should have been that of an

animal,  that  there  was  a  prohibition  against  killing  and  eating  this

animal and that nevertheless the solemn custom was to kill and eat it

communally once a year? This is precisely what happens in totemism.

And it is hardly to the purpose to argue about whether totemism ought

to be called a religion. It has intimate connections with the later god-

religions. The totem animals become the sacred animals of the gods;

and  the  earliest,  but  most  fundamental  moral  restrictions  -  the

prohibitions  against  murder  and  incest  -  originate  in  totemism.

Whether or not you accept the conclusions of Totem and Taboo, I

hope you will admit that a number of very remarkable, disconnected

facts are brought together in it into a consistent whole.

   The question of why in the long run the animal god did not suffice,

and was replaced by a human one, was hardly touched on in Totem

and Taboo, and other problems concerning the formation of religion

were not mentioned in the book at all. Do you regard a limitation of

that kind as the same thing as a denial? My work is a good example of

the strict isolation of the particular contribution which psycho-analytic

discussion can make to the solution of the problem of religion. If I am

now trying to add the other, less deeply concealed part, you should

not accuse me of contradicting myself, just as before you accused me

of being one-sided. It is, of course, my duty to point out the connecting

links between what I said earlier and what I put forward now, between

the deeper and the manifest motives, between the father-complex and

man’s helplessness and need for protection.

   These connections are not hard to find. They consist in the relation

of  the  child’s  helplessness  to  the  helplessness  of  the  adult  which

continues  it.  So  that,  as  was  to  be  expected,  the  motives  for  the

formation of religion which psycho-analysis revealed now turn out to

be the same as the infantile contribution to the manifest motives. Let

us transport ourselves into the mental life of a child. You remember

the  choice  of  object  according  to  the  anaclitic  type,  which  psycho-

analysis  talks  of?  The  libido  there  follows  the  paths  of  narcissistic

needs and attaches itself to the objects which ensure the satisfaction

of  those  needs.  In  this  way  the  mother,  who  satisfies  the  child’s

hunger,  becomes  its  first  love-object  and  certainly  also  its  first

protection against all the undefined dangers which threaten it in theexternal world - its first protection against anxiety, we may say.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4436

 

   In this function the mother is soon replaced by the stronger father,

who  retains  that  position  for  the  rest  of  childhood.  But  the  child’s

attitude to its father is coloured by a peculiar ambivalence. The father

himself  constitutes  a  danger  for  the  child,  perhaps  because  of  its

earlier relation to its mother. Thus it fears him no less than it longs for

him  and  admires  him.  The  indications  of  this  ambivalence  in  the

attitude to the father are deeply imprinted in every religion, as was

shown in Totem and Taboo. When the growing individual finds that he

is destined to remain a child for ever, that he can never do without

protection against strange superior powers, he lends those powers the

features belonging to the figure of his father; he creates for himself the

gods whom he dreads, whom he seeks to propitiate, and whom he

nevertheless entrusts with his own protection. Thus his longing for a

father  is  a  motive  identical  with  his  need  for  protection  against  the

consequences of his human weakness. The defence against childish

helplessness  is  what  lends  its  characteristic  features  to  the  adult’s

reaction to the helplessness which he has to acknowledge - a reaction

which is precisely the formation of religion. But it is not my intention to

enquire any further into the development of the idea of God; what we

are concerned with here is the finished body of religious ideas as it is

transmitted by civilization to the individual.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4437

 

                                            V

 

Let  us  now  take  up  the  thread  of  our  enquiry.  What,  then,  is  the

psychological significance of religious ideas and under what heading

are we to classify them? The question is not at all easy to answer

immediately. After rejecting a number of formulations, we will take ourstand  on  the  following  one.  Religious  ideas  are  teachings  and

assertions about facts and conditions of external (or internal) reality

which  tell  one  something  one  has  not  discovered  for  oneself  and

which lay claim to one’s belief. Since they give us information about

what is most important and interesting to us in life, they are particularly

highly prized. Anyone who knows nothing of them is very ignorant;

and  anyone  who  has  added  them  to  his  knowledge  may  consider

himself much the richer.

   There are, of course, many such teachings about the most various

things in the world. Every school lesson is full of them. Let us take

geography.  We  are  told  that  the  town  of  Constance  lies  on  the

Bodensee. A student song adds: ‘if you don’t believe it, go and see.’ I

happen to have been there and can confirm the fact that that lovely

town lies on the shore of a wide stretch of water which all those who

live round it call the Bodensee; and I am now completely convinced of

the correctness of this geographical assertion. In this connection I am

reminded of another, very remarkable, experience. I was already a

man of mature years when I stood for the first time on the hill of the

Acropolis in Athens, between the temple ruins, looking out over the

blue sea. A feeling of astonishment mingled with my joy. It seemed to

say: ‘So it really is true, just as we learnt at school!’ How shallow and

weak must have been the belief I then acquired in the real truth of

what I heard, if I could be so astonished now! But I will not lay too

much  stress  on  the  significance  of  this  experience;  for  my

astonishment could have had another explanation, which did not occur

to me at the time and which is of a wholly subjective nature and has to

do with the special character of the place.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4438

 

   All teachings like these, then, demand belief in their contents, but

not without producing grounds for their claim. They are put forward as

the  epitomized  result  of  a  longer  process  of  thought  based  on

observation and certainly also on inferences. If anyone wants to go

through this process himself instead of accepting its result, they showhim how to set about it. Moreover, we are always in addition given the

source of the knowledge conveyed by them, where that source is not

self-evident,  as  it  is  in  the  case  of  geographical  assertions.  For

instance, the earth is shaped like a sphere; the proofs adduced for this

are Foucault’s pendulum experiment, the behaviour of the horizon and

the possibility of circumnavigating the earth. Since it is impracticable,

as  everyone  concerned  realizes,  to  send  every  schoolchild  on  a

voyage round the world, we are satisfied with letting what is taught at

school be taken on trust; but we know that the path to acquiring a

personal conviction remains open.

   Let us try to apply the same test to the teachings of religion. When

we ask on what their claim to be believed is founded, we are met with

three answers, which harmonize remarkably badly with one another.

Firstly,  these  teachings  deserve  to  be  believed  because  they  were

already  believed  by  our  primal  ancestors;  secondly,  we  possess

proofs  which  have  been  handed  down  to  us  from  those  same

primaeval times; and thirdly, it is forbidden to raise the question of

their authentication at all. In former days anything so presumptuous

was visited with the severest penalties, and even to-day society looks

askance at any attempt to raise the question again.

   This third point is bound to rouse our strongest suspicions. After all,

a prohibition like this can only be for one reason - that society is very

well  aware  of  the  insecurity  of  the  claim  it  makes  on  behalf  of  its

religious doctrines. Otherwise it would certainly be very ready to put

the necessary data at the disposal of anyone who wanted to arrive at

conviction. This being so, it is with a feeling of mistrust which it is hard

to allay that we pass on to an examination of the other two grounds of

proof.  We  ought  to  believe  because  our  forefathers  believed.  But

these ancestors of ours were far more ignorant than we are. They

believed  in  things  we  could  not  possibly  accept  to-day;  and  the

possibility occurs to us that the doctrines of religion may belong to that

class too. The proofs they have left us are set down in writings which

themselves  bear  every  mark  of  untrustworthiness.  They  are  full  of

contradictions, revisions and falsifications, and where they speak of

factual  confirmations  they  are  themselves  unconfirmed.  It  does  not

help much to have it asserted that their wording, or even their content

only, originates from divine revelation; for this assertion is itself one ofthe  doctrines  whose  authenticity  is  under  examination,  and  no

proposition can be a proof of itself.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4439

 

   Thus we arrive at the singular conclusion that of all the information

provided by our cultural assets it is precisely the elements which might

be of the greatest importance to us and which have the task of solving

the riddles of the universe and of reconciling us to the sufferings of life

- it is precisely those elements that are the least well authenticated of

any. We should not be able to bring ourselves to accept anything of so

little concern to us as the fact that whales bear young instead of laying

eggs, if it were not capable of better proof than this.

      This  state  of  affairs  is  in  itself  a  very  remarkable  psychological

problem.  And  let  no  one  suppose  that  what  I  have  said  about  the

impossibility  of  proving  the  truth  of  religious  doctrines  contains

anything new. It has been felt at all times - undoubtedly, too, by the

ancestors  who  bequeathed  us  this  legacy.  Many  of  them  probably

nourished  the  same  doubts  as  ours,  but  the  pressure  imposed  on

them was too strong for them to have dared to utter them. And since

then countless people have been tormented by similar doubts, and

have striven to suppress them, because they thought it was their duty

to believe; many brilliant intellects have broken down over this conflict,

and many characters have been impaired by the compromises with

which they have tried to find a way out of it.

      If  all  the  evidence  put  forward  for  the  authenticity  of  religious

teachings originates in the past, it is natural to look round and see

whether the present, about which it is easier to form judgements, may

not also be able to furnish evidence of the sort. If by this means we

could succeed in clearing even a single portion of the religious system

from doubt, the whole of it would gain enormously in credibility. The

proceedings  of  the  spiritualists  meet  us  at  this  point;  they  are

convinced  of  the  survival  of  the  individual  soul  and  they  seek  to

demonstrate  to  us  beyond  doubt  the  truth  of  this  one  religious

doctrine. Unfortunately they cannot succeed in refuting the fact thatthe appearance and utterances of their spirits are merely the products

of  their  own  mental  activity.  They  have  called  up  the  spirits  of  the

greatest  men  and  of  the  most  eminent  thinkers,  but  all  the

pronouncements and information which they have received from them

have been so foolish and so wretchedly meaningless that one can find

nothing  credible  in  them  but  the  capacity  of  the  spirits  to  adapt

themselves to the circle of people who have conjured them up.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4440

 

   I must now mention two attempts that have been made - both of

which convey the impression of being desperate efforts - to evade the

problem. One, of a violent nature, is ancient; the other is subtle and

modern. The first is the ‘Credo quia absurdum’ of the early Father of

the  Church.  It  maintains  that  religious  doctrines  are  outside  the

jurisdiction  of  reason  -  are  above  reason.  Their  truth  must  be  felt

inwardly, and they need not be comprehended. But this Credo is only

of interest as a self-confession. As an authoritative statement it has no

binding force. Am I to be obliged to believe every absurdity? And if

not, why this one in particular? There is no appeal to a court above

that of reason. If the truth of religious doctrines is dependent on an

inner experience which bears witness to that truth, what is one to do

about the many people who do not have this rare experience? One

may require every man to use the gift of reason which he possesses,

but one cannot erect, on the basis of a motive that exists only for a

very few, an obligation that shall apply to everyone. If one man has

gained  an  unshakable  conviction  of  the  true  reality  of  religious

doctrines  from  a  state  of  ecstasy  which  has  deeply  moved  him,  of

what significance is that to others?

   The second attempt is the one made by the philosophy of ‘As if’.

This  asserts  that  our  thought-activity  includes  a  great  number  of

hypotheses  whose  groundlessness  and  even  absurdity  we  fully

realize. They are called ‘fictions’, but for a variety of practical reasons

we have to behave ‘as if’ we believed in these fictions. This is the case

with religious doctrines because of their incomparable importance forthe maintenance of human society.¹ This line of argument is not far

removed  from  the  ‘Credo  quia  absurdum’.  But  I  think  the  demand

made by the ‘As if’ argument is one that only a philosopher could put

forward. A man whose thinking is not influenced by the artifices of

philosophy will never be able to accept it; in such a man’s view, the

admission that something is absurd or contrary to reason leaves no

more to be said. It cannot be expected of him that precisely in treating

his most important interests he shall forgo the guarantees he requires

for all his ordinary activities. I am reminded of one of my children who

was distinguished at an early age by a peculiarly marked matter-of-

factness. When the children were being told a fairy story and were

listening to it with rapt attention, he would come up and ask: ‘Is that a

true story?’ When he was told it was not, he would turn away with a

look of disdain. We may expect that people will soon behave in the

same way towards the fairy tales of religion, in spite of the advocacy

of ‘As if’.

   But at present they still behave quite differently; and in past times

religious ideas, in spite of their incontrovertible lack of authentication,

have exercised the strongest possible influence on mankind. This is a

fresh psychological problem. We must ask where the inner force of

those  doctrines  lies  and  to  what  it  is  that  they  owe  their  efficacy,

independent as it is of recognition by reason.

 

    ¹ I  hope  I  am  not  doing  him  an  injustice  if  I  take  the  philosopher  of  ‘As  if’  as  the

representative of a view which is not foreign to other thinkers: ‘We include as fictions not
merely indifferent theoretical operations but ideational constructs emanating from the noblest
minds, to which the noblest part of mankind cling and of which they will not allow themselves
to be deprived. Nor is it our object so to deprive them - for as practical fictions we leave them
all intact; they perish only as theoretical truths.’ (Hans Vaihinger, 1922, 68.)

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4441

 

                                            VI

 

I think we have prepared the way sufficiently for an answer to both

these  questions.  It  will  be  found  if  we  turn  our  attention  to  the

psychical  origin  of  religious  ideas.  These,  which  are  given  out  asteachings, are not precipitates of experience or end-results of thinking:

they are illusions, fulfilments of the oldest, strongest and most urgent

wishes of mankind. The secret of their strength lies in the strength of

those  wishes.  As  we  already  know,  the  terrifying  impression  of

helplessness  in  childhood  arouses  the  need  for  protection  -  for

protection  through  love  which  was  provided  by  the  father;  and  the

recognition  that  this  helplessness  lasts  throughout  life  made  it

necessary to cling to the existence of a father, but this time a more

powerful one. Thus the benevolent rule of a divine Providence allays

our fear of the dangers of life; the establishment of a moral world-

order ensures the fulfilment of the demands of justice, which have so

often remained unfulfilled in human civilization; and the prolongation of

earthly  existence  in  a  future  life  provides  the  local  and  temporal

framework in which these wish-fulfilments shall take place. Answers to

the riddles that tempt the curiosity of man, such as how the universe

began or what the relation is between body and mind, are developed

in conformity with the underlying assumptions of this system. It is an

enormous relief to the individual psyche if the conflicts of its childhood

arising from the father-complex - conflicts which it has never wholly

overcome - are removed from it and brought to a solution which is

universally accepted.

   When I say that these things are all illusions, I must define the

meaning of the word. An illusion is not the same thing as an error; nor

is it necessarily an error. Aristotle’s belief that vermin are developed

out of dung (a belief to which ignorant people still cling) was an error;

so was the belief of a former generation of doctors that tabes dorsalis

is the result of sexual excess. It would be incorrect to call these errors

illusions. On the other hand, it was an illusion of Columbus’s that he

had discovered a new sea-route to the Indies. The part played by his

wish in this error is very clear. One may describe as an illusion the

assertion made by certain nationalists that the Indo-Germanic race is

the  only  one  capable  of  civilization;  or  the  belief,  which  was  only

destroyed  by  psycho-analysis,  that  children  are  creatures  without

sexuality. What is characteristic of illusions is that they are derived

from  human  wishes.  In  this  respect  they  come  near  to  psychiatric

delusions.  But  they  differ  from  them,  too,  apart  from  the  more

complicated  structure  of  delusions.  In  the  case  of  delusions,  weemphasize  as  essential  their  being  in  contradiction  with  reality.

Illusions need not necessarily be false - that is to say, unrealizable or

in contradiction to reality. For instance, a middle-class girl may have

the illusion that a prince will come and marry her. This is possible; and

a  few  such  cases  have  occurred.  That  the  Messiah  will  come  and

found a golden age is much less likely. Whether one classifies this

belief  as  an  illusion  or  as  something  analogous  to  a  delusion  will

depend on one’s personal attitude. Examples of illusions which have

proved true are not easy to find, but the illusion of the alchemists that

all metals can be turned into gold might be one of them. The wish to

have a great deal of gold, as much gold as possible, has, it is true,

been  a  good  deal  damped  by  our  present-day  knowledge  of  the

determinants  of  wealth,  but  chemistry  no  longer  regards  the

transmutation of metals into gold as impossible. Thus we call a belief

an  illusion  when  a  wish-fulfilment  is  a  prominent  factor  in  its

motivation, and in doing so we disregard its relations to reality, just as

the illusion itself sets no store by verification.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4442

 

      Having  thus  taken  our  bearings,  let  us  return  once  more  to  the

question of religious doctrines. We can now repeat that all of them are

illusions and insusceptible of proof. No one can be compelled to think

them true, to believe in them. Some of them are so improbable, so

incompatible with everything we have laboriously discovered about the

reality of the world, that we may compare them - if we pay proper

regard to the psychological differences - to delusions. Of the reality

value of most of them we cannot judge; just as they cannot be proved,

so they cannot be refuted. We still know too little to make a critical

approach to them. The riddles of the universe reveal themselves only

slowly to our investigation; there are many questions to which science

to-day can give no answer. But scientific work is the only road which

can lead us to a knowledge of reality outside ourselves. It is once

again  merely  an  illusion  to  expect  anything  from  intuition  and

introspection; they can give us nothing but particulars about our ownmental life, which are hard to interpret, never any information about

the questions which religious doctrine finds it so easy to answer. It

would be insolent to let one’s own arbitrary will step into the breach

and, according to one’s personal estimate, declare this or that part of

the religious system to be less or more acceptable. Such questions

are too momentous for that; they might be called too sacred.

   At this point one must expect to meet with an objection. ‘Well then, if

even obdurate sceptics admit that the assertions of religion cannot be

refuted by reason, why should I not believe in them, since they have

so much on their side - tradition, the agreement of mankind, and all

the consolations they offer?’ Why not, indeed? Just as no one can be

forced to believe, so no one can be forced to disbelieve. But do not let

us be satisfied with deceiving ourselves that arguments like these take

us along the road of correct thinking. If ever there was a case of a

lame  excuse  we  have  it  here.  Ignorance  is  ignorance;  no  right  to

believe anything can be derived from it. In other matters no sensible

person will behave so irresponsibly or rest content with such feeble

grounds for his opinions and for the one he takes. It is only in the

highest and most sacred things that he allows himself to do so. In

reality  these  are  only  attempts  at  pretending  to  oneself  or  to  other

people that one is still firmly attached to religion, when one has long

since  cut  oneself  loose  from  it.  Where  questions  of  religion  are

concerned, people are guilty of every possible sort of dishonesty and

intellectual misdemeanour. Philosophers stretch the meaning of words

until they retain scarcely anything of their original sense. They give the

name of ‘God’ to some vague abstraction which they have created for

themselves;  having  done  so  they  can  pose  before  all  the  world  as

deists, as believers in God, and they can even boast that they have

recognized a higher, purer concept of God, notwithstanding that their

God is now nothing more than an insubstantial shadow and no longer

the  mighty  personality  of  religious  doctrines.  Critics  persist  in

describing  as  ‘deeply  religious’  anyone  who  admits  to  a  sense  of

man’s insignificance or impotence in the face of the universe, although

what constitutes the essence of the religious attitude is not this feeling

but only the next step after it, the reaction to it which seeks a remedy

for it. The man who goes no further, but humbly acquiesces in the

small part which human beings play in the great world - such a man is,on the contrary, irreligious in the truest sense of the word.

   To assess the truth-value of religious doctrines does not lie within

the scope of the present enquiry. It is enough for us that we have

recognized them as being, in their psychological nature, illusions. But

we do not have to conceal the fact that this discovery also strongly

influences our attitude to the question which must appear to many to

be the most important of all. We know approximately at what periods

and by what kind of men religious doctrines were created. If in addition

we discover the motives which led to this, our attitude to the problem

of religion will undergo a marked displacement. We shall tell ourselves

that it would be very nice if there were a God who created the world

and was a benevolent Providence, and if there were a moral order in

the universe and an after-life; but it is a very striking fact that all this is

exactly  as  we  are  bound  to  wish  it  to  be.  And  it  would  be  more

remarkable still if our wretched, ignorant and downtrodden ancestors

had succeeded in solving all these difficult riddles of the universe.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4443

 

                                          VII

 

Having  recognized  religious  doctrines  as  illusions,  we  are  at  once

faced by a further question: may not other cultural assets of which we

hold a high opinion and by which we let our lives be ruled be of a

similar nature? Must not the assumptions that determine our political

regulations be called illusions as well? and is it not the case that in our

civilization the relations between the sexes are disturbed by an erotic

illusion or a number of such illusions? And once our suspicion has

been  aroused,  we  shall  not  shrink  from  asking  too  whether  our

conviction that we can learn something about external reality through

the use of observation and reasoning in scientific work - whether this

conviction has any better foundation. Nothing ought to keep us from

directing  our  observation  to  our  own  selves  or  from  applying  our

thought to criticism of itself. In this field a number of investigations

open out before us, whose results could not but be decisive for theconstruction of a ‘Weltanschauung’. We surmise, moreover, that such

an effort would not be wasted and that it would at least in part justify

our  suspicion.  But  the  author  does  not  dispose  of  the  means  for

undertaking so comprehensive a task; he needs must confine his work

to following out one only of these illusions - that, namely, of religion.

   But now the loud voice of our opponent brings us to a halt. We are

called to account for our wrong-doing:

   ‘Archaeological interests are no doubt most praiseworthy, but no

one undertakes an excavation if by doing so he is going to undermine

the  habitations  of  the  living  so  that  they  collapse  and  bury  people

under their ruins. The doctrines of religion are not a subject one can

quibble about like any other. Our civilization is built up on them, and

the maintenance of human society is based on the majority of men’s

believing in the truth of those doctrines. If men are taught that there is

no almighty and all-just God, no divine world-order and no future life,

they  will  feel  exempt  from  all  obligation  to  obey  the  precepts  of

civilization. Everyone will, without inhibition or fear, follow his asocial,

egoistic instincts and seek to exercise his power; Chaos, which we

have  banished  through  many  thousands  of  years  of  the  work  of

civilization, will come again. Even if we knew, and could prove, that

religion was not in possession of the truth, we ought to conceal the

fact and behave in the way prescribed by the philosophy of "As if" -

and this in the interest of the preservation of us all. And apart from the

danger  of  the  undertaking,  it  would  be  a  purposeless  cruelty.

Countless people find their one consolation in religious doctrines, and

can only bear life with their help. You would rob them of their support,

without having anything better to give them in exchange. It is admitted

that so far science has not achieved much, but even if it had advanced

much further it would not suffice for man. Man has imperative needs of

another sort, which can never be satisfied by cold science; and it is

very  strange  -  indeed,  it  is  the  height  of  inconsistency  -  that  a

psychologist who has always insisted on what a minor part is played in

human  affairs  by  the  intelligence  as  compared  with  the  life  of  the

instincts - that such a psychologist should now try to rob mankind of a

precious wish-fulfilment and should propose to compensate them for it

with intellectual nourishment.’

                               The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4444

 

   What a lot of accusations all at once! Nevertheless I am ready with

rebuttals for them all; and, what is more, I shall assert the view that

civilization runs a greater risk if we maintain our present attitude to

religion than if we give it up.

      But  I  hardly  know  where  to  begin  my  reply.  Perhaps  with  the

assurance  that  I  myself  regard  my  undertaking  as  completely

harmless and free of risk. It is not I who am overvaluing the intellect

this time. If people are as my opponents describe them - and I should

not  like  to  contradict  them  -  then  there  is  no  danger  of  a  devout

believer’s being overcome by my arguments and deprived of his faith.

Besides, I have said nothing which other and better men have not said

before me in a much more complete, forcible and impressive manner.

Their names are well known, and I shall not cite them, for I should not

like to give an impression that I am seeking to rank myself as one of

them. All I have done - and this is the only thing that is new in my

exposition - is to add some psychological foundation to the criticisms

of my great predecessors. It is hardly to be expected that precisely

this addition will produce the effect which was denied to those earlier

efforts. No doubt I might be asked here what is the point of writing

these  things  if  I  am  certain  that  they  will  be  ineffective.  But  I  shall

come back to that later.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4445

 

   The one person this publication may injure is myself. I shall have to

listen  to  the  most  disagreeable  reproaches  for  my  shallowness,

narrow-mindedness and lack of idealism or of understanding for the

highest  interests  of  mankind.  But  on  the  one  hand,  such

remonstrances are not new to me; and on the other, if a man has

already learnt in his youth to rise superior to the disapproval of his

contemporaries, what can it matter to him in his old age when he is

certain  soon  to  be  beyond  the  reach  of  all  favour  or  disfavour?  Informer times it was different. Then utterances such as mine brought

with  them  a  sure  curtailment  of  one’s  earthly  existence  and  an

effective  speeding-up  of  the  opportunity  for  gaining  a  personal

experience of the after-life. But, I repeat, those times are past and to-

day writings such as this bring no more danger to their author than to

their readers. The most that can happen is that the translation and

distribution of his book will be forbidden in one country or another -

and precisely, of course, in a country that is convinced of the high

standard  of  its  culture.  But  if  one  puts  in  any  plea  at  all  for  the

renunciation  of  wishes  and  for  acquiescence  in  Fate,  one  must  be

able to tolerate this kind of injury too.

   The further question occurred to me whether the publication of this

work might not after all do harm. Not to a person, however, but to a

cause - the cause of psycho-analysis. For it cannot be denied that

psycho-analysis is my creation, and it has met with plenty of mistrust

and  ill-will.  If  I  now  come  forward  with  such  displeasing

pronouncements,  people  will  be  only  too  ready  to  make  a

displacement from my person to psycho-analysis. ‘Now we see,’ they

will say, ‘where psycho-analysis leads to. The mask has fallen; it leads

to a denial of God and of a moral ideal, as we always suspected. To

keep us from this discovery we have been deluded into thinking that

psycho-analysis  has  no Weltanschauung  and  never  can  construct

one.’

   An outcry of this kind will really be disagreeable to me on account of

my many fellow-workers, some of whom do not by any means share

my  attitude  to  the  problems  of  religion.  But  psycho-analysis  has

already weathered many storms and now it must brave this fresh one.

In point of fact psycho-analysis is a method of research, an impartial

instrument, like the infinitesimal calculus, as it were. If a physicist were

to  discover  with  the  latter’s  help  that  after  a  certain  time  the  earth

would  be  destroyed,  we  would  nevertheless  hesitate  to  attribute

destructive tendencies to the calculus itself and therefore to proscribe

it. Nothing that I have said here against the truth-value of religions

needed  the  support  of  psycho-analysis;  it  had  been  said  by  others

long  before  analysis  came  into  existence.  If  the  application  of  the

psycho-analytic  method  makes  it  possible  to  find  a  new  argument

against  the  truths  of  religion, tant pis  for  religion;  but  defenders  ofreligion will by the same right make use of psycho-analysis in order to

give full value to the affective significance of religious doctrines.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4446

 

      And  now  to  proceed  with  our  defence.  Religion  has  clearly

performed  great  services  for  human  civilization.  It  has  contributed

much towards the taming of the asocial instincts. But not enough. It

has ruled human society for many thousands of years and has had

time to show what it can achieve. If it had succeeded in making the

majority of mankind happy, in comforting them, in reconciling them to

life  and  in  making  them  into  vehicles  of  civilization,  no  one  would

dream of attempting to alter the existing conditions. But what do we

see instead? We see that an appallingly large number of people are

dissatisfied with civilization and unhappy in it, and feel it as a yoke

which must be shaken of; and that these people either do everything

in  their  power  to  change  that  civilization,  or  else  go  so  far  in  their

hostility to it that they will have nothing to do with civilization or with a

restriction of instinct. At this point it will be objected against us that this

state of affairs is due to the very fact that religion has lost a part of its

influence  over  human  masses  precisely  because  of  the  deplorable

effect of the advances of science. We will note this admission and the

reason  given  for  it,  and  we  shall  make  use  of  it  later  for  our  own

purposes; but the objection itself has no force.

   It is doubtful whether men were in general happier at a time when

religious doctrines held unrestricted sway; more moral they certainly

were not. They have always known how to externalize the precepts of

religion and thus to nullify their intentions. The priests, whose duty it

was to ensure obedience to religion, met them half-way in this. God’s

kindness must lay a restraining hand on His justice. One sinned, and

then one made a sacrifice or did penance and then one was free to sin

once  more.  Russian  introspectiveness  has  reached  the  pitch  of

concluding  that  sin  is  indispensable  for  the  enjoyment  of  all  the

blessings of divine grace, so that, at bottom, sin is pleasing to God. It

is no secret that the priests could only keep the masses submissive toreligion by making such large concessions as these to the instinctual

nature of man. Thus it was agreed: God alone is strong and good,

man is weak and sinful. In every age immorality has found no less

support in religion than morality has. If the achievements of religion in

respect to man’s happiness, susceptibility to culture and moral control

are no better than this, the question cannot but arise whether we are

not overrating its necessity for mankind, and whether we do wisely in

basing our cultural demands upon it.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4447

 

   Let us consider the unmistakable situation as it is to-day. We have

heard the admission that religion no longer has the same influence on

people  that  it  used  to.  (We  are  here  concerned  with  European

Christian civilization.) And this is not because its promises have grown

less but because people find them less credible. Let us admit that the

reason - though perhaps not the only reason - for this change is the

increase of the scientific spirit in the higher strata of human society.

Criticism  has  whittled  away  the  evidential  value  of  religious

documents,  natural  science  has  shown  up  the  errors  in  them,  and

comparative  research  has  been  struck  by  the  fatal  resemblance

between the religious ideas which we revere and the mental products

of primitive peoples and times.

   The scientific spirit brings about a particular attitude towards worldly

matters; before religious matters it pauses for a little, hesitates, and

finally  there  too  crosses  the  threshold.  In  this  process  there  is  no

stopping; the greater the number of men to whom the treasures of

knowledge  become  accessible,  the  more  widespread  is  the  falling-

away  from  religious  belief  -  at  first  only  from  its  obsolete  and

objectionable trappings, but later from its fundamental postulates as

well. The Americans who instituted the ‘monkey trial’ at Dayton have

alone  shown  themselves  consistent.  Elsewhere  the  inevitable

transition is accomplished by way of half-measures and insincerities.

                               The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4448

 

   Civilization has little to fear from educated people and brain-workers.

In them the replacement of religious motives for civilized behaviour by

other, secular motives would proceed unobtrusively; moreover, such

people are to a large extent themselves vehicles of civilization. But it is

another matter with the great mass of the uneducated and oppressed,

who have every reason for being enemies of civilization. So long as

they do not discover that people no longer believe in God, all is well.

But they will discover it, infallibly, even if this piece of writing of mine is

not published. And they are ready to accept the results of scientific

thinking,  but  without  the  change  having  taken  place  in  them  which

scientific thinking brings about in people. Is there not a danger here

that the hostility of these masses to civilization will throw itself against

the weak spot that they have found in their task-mistress? If the sole

reason  why  you  must  not  kill  your  neighbour  is  because  God  has

forbidden it and will severely punish you for it in this or the next life

then, when you learn that there is no God and that you need not fear

His  punishment,  you  will  certainly  kill  your  neighbour  without

hesitation, and you can only be prevented from doing so by mundane

force. Thus either these dangerous masses must be held down most

severely and kept most carefully away from any chance of intellectual

awakening, or else the relationship between civilization and religion

must undergo a fundamental revision.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4449

 

                                          VIII

 

One might think that there would be no special difficulties in the way of

carrying out this latter proposal. It is true that it would involve a certain

amount of renunciation, but more would perhaps be gained than lost,

and a great danger would be avoided. Everyone is frightened of it,

however,  as  though  it  would  expose  civilization  to  a  still  greater

danger. When St. Boniface cut down the tree that was venerated assacred by the Saxons the bystanders expected some fearful event to

follow  upon  the  sacrilege.  But  nothing  happened,  and  the  Saxons

accepted baptism.

   When civilization laid down the commandment that a man shall not

kill  the  neighbour  whom  he  hates  or  who  is  in  his  way  or  whose

property  he  covets,  this  was  clearly  done  in  the  interest  of  man’s

communal existence, which would not otherwise be practicable. For

the  murderer  would  draw  down  on  himself  the  vengeance  of  the

murdered man’s kinsmen and the secret envy of others, who within

themselves feel as much inclined as he does for such acts of violence.

Thus he would not enjoy his revenge or his robbery for long, but would

have every prospect of soon being killed himself. Even if he protected

himself against his single foes by extraordinary strength and caution,

he would be bound to succumb to a combination of weaker men. If a

combination  of  this  sort  did  not  take  place,  the  murdering  would

continue endlessly and the final outcome would be that men would

exterminate one another. We should arrive at the same state of affairs

between  individuals  as  still  persists  in  Corsica  between  families,

though elsewhere only between nations. Insecurity of life, which is an

equal  danger  for  everyone,  now  unites  men  into  a  society  which

prohibits the individual from killing and reserves to itself the right to

communal killing of anyone who violates the prohibition. Here, then,

we have justice and punishment.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4450

 

   But we do not publish this rational explanation of the prohibition

against  murder.  We  assert  that  the  prohibition  has  been  issued  by

God. Thus we take it upon ourselves to guess His intentions, and we

find that He, too, is unwilling for men to exterminate one another. In

behaving in this way we are investing the cultural prohibition with a

quite  special  solemnity,  but  at  the  same  time  we  risk  making  its

observance dependent on belief in God. If we retrace this step - if we

no  longer  attribute  to  God  what  is  our  own  will  and  if  we  content

ourselves  with  giving  the  social  reason  -  then,  it  is  true,  we  haverenounced the transfiguration of the cultural prohibition, but we have

also  avoided  the  risk  to  it.  But  we  gain  something  else  as  well.

Through some kind of diffusion or infection, the character of sanctity

and inviolability - of belonging to another world, one might say - has

spread  from  a  few  major  prohibitions  on  to  every  other  cultural

regulation, law and ordinance. But on these the halo often looks far

from  becoming:  not  only  do  they  invalidate  one  another  by  giving

contrary decisions at different times and places, but apart from this

they show every sign of human inadequacy. It is easy to recognize in

them  things  that  can  only  be  the  product  of  short-sighted

apprehensiveness or an expression of selfishly narrow interests or a

conclusion  based  on  insufficient  premisses.  The  criticism  which  we

cannot fail to level at them also diminishes to an unwelcome extent

our respect for other, more justifiable cultural demands. Since it is an

awkward task to separate what God Himself has demanded from what

can be traced to the authority of an all-powerful parliament or a high

judiciary, it would be an undoubted advantage if we were to leave God

out altogether and honestly admit the purely human origin of all the

regulations  and  precepts  of  civilization.  Along  with  their  pretended

sanctity, these commandments and laws would lose their rigidity and

unchangeableness  as  well.  People  could  understand  that  they  are

made, not so much to rule them as, on the contrary, to serve their

interests; and they would adopt a more friendly attitude to them, and

instead  of  aiming  at  their  abolition,  would  aim  only  at  their

improvement.  This  would  be  an  important  advance  along  the  road

which leads to becoming reconciled to the burden of civilization.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4451

 

      But  here  our  plea  for  ascribing  purely  rational  reasons  to  the

precepts of civilization - that is to say, for deriving them from social

necessity - is interrupted by a sudden doubt. We have chosen as our

example  the  origin  of  the  prohibition  against  murder.  But  does  our

account of it tally with historical truth? We fear not; it appears to be

nothing  but  a  rationalistic  construction.  With  the  help  of  psycho-analysis, we have made a study of precisely this piece of the cultural

history of mankind, and, basing ourselves on it, we are bound to say

that in reality things happened otherwise. Even in present-day man

purely  reasonable  motives  can  effect  little  against  passionate

impulsions.  How  much  weaker  then  must  they  have  been  in  the

human  animal  of  primaeval  times!  Perhaps  his  descendants  would

even now kill one another without inhibition, if it were not that among

those murderous acts there was one - the killing of the primitive father

-  which  evoked  an  irresistible  emotional  reaction  with  momentous

consequences. From it arose the commandment: Thou shalt not kill.

Under  totemism  this  commandment  was  restricted  to  the  father-

substitute; but it was later extended to other people, though even to-

day it is not universally obeyed.

   But, as was shown by arguments which I need not repeat here, the

primal father was the original image of God, the model on which later

generations  have  shaped  the  figure  of  God.  Hence  the  religious

explanation is right, God actually played a part in the genesis of that

prohibition; it was His influence, not any insight into social necessity,

which created it. And the displacement of man’s will on to God is fully

justified.  For  men  knew  that  they  had  disposed  of  their  father  by

violence, and in their reaction to that impious deed, they determined to

respect  his  will  thenceforward.  Thus  religious  doctrine  tells  us  the

historical truth - though subject, it is true, to some modification and

disguise - whereas our rational account disavows it.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4452

 

   We now observe that the store of religious ideas includes not only

wish-fulfilments but important historical recollections. This concurrent

influence of past and present must give religion a truly incomparable

wealth of power. But perhaps with the help of an analogy yet another

discovery may begin to dawn on us. Though it is not a good plan to

transplant ideas far from the soil in which they grew up, yet here is a

conformity which we cannot avoid pointing out. We know that a human

child  cannot  successfully  complete  its  development  to  the  civilizedstage  without  passing  through  a  phase  of  neurosis  sometimes  of

greater and sometimes of less distinctness. This is because so many

instinctual  demands  which  will  later  be  unserviceable  cannot  be

suppressed by the rational operation of the child’s intellect but have to

be  tamed  by  acts  of  repression,  behind  which,  as  a  rule,  lies  the

motive  of  anxiety.  Most  of  these  infantile  neuroses  are  overcome

spontaneously in the course of growing up, and this is especially true

of  the  obsessional  neuroses  of  childhood.  The  remainder  can  be

cleared up later still by psycho-analytic treatment. In just the same

way,  one  might  assume,  humanity  as  a  whole,  in  its  development

through the ages, fell into states analogous to the neuroses, and for

the same reasons - namely because in the times of its ignorance and

intellectual  weakness  the  instinctual  renunciations  indispensable  for

man’s communal existence had only been achieved by it by means of

purely  affective  forces.  The  precipitates  of  these  processes

resembling  repression  which  took  place  in  prehistoric  times  still

remained attached to civilization for long periods. Religion would thus

be  the  universal  obsessional  neurosis  of  humanity;  like  the

obsessional neurosis of children, it arose out of the Oedipus complex,

out of the relation to the father. If this view is right, it is to be supposed

that  a  turning-away  from  religion  is  bound  to  occur  with  the  fatal

inevitability of a process of growth, and that we find ourselves at this

very  juncture  in  the  middle  of  that  phase  of  development.  Our

behaviour should therefore be modelled on that of a sensible teacher

who does not oppose an impending new development but seeks to

ease its path and mitigate the violence of its irruption. Our analogy

does not, to be sure, exhaust the essential nature of religion. If, on the

one hand, religion brings with it obsessional restrictions, exactly as an

individual obsessional neurosis does, on the other hand it comprises a

system of wishful illusions together with a disavowal of reality, such as

we find in an isolated form nowhere else but in amentia, in a state of

blissful hallucinatory confusion. But these are only analogies, by the

help of which we endeavour to understand a social phenomenon; the

pathology  of  the  individual  does  not  supply  us  with  a  fully  valid

counterpart.

                               The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4453

 

   It has been repeatedly pointed out (by myself and in particular by

Theodor Reik) in how great detail the analogy between religion and

obsessional  neurosis  can  be  followed  out,  and  how  many  of  the

peculiarities  and  vicissitudes  in  the  formation  of  religion  can  be

understood  in  that  light.  And  it  tallies  well  with  this  that  devout

believers are safeguarded in a high degree against the risk of certain

neurotic illnesses; their acceptance of the universal neurosis spares

them the task of constructing a personal one.

   Our knowledge of the historical worth of certain religious doctrines

increases our respect for them, but does not invalidate our proposal

that  they  should  cease  to  be  put  forward  as  the  reasons  for  the

precepts  of  civilization.  On  the  contrary!  Those  historical  residues

have helped us to view religious teachings, as it were, as neurotic

relics, and we may now argue that the time has probably come, as it

does in an analytic treatment, for replacing the effects of repression by

the results of the rational operation of the intellect. We may foresee,

but hardly regret, that such a process of remoulding will not stop at

renouncing the solemn transfiguration of cultural precepts, but that a

general revision of them will result in many of them being done away

with. In this way our appointed task of reconciling men to civilization

will  to  a  great  extent  be  achieved.  We  need  not  deplore  the

renunciation of historical truth when we put forward rational grounds

for  the  precepts  of  civilization.  The  truths  contained  in  religious

doctrines are after all so distorted and systematically disguised that

the mass of humanity cannot recognize them as truth. The case is

similar to what happens when we tell a child that new-born babies are

brought by the stork. Here, too, we are telling the truth in symbolic

clothing, for we know what the large bird signifies. But the child does

not know it. He hears only the distorted part of what we say, and feels

that he has been deceived; and we know how often his distrust of the

grown-ups  and  his  refractoriness  actually  take  their  start  from  this

impression. We have become convinced that it is better to avoid such

symbolic disguisings of the truth in what we tell children and not to

withhold  from  them  a  knowledge  of  the  true  state  of  affairscommensurate with their intellectual level.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4454

 

                                            IX

 

‘You permit yourself contradictions which are hard to reconcile with

one another. You begin by saying that a piece of writing like yours is

quite  harmless:  no  one  will  let  himself  be  robbed  of  his  faith  by

considerations of the sort put forward in it. But since it is nevertheless

your intention, as becomes evident later on, to upset that faith, we

may  ask  why  in  fact  you  are  publishing  your  work?  In  another

passage, moreover, you admit that it may be dangerous, indeed very

dangerous, for someone to discover that people no longer believe in

God. Hitherto he has been docile, but now he throws off his obedience

to the precepts of civilization. Yet your whole contention that basing

the commandments of civilization on religious grounds constitutes a

danger for civilization rests on the assumption that the believer can be

turned into an unbeliever. Surely that is a complete contradiction.

   ‘And here is another. On the one hand you admit that men cannot

be guided through their intelligence, they are ruled by their passions

and their instinctual demands. But on the other hand you propose to

replace  the  affective  basis  of  their  obedience  to  civilization  by  a

rational one. Let who can understand this. To me it seems that it must

be either one thing or the other.

   ‘Besides, have you learned nothing from history? Once before an

attempt  of  this  kind  was  made  to  substitute  reason  for  religion,

officially and in the grand manner. Surely you remember the French

Revolution  and  Robespierre?  And  you  must  also  remember  how

short-lived and miserably ineffectual the experiment was? The same

experiment is being repeated in Russia at the present time, and we

need not feel curious as to its outcome. Do you not think we may take

it for granted that men cannot do without religion?

   ‘You have said yourself that religion is more than an obsessional

neurosis. But you have not dealt with this other side of it. You arecontent to work out the analogy with a neurosis. Men, you say, must

be freed from a neurosis. What else may be lost in the process is of

no concern to you.’

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4455

 

   The appearance of contradiction has probably come about because

I  have  dealt  with  complicated  matters  too  hurriedly.  But  we  can

remedy this to some extent. I still maintain that what I have written is

quite harmless in one respect. No believer will let himself be led astray

from his faith by these or any similar arguments. A believer is bound to

the  teachings  of  religion  by  certain  ties  of  affection.  But  there  are

undoubtedly countless other people who are not in the same sense

believers.  They  obey  the  precepts  of  civilization  because  they  let

themselves  be  intimidated  by  the  threats  of  religion,  and  they  are

afraid of religion so long as they have to consider it as a part of the

reality which hems them in. They are the people who break away as

soon as they are allowed to give up their belief in the reality-value of

religion. But they too are unaffected by arguments. They cease to fear

religion when they observe that others do not fear it; and it was of

them that I asserted that they would get to know about the decline of

religious influence even if I did not publish my work.

   But I think you yourself attach more weight to the other contradiction

which  you  charge  me  with.  Since  men  are  so  little  accessible  to

reasonable arguments and are so entirely governed by their instinctual

wishes,  why  should  one  set  out  to  deprive  them  of  an  instinctual

satisfaction and replace it by reasonable arguments? It is true that

men are like this; but have you asked yourself whether they must be

like  this,  whether  their  innermost  nature  necessitates  it?  Can  an

anthropologist give the cranial index of a people whose custom it is to

deform  their  children’s  heads  by  bandaging  them  round  from  their

earliest years? Think of the depressing contrast between the radiant

intelligence of a healthy child and the feeble intellectual powers of the

average adult. Can we be quite certain that it is not precisely religious

education  which  bears  a  large  share  of  the  blame  for  this  relativeatrophy? I think it would be a very long time before a child who was

not  influenced  began  to  trouble  himself  about  God  and  things  in

another world. Perhaps his thoughts on these matters would then take

the same paths as they did with his forefathers. But we do not wait for

such a development; we introduce him to the doctrines of religion at

an age when he is neither interested in them nor capable of grasping

their import. Is it not true that the two main points in the programme for

the education of children to-day are retardation of sexual development

and  premature  religious  influence?  Thus  by  the  time  the  child’s

intellect  awakens,  the  doctrines  of  religion  have  already  become

unassailable. But are you of opinion that it is very conducive to the

strengthening  of  the  intellectual  function  that  so  important  a  field

should be closed against it by the threat of Hell-fire? When a man has

once  brought  himself  to  accept  uncritically  all  the  absurdities  that

religious  doctrines  put  before  him  and  even  to  overlook  the

contradictions between them, we need not be greatly surprised at the

weakness of his intellect. But we have no other means of controlling

our instinctual nature but our intelligence. How can we expect people

who are under the dominance of prohibitions of thought to attain the

psychological ideal, the primacy of the intelligence? You know, too,

that women in general are said to suffer from ‘physiological feeble-

mindedness’ - that is, from a lesser intelligence than men. The fact

itself is disputable and its interpretation doubtful, but one argument in

favour of this intellectual atrophy being of a secondary nature is that

women  labour  under  the  harshness  of  an  early  prohibition  against

turning  their  thoughts  to  what  would  most  have  interested  them  -

namely, the problems of sexual life. So long as a person’s early years

are influenced not only by a sexual inhibition of thought but also by a

religious  inhibition  and  by  a  loyal  inhibition  derived  from  this,  we

cannot really tell what in fact he is like.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4456

 

   But I will moderate my zeal and admit the possibility that I, too, am

chasing an illusion. Perhaps the effect of the religious prohibition ofthought may not be so bad as I suppose; perhaps it will turn out that

human nature remains the same even if education is not abused in

order to subject people to religion. I do not know and you cannot know

either. It is not only the great problems of this life that seem insoluble

at the present time; many lesser questions too are difficult to answer.

But you must admit that here we are justified in having a hope for the

future  -  that  perhaps  there  is  a  treasure  to  be  dug  up  capable  of

enriching civilization and that it is worth making the experiment of an

irreligious education. Should the experiment prove unsatisfactory I am

ready  to  give  up  the  reform  and  to  return  to  my  earlier,  purely

descriptive judgement that man is a creature of weak intelligence who

is ruled by his instinctual wishes.

      On  another  point  I  agree  with  you  unreservedly.  It  is  certainly

senseless to begin by trying to do away with religion by force and at a

single blow. Above all, because it would be hopeless. The believer will

not  let  his  belief  be  torn  from  him,  either  by  arguments  or  by

prohibitions.  And  even  if  this  did  succeed  with  some  it  would  be

cruelty.  A  man  who  has  been  taking  sleeping  draughts  for  tens  of

years is naturally unable to sleep if his sleeping draught is taken away

from him. That the effect of religious consolations may be likened to

that of a narcotic is well illustrated by what is happening in America.

There they are now trying - obviously under the influence of petticoat

government - to deprive people of all stimulants, intoxicants, and other

pleasure-producing substances, and instead, by way of compensation,

are surfeiting them with piety. This is another experiment as to whose

outcome we need not feel curious.

   Thus I must contradict you when you go on to argue that men are

completely  unable  to  do  without  the  consolation  of  the  religious

illusion, that without it they could not bear the troubles of life and the

cruelties of reality. That is true, certainly, of the men into whom you

have  instilled  the  sweet  -  or  bitter-sweet  -  poison  from  childhood

onwards. But what of the other men, who have been sensibly brought

up? Perhaps those who do not suffer from the neurosis will need no

intoxicant to deaden it. They will, it is true, find themselves in a difficult

situation. They will have to admit to themselves the full extent of their

helplessness and their insignificance in the machinery of the universe;

they can no longer be the centre of creation, no longer the object oftender care on the part of a beneficent Providence. They will be in the

same position as a child who has left the parental house where he

was so warm and comfortable. But surely infantilism is destined to be

surmounted. Men cannot remain children for ever; they must in the

end go out into ‘hostile life’. We may call this ‘education to reality’.

Need I confess to you that the sole purpose of my book is to point out

the necessity for this forward step?

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4457

 

   You are afraid, probably, that they will not stand up to the hard test?

Well, let us at least hope they will. It is something, at any rate, to know

that  one  is  thrown  upon  one’s  own  resources.  One  learns  then  to

make  a  proper  use  of  them.  And  men  are  not  entirely  without

assistance. Their scientific knowledge has taught them much since the

days of the Deluge, and it will increase their power still further. And, as

for the great necessities of Fate, against which there is no help, they

will learn to endure them with resignation. Of what use to them is the

mirage of wide acres in the moon, whose harvest no one has ever yet

seen?  As  honest  smallholders  on  this  earth  they  will  know  how  to

cultivate their plot in such a way that it supports them. By withdrawing

their  expectations  from  the  other  world  and  concentrating  all  their

liberated energies into their life on earth, they will probably succeed in

achieving  a  state  of  things  in  which  life  will  become  tolerable  for

everyone and civilization no longer oppressive to anyone. Then, with

one of our fellow-unbelievers, they will be able to say without regret:

 

                                                Den Himmel überlassen wir

                                                                Den Engeln und den Spatzen.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4458

 

                                            X

 That sounds splendid! A race of men who have renounced all illusions

and have thus become capable of making their existence on earth

tolerable! I, however, cannot share your expectations. And that is not

because I am the obstinate reactionary you perhaps take me for. No, it

is because I am sensible. We seem now to have exchanged roles: you

emerge as an enthusiast who allows himself to be carried away by

illusions, and I stand for the claims of reason, the rights of scepticism.

What you have been expounding seems to me to be built upon errors

which,  following  your  example,  I  may  call  illusions,  because  they

betray clearly enough the influence of your wishes. You pin your hope

on  the  possibility  that  generations  which  have  not  experienced  the

influence of religious doctrines in early childhood will easily attain the

desired primacy of the intelligence over the life of the instincts. This is

surely an illusion: in this decisive respect human nature is hardly likely

to  change.  If  I  am  not  mistaken  -  one  knows  so  little  about  other

civilizations  -  there  are  even  to-day  peoples  which  do  not  grow  up

under the pressure of a religious system, and yet they approach no

nearer to your ideal than the rest. If you want to expel religion from our

European civilization, you can only do it by means of another system

of doctrines; and such a system would from the outset take over all

the psychological characteristics of religion - the same sanctity, rigidity

and intolerance, the same prohibition of thought - for its own defence.

You  have  to  have  something  of  the  kind  in  order  to  meet  the

requirements of education. And you cannot do without education. The

path from the infant at the breast to the civilized man is a long one; too

many human young would go astray on it and fail to reach their life-

tasks at the proper time if they were left without guidance to their own

development.  The  doctrines  which  had  been  applied  in  their

upbringing would always set limits to the thinking of their riper years -

which is exactly what you reproach religion with doing to-day. Do you

not  observe  that  it  is  an  ineradicable  and  innate  defect  of  our  and

every other civilization, that it imposes on children, who are driven by

instinct and weak in intellect, the making of decisions which only the

mature intelligence of adults can vindicate? But civilization cannot do

otherwise, because of the fact that mankind’s age-long development is

compressed into a few years of childhood; and it is only by emotional

forces that the child can be induced to master the task set before it.Such, then, are the prospects for your "primacy of the intellect".

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4459

 

   ‘And now you must not be surprised if I plead on behalf of retaining

the religious doctrinal system as the basis of education and of man’s

communal life. This is a practical problem, not a question of reality-

value.  Since,  for  the  sake  of  preserving  our  civilization,  we  cannot

postpone  influencing  the  individual  until  he  has  become  ripe  for

civilization (and many would never become so in any case), since we

are  obliged  to  impose  on  the  growing  child  some  doctrinal  system

which shall operate in him as an axiom that admits of no criticism, it

seems to me that the religious system is by far the most suitable for

the purpose. And it is so, of course, precisely on account of its wish-

fulfilling and consolatory power, by which you claim to recognize it as

an  "illusion".  In  view  of  the  difficulty  of  discovering  anything  about

reality - indeed, of the doubt whether it is possible for us to do so at all

- we must not overlook the fact that human needs, too, are a piece of

reality,  and,  in  fact,  an  important  piece  and  one  that  concerns  us

especially closely.

   ‘Another advantage of religious doctrine resides, to my mind, in one

of its characteristics to which you seem to take particular exception.

For it allows of a refinement and sublimation of ideas, which make it

possible for it to be divested of most of the traces which it bears of

primitive and infantile thinking. What then remains is a body of ideas

which science no longer contradicts and is unable to disprove. These

modifications  of  religious  doctrine,  which  you  have  condemned  as

half-measures and compromises, make it possible to avoid the cleft

between the uneducated masses and the philosophic thinker, and to

preserve the common bond between them which is so important for

the safeguarding of civilization. With this, there would be no need to

fear that the men of the people would discover that the upper strata of

society "no longer believe in God". I think I have now shown that your

endeavours  come  down  to  an  attempt  to  replace  a  proved  and

emotionally valuable illusion by another one, which is unproved andwithout emotional value.’

      You  will  not  find  me  inaccessible  to  your  criticism.  I  know  how

difficult it is to avoid illusions; perhaps the hopes I have confessed to

are of an illusory nature, too. But I hold fast to one distinction. Apart

from  the  fact  that  no  penalty  is  imposed  for  not  sharing  them,  my

illusions  are  not,  like  religious  ones,  incapable  of  correction.  They

have not the character of a delusion. If experience should show - not

to me, but to others after me, who think as I do - that we have been

mistaken, we will give up our expectations. Take my attempt for what

it is. A psychologist who does not deceive himself about the difficulty

of finding one’s bearings in this world, makes an endeavour to assess

the development of man, in the light of the small portion of knowledge

he has gained through a study of the mental processes of individuals

during  their  development  from  child  to  adult.  In  so  doing,  the  idea

forces  itself  upon  him  that  religion  is  comparable  to  a  childhood

neurosis, and he is optimistic enough to suppose that mankind will

surmount this neurotic phase, just as so many children grow out of

their  similar  neurosis.  These  discoveries  derived  from  individual

psychology may be insufficient, their application to the human race

unjustified,  and  his  optimism  unfounded.  I  grant  you  all  these

uncertainties.  But  often  one  cannot  refrain  from  saying  what  one

thinks, and one excuses oneself on the ground that one is not giving it

out for more than it is worth.

 


                              The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4460

 

   And there are two points that I must dwell on a little longer. Firstly,

the  weakness  of  my  position  does  not  imply  any  strengthening  of

yours. I think you are defending a lost cause. We may insist as often

as  we  like  that  man’s  intellect  is  powerless  in  comparison  with  his

instinctual  life,  and  we  may  be  right  in  this.  Nevertheless,  there  is

something peculiar about this weakness. The voice of the intellect is a

soft one, but it does not rest till it has gained a hearing. Finally, after a

countless succession of rebuffs, it succeeds. This is one of the few

points on which one may be optimistic about the future of mankind,but it is in itself a point of no small importance. And from it one can

derive yet other hopes. The primacy of the intellect lies, it is true, in a

distant, distant future, but probably not in an infinitely distant one. It

will presumably set itself the same aims as those whose realization

you expect from your God (of course within human limits - so far as

external reality, Anagch, allows it), namely the love of man and the

decrease of suffering. This being so, we may tell ourselves that our

antagonism is only a temporary one and not irreconcilable. We desire

the same things, but you are more impatient, more exacting, and -

why should I not say it? - more self-seeking than I and those on my

side. You would have the state of bliss begin directly after death; you

expect the impossible from it and you will not surrender the claims of

the individual. Our God, Lsgox,¹ will fulfil whichever of these wishes

nature outside us allows, but he will do it very gradually, only in the

unforeseeable future, and for a new generation of men. He promises

no compensation for us, who suffer grievously from life. On the way to

this distant goal your religious doctrines will have to be discarded, no

matter whether the first attempts fail, or whether the first substitutes

prove to be untenable. You know why: in the long run nothing can

withstand reason and experience, and the contradiction which religion

offers to both is all too palpable. Even purified religious ideas cannot

escape  this  fate,  so  long  as  they  try  to  preserve  anything  of  the

consolation of religion. No doubt if they confine themselves to a belief

in a higher spiritual being, whose qualities are indefinable and whose

purposes cannot be discerned, they will be proof against the challenge

of science; but then they will also lose their hold on human interest.

      And  secondly:  observe  the  difference  between  your  attitude  to

illusions and mine. You have to defend the religious illusion with all

your might. If it becomes discredited - and indeed the threat to it is

great enough - then your world collapses. There is nothing left for you

but to despair of everything, of civilization and the future of mankind.

From  that  bondage  I  am,  we  are,  free.  Since  we  are  prepared  to

renounce a good part of our infantile wishes, we can bear it if a few of

our expectations turn out to be illusions.

 

   ¹ The twin gods Lsgox andAnagch of the Dutch writer Multatuli.

                               The Future Of An Illusion

                                                                                      4461

 

   Education freed from the burden of religious doctrines will not, it may

be, effect much change in men’s psychological nature. Our god Lsgox

is perhaps not a very almighty one, and he may only be able to fulfil a

small  part  of  what  his  predecessors  have  promised.  If  we  have  to

acknowledge this we shall accept it with resignation. We shall not on

that account lose our interest in the world and in life, for we have one

sure support which you lack. We believe that it is possible for scientific

work to gain some knowledge about the reality of the world, by means

of which we can increase our power and in accordance with which we

can arrange our life. If this belief is an illusion, then we are in the same

position as you. But science has given us evidence by its numerous

and important successes that it is no illusion. Science has many open

enemies,  and  many  more  secret  ones,  among  those  who  cannot

forgive her for having weakened religious faith and for threatening to

overthrow it. She is reproached for the smallness of the amount she

has taught us and for the incomparably greater field she has left in

obscurity. But, in this, people forget how young she is, how difficult her

beginnings  were  and  how  infinitesimally  small  is  the  period  of  time

since the human intellect has been strong enough for the tasks she

sets. Are we not all at fault, in basing our judgements on periods of

time that are too short? We should make the geologists our pattern.

People complain of the unreliability of science - how she announces

as a law to-day what the next generation recognizes as an error and

replaces by a new law whose accepted validity lasts no longer. But

this  is  unjust  and  in  part  untrue.  The  transformations  of  scientific

opinion  are  developments,  advances,  not  revolutions.  A  law  which

was held at first to be universally valid proves to be a special case of a

more  comprehensive  uniformity,  or  is  limited  by  another  law,  not

discovered till later; a rough approximation to the truth is replaced by a

more carefully adapted one, which in turn awaits further perfectioning.

There are various fields where we have not yet surmounted a phase

of research in which we make trial with hypotheses that soon have to

be rejected as inadequate; but in other fields we already possess an

assured and almost unalterable core of knowledge. Finally, an attempthas been made to discredit scientific endeavour in a radical way, on

the  ground  that,  being  bound  to  the  conditions  of  our  own

organization, it can yield nothing else than subjective results, whilst

the real nature of things outside ourselves remains inaccessible. But

this is to disregard several factors which are of decisive importance for

the understanding of scientific work. In the first place, our organization

- that is, our mental apparatus - has been developed precisely in the

attempt  to  explore  the  external  world,  and  it  must  therefore  have

realized  in  its  structure  some  degree  of  expediency;  in  the  second

place, it is itself a constituent part of the world which we set out to

investigate, and it readily admits of such an investigation; thirdly, the

task of science is fully covered if we limit it to showing how the world

must appear to us in consequence of the particular character of our

organization;  fourthly,  the  ultimate  findings  of  science,  precisely

because of the way in which they are acquired, are determined not

only by our organization but by the things which have affected that

organization;  finally,  the  problem  of  the  nature  of  the  world  without

regard  to  our  percipient  mental  apparatus  is  an  empty  abstraction,

devoid of practical interest.

   No, our science is no illusion. But an illusion it would be to suppose

that what science cannot give us we can get elsewhere.

                                                                                       4462

 

                      CIVILIZATION AND ITS DISCONTENTS

                                        (1930)

 


                                                                                      4463

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4464

 

                      CIVILIZATION AND ITS DISCONTENTS

 

                                            I

 

It is impossible to escape the impression that people commonly use

false standards of measurement - that they seek power, success and

wealth  for  themselves  and  admire  them  in  others,  and  that  they

underestimate what is of true value in life. And yet, in making any

general  judgement  of  this  sort,  we  are  in  danger  of  forgetting  how

variegated the human world and its mental life are. There are a few

men  from  whom  their  contemporaries  do  not  withhold  admiration,

although their greatness rests on attributes and achievements which

are completely foreign to the aims and ideals of the multitude. One

might easily be inclined to suppose that it is after all only a minority

which  appreciates  these  great  men,  while  the  large  majority  cares

nothing for them. But things are probably not as simple as that, thanks

to the discrepancies between people’s thoughts and their actions, and

to the diversity of their wishful impulses.

   One of these exceptional few calls himself my friend in his letters to

me. I had sent him my small book that treats religion as an illusion,

and  he  answered  that  he  entirely  agreed  with  my  judgement  upon

religion, but that he was sorry I had not properly appreciated the true

source of religious sentiments. This, he says, consists in a peculiar

feeling, which he himself is never without, which he finds confirmed bymany  others,  and  which  he  may  suppose  is  present  in  millions  of

people.  It  is  a  feeling  which  he  would  like  to  call  a  sensation  of

‘eternity’, a feeling as of something limitless, unbounded - as it were,

‘oceanic’.  This  feeling,  he  adds,  is  a  purely  subjective  fact,  not  an

article of faith; it brings with it no assurance of personal immortality,

but it is the source of the religious energy which is seized upon by the

various  Churches  and  religious  systems,  directed  by  them  into

particular channels, and doubtless also exhausted by them. One may,

he thinks, rightly call oneself religious on the ground of this oceanic

feeling alone, even if one rejects every belief and every illusion.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4465

 

   The views expressed by the friend whom I so much honour, and

who himself once praised the magic of illusion in a poem,¹ caused me

no small difficulty. I cannot discover this ‘oceanic’ feeling in myself. It

is  not  easy  to  deal  scientifically  with  feelings.  One  can  attempt  to

describe their physiological signs. Where this is not possible - and I

am  afraid  that  the  oceanic  feeling  too  will  defy  this  kind  of

characterization - nothing remains but to fall back on the ideational

content  which  is  most  readily  associated  with  the  feeling.  If  I  have

understood my friend rightly, he means the same thing by it as the

consolation offered by an original and somewhat eccentric dramatist

to his hero who is facing a self-inflicted death. ‘We cannot fall out of

this world.’² That is to say, it is a feeling of an indissoluble bond, of

being one with the external world as a whole. I may remark that to me

this seems something rather in the nature of an intellectual perception,

which is not, it is true, without an accompanying feeling-tone, but only

such as would be present with any other act of thought of equal range.

From my own experience I could not convince myself of the primary

nature of such a feeling. But this gives me no right to deny that it does

in fact occur in other people. The only question is whether it is being

correctly interpreted and whether it ought to be regarded as the fons

et origo of the whole need for religion.

    ¹ Liluli. Since the publication of his two books La vie de Ramakrishna and La  vie  de

Vivekananda, I need no longer hide the fact that the friend spoken of in the text is Romain
Rolland.

   ² Christian Dietrich Grabbe, Hannibal: ‘Ja, aus der Welt werden wir nicht fallen. Wir sind

einmal darin.’
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4466

 

   I have nothing to suggest which could have a decisive influence on

the solution of this problem. The idea of men’s receiving an intimation

of their connection with the world around them through an immediate

feeling which is from the outset directed to that purpose sounds so

strange and fits in so badly with the fabric of our psychology that one

is  justified  in  attempting  to  discover  a  psycho-analytic  -  that  is,  a

genetic - explanation of such a feeling. The following line of thought

suggests  itself.  Normally,  there  is  nothing  of  which  we  are  more

certain than the feeling of our self, of our own ego. This ego appears

to us as something autonomous and unitary, marked off distinctly from

everything else. That such an appearance is deceptive, and that on

the  contrary  the  ego  is  continued  inwards,  without  any  sharp

delimitation, into an unconscious mental entity which we designate as

the id and for which it serves as a kind of façade - this was a discovery

first made by psycho-analytic research, which should still have much

more to tell us about the relation of the ego to the id. But towards the

outside, at any rate, the ego seems to maintain clear and sharp lines

of demarcation. There is only one state - admittedly an unusual state,

but not one that can be stigmatized as pathological - in which it does

not do this. At the height of being in love the boundary between ego

and  object  threatens  to  melt  away.  Against  all  the  evidence  of  his

senses, a man who is in love declares that ‘I’ and ‘you’ are one, and is

prepared to behave as if it were a fact. What can be temporarily done

away with by a physiological function must also, of course, be liable to

be  disturbed  by  pathological  processes.  Pathology  has  made  us

acquainted with a great number of states in which the boundary lines

between the ego and the external world become uncertain or in which

they are actually drawn incorrectly. There are cases in which parts ofa  person’s  own  body,  even  portions  of  his  own  mental  life  -  his

perceptions, thoughts and feelings -, appear alien to him and as not

belonging to his ego; there are other cases in which he ascribes to the

external  world  things  that  clearly  originate  in  his  own  ego  and  that

ought to be acknowledged by it. Thus even the feeling of our own ego

is  subject  to  disturbances  and  the  boundaries  of  the  ego  are  not

constant.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4467

 

   Further reflection tells us that the adult’s ego-feeling cannot have

been  the  same  from  the  beginning.  It  must  have  gone  through  a

process of development, which cannot, of course, be demonstrated

but  which  admits  of  being  constructed  with  a  fair  degree  of

probability.¹ An infant at the breast does not as yet distinguish his ego

from  the  external  world  as  the  source  of  the  sensations  flowing  in

upon  him.  He  gradually  learns  to  do  so,  in  response  to  various

promptings. He must be very strongly impressed by the fact that some

sources of excitation, which he will later recognize as his own bodily

organs,  can  provide  him  with  sensations  at  any  moment,  whereas

other sources evade him from time to time - among them what he

desires most of all, his mother’s breast - and only reappear as a result

of his screaming for help. In this way there is for the first time set over

against  the  ego  an  ‘object’,  in  the  form  of  something  which  exists

‘outside’ and which is only forced to appear by a special action. A

further incentive to a disengagement of the ego from the general mass

of sensations - that is, to the recognition of an ‘outside’, an external

world  -  is  provided  by  the  frequent,  manifold  and  unavoidable

sensations  of  pain  and  unpleasure  the  removal  and  avoidance  of

which  is  enjoined  by  the  pleasure  principle,  in  the  exercise  of  its

unrestricted domination. A tendency arises to separate from the ego

everything that can become a source of such unpleasure, to throw it

outside and to create a pure pleasure-ego which is confronted by a

strange  and  threatening  ‘outside’.  The  boundaries  of  this  primitive

pleasure-ego cannot escape rectification through experience. Some ofthe things that one is unwilling to give up, because they give pleasure,

are  nevertheless  not  ego  but  object;  and  some  sufferings  that  one

seeks to expel turn out to be inseparable from the ego in virtue of their

internal origin. One comes to learn a procedure by which, through a

deliberate  direction  of  one’s  sensory  activities  and  through  suitable

muscular action, one can differentiate between what is internal - what

belongs to the ego - and what is external - what emanates from the

outer  world.  In  this  way  one  makes  the  first  step  towards  the

introduction  of  the  reality  principle  which  is  to  dominate  future

development.  This  differentiation,  of  course,  serves  the  practical

purpose  of  enabling  one  to  defend  oneself  against  sensations  of

unpleasure which one actually feels or with which one is threatened.

In  order  to  fend  off  certain  unpleasurable  excitations  arising  from

within, the ego can use no other methods than those which it uses

against unpleasure coming from without, and this is the starting-point

of important pathological disturbances.

 

   ¹ Cf.  the  many  writings  on  the  topic  of  ego-development  and  ego-feeling,  dating  from

Ferenczi’s paper on ‘Stages in the Development of the Sense of Reality’ (1913) to Federn’s
contributions of 1926, 1927 and later.
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4468

 

   In this way, then, the ego detaches itself from the external world. Or,

to put it more correctly, originally the ego includes everything, later it

separates off an external world from itself. Our present ego-feeling is,

therefore, only a shrunken residue of a much more inclusive - indeed,

an  all-embracing  -  feeling  which  corresponded  to  a  more  intimate

bond between the ego and the world about it. If we may assume that

there are many people in whose mental life this primary ego-feeling

has persisted to a greater or less degree, it would exist in them side

by side with the narrower and more sharply demarcated ego-feeling of

maturity, like a kind of counterpart to it. In that case, the ideational

contents  appropriate  to  it  would  be  precisely  those  of  limitlessness

and of a bond with the universe - the same ideas with which my friend

elucidated the ‘oceanic’ feeling.   But have we a right to assume the survival of something that was

originally  there,  alongside  of  what  was  later  derived  from  it?

Undoubtedly.  There  is  nothing  strange  in  such  a  phenomenon,

whether in the mental field or elsewhere. In the animal kingdom we

hold  to  the  view  that  the  most  highly  developed  species  have

proceeded from the lowest; and yet we find all the simple forms still in

existence to-day. The race of the great saurians is extinct and has

made  way  for  the  mammals;  but  a  true  representative  of  it,  the

crocodile, still lives among us. This analogy may be too remote, and it

is also weakened by the circumstance that the lower species which

survive are for the most part not the true ancestors of the present-day

more highly developed species. As a rule the intermediate links have

died out and are known to us only through reconstruction. In the realm

of  the  mind,  on  the  other  hand,  what  is  primitive  is  so  commonly

preserved alongside of the transformed version which has arisen from

it  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  give  instances  as  evidence.  When  this

happens it is usually in consequence of a divergence in development:

one  portion  (in  the  quantitative  sense)  of  an  attitude  or  instinctual

impulse has remained unaltered, while another portion has undergone

further development.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4469

 

   This brings us to the more general problem of preservation in the

sphere of the mind. The subject has hardly been studied yet; but it is

so  attractive  and  important  that  we  may  be  allowed  to  turn  our

attention to it for a little, even though our excuse is insufficient. Since

we overcame the error of supposing that the forgetting we are familiar

with  signified  a  destruction  of  the  memory-trace  -  that  is,  its

annihilation - we have been inclined to take the opposite view, that in

mental  life  nothing  which  has  once  been  formed  can  perish  -  that

everything is somehow preserved and that in suitable circumstances

(when,  for  instance,  regression  goes  back  far  enough)  it  can  once

more  be  brought  to  light.  Let  us  try  to  grasp  what  this  assumption

involves by taking an analogy from another field. We will choose as anexample  the  history  of  the  Eternal  City.¹  Historians  tell  us  that  the

oldest  Rome  was  the Roma Quadrata,  a  fenced  settlement  on  the

Palatine. Then followed the phase of the Septimontium, a federation of

the settlements on the different hills; after that came the city bounded

by the Servian wall; and later still, after all the transformations during

the periods of the republic and the early Caesars, the city which the

Emperor  Aurelian  surrounded  with  his  walls.  We  will  not  follow  the

changes  which  the  city  went  through  any  further,  but  we  will  ask

ourselves how much a visitor, whom we will suppose to be equipped

with the most complete historical and topographical knowledge, may

still find left of these early stages in the Rome of to-day. Except for a

few gaps, he will see the wall of Aurelian almost unchanged. In some

places he will be able to find sections of the Servian wall where they

have been excavated and brought to light. If he knows enough - more

than present-day archaeology does - he may perhaps be able to trace

out in the plan of the city the whole course of that wall and the outline

of  the Roma Quadrata.  Of  the  buildings  which  once  occupied  this

ancient area he will find nothing, or only scanty remains, for they exist

no  longer.  The  best  information  about  Rome  in  the  republican  era

would only enable him at the most to point out the sites where the

temples and public buildings of that period stood. Their place is now

taken by ruins, but not by ruins of themselves but of later restorations

made after fires or destruction. It is hardly necessary to remark that all

these remains of ancient Rome are found dovetailed into the jumble of

a great metropolis which has grown up in the last few centuries since

the  Renaissance.  There  is  certainly  not  a  little  that  is  ancient  still

buried in the soil of the city or beneath its modern buildings. This is the

manner in which the past is preserved in historical sites like Rome.

 

   ¹ Based on The Cambridge Ancient History, 7 (1928): ‘The Founding of Rome’ by Hugh

Last.
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4470

 

   Now let us, by a flight of imagination, suppose that Rome is not a

human  habitation  but  a  psychical  entity  with  a  similarly  long  andcopious past - an entity, that is to say, in which nothing that has once

come into existence will have passed away and all the earlier phases

of development continue to exist alongside the latest one. This would

mean that in Rome the palaces of the Caesars and the Septizonium of

Septimius  Severus  would  still  be  rising  to  their  old  height  on  the

Palatine and that the castle of S. Angelo would still be carrying on its

battlements the beautiful statues which graced it until the siege by the

Goths, and so on. But more than this. In the place occupied by the

Palazzo Caffarelli would once more stand - without the Palazzo having

to be removed - the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus; and this not only in

its latest shape, as the Romans of the Empire saw it, but also in its

earliest one, when it still showed Etruscan forms and was ornamented

with terracotta antefixes. Where the Coliseum now stands we could at

the same time admire Nero’s vanished Golden House. On the Piazza

of the Pantheon we should find not only the Pantheon of to-day, as it

was bequeathed to us by Hadrian, but, on the same site, the original

edifice erected by Agrippa; indeed, the same piece of ground would

be  supporting  the  church  of  Santa  Maria  sopra  Minerva  and  the

ancient  temple  over  which  it  was  built.  And  the  observer  would

perhaps only have to change the direction of his glance or his position

in order to call up the one view or the other.

   There is clearly no point in spinning our phantasy any further, for it

leads to things that are unimaginable and even absurd. If we want to

represent historical sequence in spatial terms we can only do it by

juxtaposition  in  space:  the  same  space  cannot  have  two  different

contents.  Our  attempt  seems  to  be  an  idle  game.  It  has  only  one

justification.  It  shows  us  how  far  we  are  from  mastering  the

characteristics of mental life by representing them in pictorial terms.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4471

 

      There  is  one  further  objection  which  has  to  be  considered.  The

question may be raised why we chose precisely the past of a city to

compare with the past of the mind. The assumption that everything

past is preserved holds good even in mental life only on condition thatthe organ of the mind has remained intact and that its tissues have not

been damaged by trauma or inflammation. But destructive influences

which  can  be  compared  to  causes  of  illness  like  these  are  never

lacking in the history of a city, even if it has had a less chequered past

than Rome, and even if, like London, it has hardly ever suffered from

the visitations of an enemy. Demolitions and replacement of buildings

occur in the course of the most peaceful development of a city. A city

is thus a priori unsuited for a comparison of this sort with a mental

organism.

   We bow to this objection; and, abandoning our attempt to draw a

striking contrast, we will turn instead to what is after all a more closely

related  object  of  comparison  -  the  body  of  an  animal  or  a  human

being. But here, too, we find the same thing. The earlier phases of

development are in no sense still preserved; they have been absorbed

into the later phases for which they have supplied the material. The

embryo  cannot  be  discovered  in  the  adult.  The  thymus  gland  of

childhood  is  replaced  after  puberty  by  connective  tissue,  but  is  no

longer present itself; in the marrow-bones of the grown man I can, it is

true, trace the outline of the child’s bone, but it itself has disappeared,

having  lengthened  and  thickened  until  it  has  attained  its  definitive

form. The fact remains that only in the mind is such a preservation of

all the earlier stages alongside of the final form possible, and that we

are not in a position to represent this phenomenon in pictorial terms.

   Perhaps we are going too far in this. Perhaps we ought to content

ourselves  with  asserting  that  what  is  past  in  mental  life may  be

preserved and is not necessarily destroyed. It is always possible that

even in the mind some of what is old is effaced or absorbed - whether

in the normal course of things or as an exception - to such an extent

that  it  cannot  be  restored  or  revivified  by  any  means;  or  that

preservation in general is dependent on certain favourable conditions.

It is possible, but we know nothing about it. We can only hold fast to

the fact that it is rather the rule than the exception for the past to be

preserved in mental life.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4472 

      Thus  we  are  perfectly  willing  to  acknowledge  that  the  ‘oceanic’

feeling exists in many people, and we are inclined to trace it back to

an early phase of ego-feeling. The further question then arises, what

claim this feeling has to be regarded as the source of religious needs.

   To me the claim does not seem compelling. After all, a feeling can

only be a source of energy if it is itself the expression of a strong

need. The derivation of religious needs from the infant’s helplessness

and  the  longing  for  the  father  aroused  by  it  seems  to  me

incontrovertible, especially since the feeling is not simply prolonged

from  childhood  days,  but  is  permanently  sustained  by  fear  of  the

superior power of Fate. I cannot think of any need in childhood as

strong as the need for a father’s protection. Thus the part played by

the oceanic feeling, which might seek something like the restoration of

limitless  narcissism,  is  ousted  from  a  place  in  the  foreground.  The

origin of the religious attitude can be traced back in clear outlines as

far as the feeling of infantile helplessness. There may be something

further behind that, but for the present it is wrapped in obscurity.

      I  can  imagine  that  the  oceanic  feeling  became  connected  with

religion later on. The ‘oneness with the universe’ which constitutes its

ideational content sounds like a first attempt at a religious consolation,

as though it were another way of disclaiming the danger which the ego

recognizes  as  threatening  it  from  the  external  world.  Let  me  admit

once more that it is very difficult for me to work with these almost

intangible quantities. Another friend of mine, whose insatiable craving

for knowledge has led him to make the most unusual experiments and

has ended by giving him encyclopaedic knowledge, has assured me

that through the practices of Yoga, by withdrawing from the world, by

fixing  the  attention  on  bodily  functions  and  by  peculiar  methods  of

breathing, one can in fact evoke new sensations and coenaesthesias

in  oneself,  which  he  regards  as  regressions  to  primordial  states  of

mind  which  have  long  ago  been  overlaid.  He  sees  in  them  a

physiological basis, as it were, of much of the wisdom of mysticism. It

would not be hard to find connections here with a number of obscure

modifications of mental life, such as trances and ecstasies. But I am

moved to exclaim in the words of Schiller’s diver:-

                                                                 ‘. . . Es freue sich.
                                                                Wer da atmet im rosigten Licht.’
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4473

 

                                            II

 

In  my Future  of  an  Illusion  I  was  concerned  much  less  with  the

deepest sources of the religious feeling than with what the common

man understands by his religion - with the system of doctrines and

promises which on the one hand explains to him the riddles of this

world with enviable completeness, and, on the otter, assures him that

a careful Providence will watch over his life and will compensate him

in a future existence for any frustrations he suffers here. The common

man cannot imagine this Providence otherwise than in the figure of an

enormously  exalted  father.  Only  such  a  being  can  understand  the

needs of the children of men and be softened by their prayers and

placated by the signs of their remorse. The whole thing is so patently

infantile, so foreign to reality, that to anyone with a friendly attitude to

humanity it is painful to think that the great majority of mortals will

never be able to rise above this view of life. It is still more humiliating

to discover how large a number of people living to-day, who cannot

but see that this religion is not tenable, nevertheless try to defend it

piece by piece in a series of pitiful rearguard actions. One would like

to  mix  among  the  ranks  of  the  believers  in  order  to  meet  these

philosophers,  who  think  they  can  rescue  the  God  of  religion  by

replacing him by an impersonal, shadowy and abstract principle, and

to  address  them  with  the  warning  words:  ‘Thou  shalt  not  take  the

name of the Lord thy God in Vain!’ And if some of the great men of the

past acted in the same way, no appeal can be made to their example:

we know why they were obliged to.

   Let us return to the common man and to his religion - the only

religion which ought to bear that name. The first thing that we think of

is  the  well-known  saying  of  one  of  our  great  poets  and  thinkers

concerning the relation of religion to art and science:

                                                 Wer Wissenschaft und Kunst besitzt, hat auch Religion;
                                                Wer jene beide nicht besitzt, der habe Religion!
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4474

 

   This saying on the one hand draws an antithesis between religion

and the two highest achievements of man, and on the other, asserts

that, as regards their value in life, those achievements and religion

can represent or replace each other. If we also set out to deprive the

common  man  of  his  religion,  we  shall  clearly  not  have  the  poet’s

authority  on  our  side.  We  will  choose  a  particular  path  to  bring  us

nearer an appreciation of his words. Life, as we find it, is too hard for

us; it brings us too many pains, disappointments and impossible tasks.

In order to bear it we cannot dispense with palliative measures. ‘We

cannot do without auxiliary constructions’, as Theodor Fontane tells

us.  There  are  perhaps  three  such  measures:  powerful  deflections,

which cause us to make light of our misery; substitutive satisfactions,

which  diminish  it;  and  intoxicating  substances,  which  make  us

insensitive to it. Something of the kind is indispensable.¹ Voltaire has

deflections in mind when he ends Candide with the advice to cultivate

one’s garden; and scientific activity is a deflection of this kind, too. The

substitutive  satisfactions,  as  offered  by  art,  are  illusions  in  contrast

with reality, but they are none the less psychically effective, thanks to

the role which phantasy has assumed in mental life. The intoxicating

substances influence our body and alter its chemistry. It is no simple

matter to see where religion has its place in this series. We must look

further afield.

   The question of the purpose of human life has been raised countless

times; it has never yet received a satisfactory answer and perhaps

does not admit of one. Some of those who have asked it have added

that if it should turn out that life has no purpose, it would lose all value

for them. But this threat alters nothing. It looks, on the contrary, as

though one had a right to dismiss the question, for it seems to derive

from  the  human  presumptuousness,  many  other  manifestations  of

which are already familiar to us. Nobody talks about the purpose of

the life of animals, unless, perhaps, it may be supposed to lie in beingof service to man. But this view is not tenable either, for there are

many animals of which man can make nothing, except to describe,

classify  and  study  them;  and  innumerable  species  of  animals  have

escaped even this use, since they existed and became extinct before

man  set  eyes  on  them.  Once  again,  only  religion  can  answer  the

question of the purpose of life. One can hardly be wrong in concluding

that the idea of life having a purpose stands and falls with the religious

system.

 

   ¹ In Die Fromme Helene Wilhelm Busch has said the same thing on a lower plane: ‘Wer

Sorgen hat, hat auch Likör.’
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4475

 

   We will therefore turn to the less ambitious question of what men

themselves show by their behaviour to be the purpose and intention of

their lives. What do they demand of life and wish to achieve in it? The

answer to this can hardly be in doubt. They strive after happiness;

they want to become happy and to remain so. This endeavour has two

sides, a positive and a negative aim. It aims, on the one hand, at an

absence  of  pain  and  unpleasure,  and,  on  the  other,  at  the

experiencing of strong feelings of pleasure. In its narrower sense the

word  ‘happiness’  only  relates  to  the  last.  In  conformity  with  this

dichotomy  in  his  aims,  man’s  activity  develops  in  two  directions,

according as it seeks to realize - in the main, or even exclusively - the

one or the other of these aims.

      As  we  see,  what  decides  the  purpose  of  life  is  simply  the

programme  of  the  pleasure  principle.  This  principle  dominates  the

operation  of  the  mental  apparatus  from  the  start.  There  can  be  no

doubt about its efficacy, and yet its programme is at loggerheads with

the whole world, with the macrocosm as much as with the microcosm.

There  is  no  possibility  at  all  of  its  being  carried  through;  all  the

regulations of the universe run counter to it. One feels inclined to say

that the intention that man should be ‘happy’ is not included in the plan

of  ‘Creation’.  What  we  call  happiness  in  the  strictest  sense  comes

from the (preferably sudden) satisfaction of needs which have beendammed up to a high degree, and it is from its nature only possible as

an episodic phenomenon. When any situation that is desired by the

pleasure  principle  is  prolonged,  it  only  produces  a  feeling  of  mild

contentment. We are so made that we can derive intense enjoyment

only from a contrast and very little from a state of things.¹ Thus our

possibilities  of  happiness  are  already  restricted  by  our  constitution.

Unhappiness is much less difficult to experience. We are threatened

with  suffering  from  three  directions:  from  our  own  body,  which  is

doomed to decay and dissolution and which cannot even do without

pain and anxiety as warning signals; from the external world, which

may  rage  against  us  with  overwhelming  and  merciless  forces  of

destruction; and finally from our relations to other men. The suffering

which comes from this last source is perhaps more painful to us than

any  other.  We  tend  to  regard  it  as  a  kind  of  gratuitous  addition,

although it cannot be any less fatefully inevitable than the suffering

which comes from elsewhere.

 

   ¹ Goethe, indeed, warns us that ‘nothing is harder to bear than a succession of fair days.’

But this may be an exaggeration.
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4476

 

      It  is  no  wonder  if,  under  the  pressure  of  these  possibilities  of

suffering, men are accustomed to moderate their claims to happiness

- just as the pleasure principle itself, indeed, under the influence of the

external world, changed into the more modest reality principle -, if a

man thinks himself happy merely to have escaped unhappiness or to

have  survived  his  suffering,  and  if  in  general  the  task  of  avoiding

suffering  pushes  that  of  obtaining  pleasure  into  the  background.

Reflection  shows  that  the  accomplishment  of  this  task  can  be

attempted along very different paths; and all these paths have been

recommended by the various schools of worldly wisdom and put into

practice by men. An unrestricted satisfaction of every need presents

itself  as  the  most  enticing  method  of  conducting  one’s  life,  but  it

means  putting  enjoyment  before  caution,  and  soon  brings  its  own

punishment. The other methods, in which avoidance of unpleasure isthe  main  purpose,  are  differentiated  according  to  the  source  of

unpleasure to which their attention is chiefly turned. Some of these

methods are extreme and some moderate; some are one-sided and

some attack the problem simultaneously at several points. Against the

suffering  which  may  come  upon  one  from  human  relationships  the

readiest safeguard is voluntary isolation, keeping oneself aloof from

other people. The happiness which can be achieved along this path is,

as we see, the happiness of quietness. Against the dreaded external

world one can only defend oneself by some kind of turning away from

it, if one intends to solve the task by oneself. There is, indeed, another

and better path: that of becoming a member of the human community,

and, with the help of a technique guided by science, going over to the

attack against nature and subjecting her to the human will. Then one

is working with all for the good of all. But the most interesting methods

of  averting  suffering  are  those  which  seem  to  influence  our  own

organism.  In  the  last  analysis,  all  suffering  is  nothing  else  than

sensation; it only exists in so far as we feel it, and we only feel it in

consequence of certain ways in which our organism is regulated.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4477

 

   The crudest, but also the most effective among these methods of

influence is the chemical one - intoxication. I do not think that anyone

completely understands its mechanism, but it is a fact that there are

foreign  substances  which,  when  present  in  the  blood  or  tissues,

directly cause us pleasurable sensations; and they also so alter the

conditions  governing  our  sensibility  that  we  become  incapable  of

receiving  unpleasurable  impulses.  The  two  effects  not  only  occur

simultaneously, but seem to be intimately bound up with each other.

But  there  must  be  substances  in  the  chemistry  of  our  own  bodies

which have similar effects, for we know at least one pathological state,

mania, in which a condition similar to intoxication arises without the

administration  of  any  intoxicating  drug.  Besides  this,  our  normal

mental  life  exhibits  oscillations  between  a  comparatively  easy

liberation of pleasure and a comparatively difficult one, parallel withwhich  there  goes  a  diminished  or  an  increased  receptivity  to

unpleasure. It is greatly to be regretted that this toxic side of mental

processes  has  so  far  escaped  scientific  examination.  The  service

rendered by intoxicating media in the struggle for happiness and in

keeping  misery  at  a  distance  is  so  highly  prized  as  a  benefit  that

individuals and peoples alike have given them an established place in

the economics of their libido. We owe to such media not merely the

immediate  yield  of  pleasure,  but  also  a  greatly  desired  degree  of

independence from the external world. For one knows that, with the

help of this ‘drowner of cares’ one can at any time withdraw from the

pressure of reality and find refuge in a world of one’s own with better

conditions of sensibility. As is well known, it is precisely this property

of  intoxicants  which  also  determines  their  danger  and  their

injuriousness. They are responsible, in certain circumstances, for the

useless  waste  of  a  large  quota  of  energy  which  might  have  been

employed for the improvement of the human lot.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4478

 

   The complicated structure of our mental apparatus admits, however,

of a whole number of other influences. Just as a satisfaction of instinct

spells  happiness  for  us,  so  severe  suffering  is  caused  us  if  the

external world lets us starve, if it refuses to sate our needs. One may

therefore  hope  to  be  freed  from  a  part  of  one’s  sufferings  by

influencing  the  instinctual  impulses.  This  type  of  defence  against

suffering  is  no  longer  brought  to  bear  on  the  sensory  apparatus;  it

seeks to master the internal sources of our needs. The extreme form

of this is brought about by killing off the instincts, as is prescribed by

the worldly wisdom of the East and practised by Yoga. If it succeeds,

then the subject has, it is true, given up all other activities as well - he

has sacrificed his life; and, by another path, he has once more only

achieved the happiness of quietness. We follow the same path when

our  aims  are  less  extreme  and  we  merely  attempt  to control  our

instinctual life. In that case, the controlling elements are the higher

psychical  agencies,  which  have  subjected  themselves  to  the  realityprinciple.  Here  the  aim  of  satisfaction  is  not  by  any  means

relinquished; but a certain amount of protection against suffering is

secured, in that non-satisfaction is not so painfully felt in the case of

instincts kept in dependence as in the case of uninhibited ones. As

against this, there is an undeniable diminution in the potentialities of

enjoyment. The feeling of happiness derived from the satisfaction of a

wild  instinctual  impulse  untamed  by  the  ego  is  incomparably  more

intense than that derived from sating an instinct that has been tamed.

The irresistibility of perverse instincts, and perhaps the attraction in

general of forbidden things, finds an economic explanation here.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4479

 

   Another technique for fending off suffering is the employment of the

displacements  of  libido  which  our  mental  apparatus  permits  of  and

through which its function gains so much in flexibility. The task here is

that  of  shifting  the  instinctual  aims  in  such  a  way  that  they  cannot

come  up  against  frustration  from  the  external  world.  In  this,

sublimation of the instincts lends its assistance. One gains the most if

one can sufficiently heighten the yield of pleasure from the sources of

psychical  and  intellectual  work.  When  that  is  so,  fate  can  do  little

against  one.  A  satisfaction  of  this  kind,  such  as  an  artist’s  joy  in

creating,  in  giving  his  phantasies  body,  or  a  scientist’s  in  solving

problems or discovering truths, has a special quality which we shall

certainly one day be able to characterize in metapsychological terms.

At present we can only say figuratively that such satisfactions seem

‘finer  and  higher’.  But  their  intensity  is  mild  as  compared  with  that

derived from the sating of crude and primary instinctual impulses; it

does  not  convulse  our  physical  being.  And  the  weak  point  of  this

method is that it is not applicable generally: it is accessible to only a

few people. It presupposes the possession of special dispositions and

gifts which are far from being common to any practical degree. And

even  to  the  few  who  do  possess  them,  this  method  cannot  give

complete protection from suffering. It creates no impenetrable armour

against the arrows of fortune, and it habitually fails when the source ofsuffering is a person’s own body.¹

 

   ¹ When there is no special disposition in a person which imperatively prescribes what

direction his interests in life shall take, the ordinary professional work that is open to everyone
can play the part assigned to it by Voltaire’s wise advice. It is not possible, within the limits of
a short survey, to discuss adequately the significance of work for the economics of the libido.
No other technique for the conduct of life attaches the individual so firmly to reality as laying
emphasis on work; for his work at least gives him a secure place in a portion of reality, in the
human  community.  The  possibility  it  offers  of  displacing  a  large  amount  of  libidinal
components, whether narcissistic, aggressive or even erotic, on to professional work and on
to the human relations connected with it lends it a value by no means second to what it enjoys
as  something  indispensible  to  the  preservation  and  justification  of  existence  in  society.
Professional activity is a source of special satisfaction if it is a freely chosen one - if, that is to
say, by means of sublimation, it makes possible the use of existing inclinations, of persisting
or constitutionally reinforced instinctual impulses. And yet, as a path to happiness, work is not
highly  prized  by  men.  They  do  not  strive  after  it  as  they  do  after  other  possibilities  of
satisfaction. The great majority of people only work under the stress of necessity, and this
natural human aversion to work raises most difficult social problems.
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4480

 

   While this procedure already clearly shows an intention of making

oneself independent of the external world by seeking satisfaction in

internal,  psychical  processes,  the  next  procedure  brings  out  those

features  yet  more  strongly.  In  it,  the  connection  with  reality  is  still

further  loosened;  satisfaction  is  obtained  from  illusions,  which  are

recognized as such without the discrepancy between them and reality

being  allowed  to  interfere  with  enjoyment.  The  region  from  which

these illusions arise is the life of the imagination; at the time when the

development  of  the  sense  of  reality  took  place,  this  region  was

expressly exempted from the demands of reality-testing and was set

apart for the purpose of fulfilling wishes which were difficult to carry

out. At the head of these satisfactions through phantasy stands the

enjoyment of works of art - an enjoyment which, by the agency of the

artist,  is  made  accessible  even  to  those  who  are  not  themselves

creative.¹ People who are receptive to the influence of art cannot set

too high a value on it as a source of pleasure and consolation in life.

Nevertheless the mild narcosis induced in us by art can do no more

than  bring  about  a  transient  withdrawal  from  the  pressure  of  vitalneeds, and it is not strong enough to make us forget real misery.

      Another  procedure  operates  more  energetically  and  more

thoroughly. It regards reality as the sole enemy and as the source of

all suffering, with which it is impossible to live, so that one must break

off all relations with it if one is to be in any way happy. The hermit

turns his back on the world and will have no truck with it. But one can

do more than that; one can try to re-create the world, to build up in its

stead  another  world  in  which  its  most  unbearable  features  are

eliminated and replaced by others that are in conformity with one’s

own wishes. But whoever, in desperate defiance, sets out upon this

path to happiness will as a rule attain nothing. Reality is too strong for

him. He becomes a madman, who for the most part finds no one to

help him in carrying through his delusion. It is asserted, however, that

each one of us behaves in some one respect like a paranoic, corrects

some  aspect  of  the  world  which  is  unbearable  to  him  by  the

construction  of  a  wish  and  introduces  this  delusion  into  reality.  A

special  importance  attaches  to  the  case  in  which  this  attempt  to

procure  a  certainty  of  happiness  and  a  protection  against  suffering

through a delusional remoulding of reality is made by a considerable

number  of  people  in  common.  The  religions  of  mankind  must  be

classed among the mass delusions of this kind. No one, needless to

say, who shares a delusion ever recognizes it as such.

 

   ¹ Cf. ‘Formulations on the Two Principles of Mental Functioning’ (1911b), and Lecture XXIII

of my Introductory Lectures (1916-17).
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4481

 

      I  do  not  think  that  I  have  made  a  complete  enumeration  of  the

methods by which men strive to gain happiness and keep suffering

away and I know, too, that the material might have been differently

arranged. One procedure I have not yet mentioned - not because I

have  forgotten  it  but  because  it  will  concern  us  later  in  another

connection.  And  how  could  one  possibly  forget,  of  all  others,  this

technique in the art of living? It is conspicuous for a most remarkable

combination  of  characteristic  features.  It,  too,  aims  of  course  atmaking the subject independent of Fate (as it is best to call it), and to

that end it locates satisfaction in internal mental processes, making

use, in so doing, of the displaceability of the libido of which we have

already spoken. But it does not turn away from the external world; on

the contrary, it clings to the objects belonging to that world and obtains

happiness from an emotional relationship to them. Nor is it content to

aim at an avoidance of unpleasure - a goal, as we might call it, of

weary resignation; it passes this by without heed and holds fast to the

original, passionate striving for a positive fulfilment of happiness. And

perhaps  it  does  in  fact  come  nearer  to  this  goal  than  any  other

method. I am, of course, speaking of the way of life which makes love

the centre of everything, which looks for all satisfaction in loving and

being loved. A psychical attitude of this sort comes naturally enough to

all of us; one of the forms in which love manifests itself - sexual love -

has  given  us  our  most  intense  experience  of  an  overwhelming

sensation of pleasure and has thus furnished us with a pattern for our

search  for  happiness.  What  is  more  natural  than  that  we  should

persist  in  looking  for  happiness  along  the  path  on  which  we  first

encountered it? The weak side of this technique of living is easy to

see; otherwise no human being would have thought of abandoning

this  path  to  happiness  for  any  other.  It  is  that  we  are  never  so

defenceless against suffering as when we love, never so helplessly

unhappy as when we have lost our loved object or its love. But this

does not dispose of the technique of living based on the value of love

as a means to happiness. There is much more to be said about it.

   We may go on from here to consider the interesting case in which

happiness in life is predominantly sought in the enjoyment of beauty,

wherever beauty presents itself to our senses and our judgement - the

beauty  of  human  forms  and  gestures,  of  natural  objects  and

landscapes and of artistic and even scientific creations. This aesthetic

attitude to the goal of life offers little protection against the threat of

suffering, but it can compensate for a great deal. The enjoyment of

beauty has a peculiar, mildly intoxicating quality of feeling. Beauty has

no obvious use; nor is there any clear cultural necessity for it. Yet

civilization  could  not  do  without  it.  The  science  of  aesthetics

investigates the conditions under which things are felt as beautiful, but

it has been unable to give any explanation of the nature and origin ofbeauty,  and,  as  usually  happens,  lack  of  success  is  concealed

beneath  a  flood  of  resounding  and  empty  words.  Psycho-analysis,

unfortunately, has scarcely anything to say about beauty either. All

that seems certain is its derivation from the field of sexual feeling. The

love of beauty seems a perfect example of an impulse inhibited in its

aim.  ‘Beauty’  and  ‘attraction’  are  originally  attributes  of  the  sexual

object. It is worth remarking that the genitals themselves, the sight of

which is always exciting, are nevertheless hardly ever judged to be

beautiful;  the  quality  of  beauty  seems,  instead,  to  attach  to  certain

secondary sexual characters.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4482

 

   In spite of the incompleteness, I will venture on a few remarks as a

conclusion to our enquiry. The programme of becoming happy, which

the pleasure principle imposes on us, cannot be fulfilled; yet we must

not  -  indeed,  we  cannot  -  give  up  our  efforts  to  bring  it  nearer  to

fulfilment by some means or other. Very different paths may be taken

in that direction, and we may give priority either to the positive aspect

of  the  aim,  that  of  gaining  pleasure,  or  to  its  negative  one,  that  of

avoiding unpleasure. By none of these paths can we attain all that we

desire. Happiness, in the reduced sense in which we recognize it as

possible,  is  a  problem  of  the  economics  of  the  individual’s  libido.

There is no golden rule which applies to everyone: every man must

find out for himself in what particular fashion he can be saved. All

kinds  of  different  factors  will  operate  to  direct  his  choice.  It  is  a

question of how much real satisfaction he can expect to get from the

external world, how far he is led to make himself independent of it,

and, finally, how much strength he feels he has for altering the world

to suit his wishes. In this, his psychical constitution will play a decisive

part,  irrespectively  of  the  external  circumstances.  The  man  who  is

predominantly  erotic  will  give  first  preference  to  his  emotional

relationships to other people; the narcissistic man, who inclines to be

self-sufficient, will seek his main satisfactions in his internal mental

processes; the man of action will never give up the external world onwhich  he  can  try  out  his  strength.  As  regards  the  second  of  these

types,  the  nature  of  his  talents  and  the  amount  of  instinctual

sublimation open to him will decide where he shall locate his interests.

Any choice that is pushed to an extreme will be penalized by exposing

the individual to the dangers which arise if a technique of living that

has been chosen as an exclusive one should prove inadequate. Just

as  a  cautious  business-man  avoids  tying  up  all  his  capital  in  one

concern, so, perhaps, worldly wisdom will advise us not to look for the

whole of our satisfaction from a single aspiration. Its success is never

certain, for that depends on the convergence of many factors, perhaps

on none more than on the capacity of the psychical constitution to

adapt  its  function  to  the  environment  and  then  to  exploit  that

environment  for  a  yield  of  pleasure.  A  person  who  is  born  with  a

specially  unfavourable  instinctual  constitution,  and  who  has  not

properly  undergone  the  transformation  and  rearrangement  of  his

libidinal  components  which  is  indispensable  for  later  achievements,

will  find  it  hard  to  obtain  happiness  from  his  external  situation,

especially  if  he  is  faced  with  tasks  of  some  difficulty.  As  a  last

technique  of  living,  which  will  at  least  bring  him  substitutive

satisfactions, he is offered that of a flight into neurotic illness - a flight

which he usually accomplishes when he is still young. The man who

sees his pursuit of happiness come to nothing in later years can still

find consolation in the yield of pleasure of chronic intoxication; or he

can  embark  on  the  desperate  attempt  at  rebellion  seen  in  a

psychosis.¹

 

   ¹ I feel impelled to point out one at least of the gaps that have been left in the account given

above.  No  discussion  of  the  possibilities  of  human  happiness  should  omit  to  take  into
consideration the relation between narcissism and object libido. We require to know what
being essentially self-dependent signifies for the economics of the libido.
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4483

 

   Religion restricts this play of choice and adaptation, since it imposes

equally on everyone its own path to the acquisition of happiness and

protection  from  suffering.  Its  technique  consists  in  depressing  thevalue of life and distorting the picture of the real world in a delusional

manner - which presupposes an intimidation of the intelligence. At this

price, by forcibly fixing them in a state of psychical infantilism and by

drawing them into a mass-delusion, religion succeeds in sparing many

people an individual neurosis. But hardly anything more. There are, as

we have said, many paths which may lead to such happiness as is

attainable by men, but there is none which does so for certain. Even

religion cannot keep its promise. If the believer finally sees himself

obliged to speak of God’s ‘inscrutable decrees’, he is admitting that all

that is left to him as a last possible consolation and source of pleasure

in his suffering is an unconditional submission. And if he is prepared

for  that,  he  could  probably  have  spared  himself  the détour  he  has

made.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4484

 

                                            III

 

Our enquiry concerning happiness has not so far taught us much that

is not already common knowledge. And even if we proceed from it to

the problem of why it is so hard for men to be happy, there seems no

greater prospect of learning anything new. We have given the answer

already  by  pointing  to  the  three  sources  from  which  our  suffering

comes:  the  superior  power  of  nature,  the  feebleness  of  our  own

bodies and the inadequacy of the regulations which adjust the mutual

relation ships of human beings in the family, the state and society. In

regard to the first two sources, our judgement cannot hesitate long. It

forces us to acknowledge those sources of suffering and to submit to

the  inevitable.  We  shall  never  completely  master  nature;  and  our

bodily  organism,  itself  a  part  of  that  nature,  will  always  remain  a

transient  structure  with  a  limited  capacity  for  adaptation  and

achievement. This recognition does not have a paralysing effect. On

the contrary, it points the direction for our activity. If we cannot remove

all suffering, we can remove some, and we can mitigate some: the

experience of many thousands of years has convinced us of that. Asregards the third source, the social source of suffering, our attitude is

a  different  one.  We  do  not  admit  it  at  all;  we  cannot  see  why  the

regulations  made  by  ourselves  should  not,  on  the  contrary,  be  a

protection  and  a  benefit  for  every  one  of  us.  And  yet,  when  we

consider  how  unsuccessful  we  have  been  in  precisely  this  field  of

prevention  of  suffering,  a  suspicion  dawns  on  us  that  here,  too,  a

piece of unconquerable nature may lie behind it - this time a piece of

our own psychical constitution.

      When  we  start  considering  this  possibility,  we  come  upon  a

contention which is so astonishing that we must dwell upon it. This

contention holds that what we call our civilization is largely responsible

for our misery, and that we should be much happier if we gave it up

and returned to primitive conditions. I call this contention astonishing

because, in whatever way we may define the concept of civilization, it

is  a  certain  fact  that  all  the  things  with  which  we  seek  to  protect

ourselves  against  the  threats  that  emanate  from  the  sources  of

suffering are part of that very civilization.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4485

 

   How has it happened that so many people have come to take up this

strange attitude of hostility to civilization? I believe that the basis of it

was a deep and long-standing dissatisfaction with the then existing

state of civilization and that on that basis a condemnation of it was

built up, occasioned by certain specific historical events. I think I know

what the last and the last but one of those occasions were. I am not

learned  enough  to  trace  the  chain  of  them  far  back  enough  in  the

history  of  the  human  species;  but  a  factor  of  this  kind  hostile  to

civilization  must  already  have  been  at  work  in  the  victory  of

Christendom over the heathen religions. For it was very closely related

to the low estimation put upon earthly life by the Christian doctrine.

The  last  but  one  of  these  occasions  was  when  the  progress  of

voyages of discovery led to contact with primitive peoples and races.

In  consequence  of  insufficient  observation  and  a  mistaken  view  of

their  manners  and  customs,  they  appeared  to  Europeans  to  beleading  a  simple,  happy  life  with  few  wants,  a  life  such  as  was

unattainable  by  their  visitors  with  their  superior  civilization.  Later

experience has corrected some of those judgements. In many cases

the observers had wrongly attributed to the absence of complicated

cultural demands what was in fact due to the bounty of nature and the

ease  with  which  the  major  human  needs  were  satisfied.  The  last

occasion is especially familiar to us. It arose when people came to

know  about  the  mechanism  of  the  neuroses,  which  threaten  to

undermine the modicum of happiness enjoyed by civilized men. It was

discovered  that  a  person  becomes  neurotic  because  he  cannot

tolerate the amount of frustration which society imposes on him in the

service  of  its  cultural  ideals,  and  it  was  inferred  from  this  that  the

abolition or reduction of those demands would result in a return to

possibilities of happiness.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4486

 

   There is also an added factor of disappointment. During the last few

generations  mankind  has  made  an  extraordinary  advance  in  the

natural sciences and in their technical application and has established

his control over nature in a way never before imagined. The single

steps of this advance are common knowledge and it is unnecessary to

enumerate them. Men are proud of those achievements, and have a

right to be. But they seem to have observed that this newly-won power

over space and time, this subjugation of the forces of nature, which is

the fulfilment of a longing that goes back thousands of years, has not

increased  the  amount  of  pleasurable  satisfaction  which  they  may

expect  from  life  and  has  not  made  them  feel  happier.  From  the

recognition of this fact we ought to be content to conclude that power

over nature is not the only precondition of human happiness, just as it

is not the only goal of cultural endeavour; we ought not to infer from it

that  technical  progress  is  without  value  for  the  economics  of  our

happiness. One would like to ask: is there, then, no positive gain in

pleasure, no unequivocal increase in my feeling of happiness, if I can,

as often as I please, hear the voice of a child of mine who is livinghundreds of miles away or if I can learn in the shortest possible time

after a friend has reached his destination that he has come through

the long and difficult voyage unharmed? Does it mean nothing that

medicine has succeeded in enormously reducing infant mortality and

the  danger  of  infection  for  women  in  childbirth,  and,  indeed,  in

considerably  lengthening  the  average  life  of  a  civilized  man?  And

there is a long list that might be Added to benefits of this kind which

we owe to the much-despised era of scientific and technical advances.

But  here  the  voice  of  pessimistic  criticism  makes  itself  heard  and

warns  us  that  most  of  these  satisfactions  follow  the  model  of  the

‘cheap enjoyment’ extolled in the anecdote - the enjoyment obtained

by putting a bare leg from under the bedclothes on a cold winter night

and  drawing  it  in  again.  If  there  had  been  no  railway  to  conquer

distances, my child would never have left his native town and I should

need no telephone to hear his voice; if travelling across the ocean by

ship had not been introduced, my friend would not have embarked on

his sea-voyage and I should not need a cable to relieve my anxiety

about him. What is the use of reducing infantile mortality when it is

precisely that reduction which imposes the greatest restraint on us in

the begetting of children, so that, taken all round, we nevertheless rear

no more children than in the days before the reign of hygiene, while at

the same time we have created difficult conditions for our sexual life in

marriage, and have probably worked against the beneficial effects of

natural selection? And, finally, what good to us is a long life if it is

difficult and barren of joys, and if it is so full of misery that we can only

welcome death as a deliverer?

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4487

 

   It seems certain that we do not feel comfortable in our present-day

civilization, but it is very difficult to form an opinion whether and in

what degree men of an earlier age felt happier and what part their

cultural  conditions  played  in  the  matter.  We  shall  always  tend  to

consider people’s distress objectively - that is, to place ourselves, with

our  own  wants  and  sensibilities,  in their  conditions,  and  then  toexamine  what  occasions  we  should  find  in  them  for  experiencing

happiness or unhappiness. This method of looking at things, which

seems  objective  because  it  ignores  the  variations  in  subjective

sensibility, is, of course, the most subjective possible, since it puts

one’s own mental states in the place of any others, unknown though

they may be. Happiness, however, is something essentially subjective.

No matter how much we may shrink with horror from certain situations

- of a galley-slave in antiquity, of a peasant during the Thirty Years’

War, of a victim of the Holy Inquisition, of a Jew awaiting a pogrom - it

is nevertheless impossible for us to feel our way into such people - to

divine  the  changes  which  original  obtuseness  of  mind,  a  gradual

stupefying process, the cessation of expectations, and cruder or more

refined methods of narcotization have produced upon their receptivity

to sensations of pleasure and unpleasure. Moreover, in the case of

the  most  extreme  possibility  of  suffering,  special  mental  protective

devices  are  brought  into  operation.  It  seems  to  me  unprofitable  to

pursue this aspect of the problem any further.

   It is time for us to turn our attention to the nature of this civilization

on whose value as a means to happiness doubts have been thrown.

We shall not look for a formula in which to express that nature in a few

words,  until  we  have  learned  something  by  examining  it.  We  shall

therefore  content  ourselves  with  saying  once  more  that  the  word

‘civilization’  describes  the  whole  sum  of  the  achievements  and  the

regulations  which  distinguish  our  lives  from  those  of  our  animal

ancestors  and  which  serve  two  purposes  -  namely  to  protect  men

against nature and to adjust their mutual relations.¹ In order to learn

more,  we  will  bring  together  the  various  features  of  civilization

individually, as they are exhibited in human communities. In doing so,

we shall have no hesitation in letting ourselves be guided by linguistic

usage or, as it is also called, linguistic feeling, in the conviction that we

shall  thus  be  doing  justice  to  inner  discernments  which  still  defy

expression in abstract terms.

 

   ¹ See The Future of an Illusion (1927c).

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4488 

   The first stage is easy. We recognize as cultural all activities and

resources which are useful to men for making the earth serviceable to

them, for protecting them against the violence of the forces of nature,

and so on. As regards this side of civilization, there can be scarcely

any  doubt.  If  we  go  back  far  enough,  we  find  that  the  first  acts  of

civilization were the use of tools, the gaining of control over fire and

the  construction  of  dwellings.  Among  these,  the  control  over  fire

stands  out  as  a  quite  extraordinary  and  unexampled  achievement,¹

while the others opened up paths which man has followed ever since,

and the stimulus to which is easily guessed. With every tool man is

perfecting his own organs, whether motor or sensory, or is removing

the limits to their functioning. Motor power places gigantic forces at his

disposal,  which,  like  his  muscles,  he  can  employ  in  any  direction;

thanks  to  ships  and  aircraft  neither  water  nor  air  can  hinder  his

movements; by means of spectacles he corrects defects in the lens of

his own eye; by means of the telescope he sees into the far distance;

and by means of the microscope he overcomes the limits of visibility

set by the structure of his retina. In the photographic camera he has

created an instrument which retains the fleeting visual impressions,

just as a gramophone disc retains the equally fleeting auditory ones;

both  are  at  bottom  materializations  of  the  power  he  possesses  of

recollection, his memory. With the help of the telephone he can hear

at distances which would be respected as unattainable even in a fairy

tale. Writing was in its origin the voice of an absent person; and the

dwelling-house  was  a  substitute  for  the  mother’s  womb,  the  first

lodging, for which in all likelihood man still longs, and in which he was

safe and felt at ease.

 

   ¹ Psycho-analytic material, incomplete as it is and not susceptible to clear interpretation,

nevertheless admits of a conjecture - a fantastic sounding one - about the origin of this human
feat. It is as though primal man had the habit, when he came in contact with fire, or satisfying
an infantile desire connected with it, by putting it out with a stream of his urine. The legends
that we possess leave no doubt about the originally phallic view taken of tongues of flame as
they shoot upwards. Putting out fire by micturating - a theme to which modern giants, Gulliver
in Lilliput and Rabelais’ Gargantua, still hark back - was therefore a kind of sexual act with a
male,  an  enjoyment  of  sexual  potency  in  a  homosexual  competition.  The  first  person  to
renounce this desire and spare the fire was able to carry it off with him and subdue it to his
own use. By damping down the fire of his own sexual excitation, he had tamed the natural
force of fire. This great cultural conquest was thus the reward for his renunciation of instinct.Further,  it  is  as  though  woman  had  been  appointed  guardian  of  the  fire  which  was  held
captive on the domestic hearth, because her anatomy made it impossible for her to yield to
the temptation of this desire. It is remarkable, too, how regularly analytic experience testifies
to the connection between ambition, fire and urethral erotism.
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4489

 

   These things that, by his science and technology, man has brought

about on this earth, on which he first appeared as a feeble animal

organism and on which each individual of his species must once more

make  its  entry  (‘oh  inch  of  nature!’)  as  a  helpless  suckling  -  these

things do not only sound like a fairy tale, they are an actual fulfilment

of every - or of almost every - fairy-tale wish. All these assets he may

lay claim to as his cultural acquisition. Long ago he formed an ideal

conception of omnipotence and omniscience which he embodied in

his  gods.  To  these  gods  he  attributed  everything  that  seemed

unattainable to his wishes, or that was forbidden to him. One may say,

therefore, that these gods were cultural ideals. To-day he has come

very close to the attainment of this ideal, he has almost become a god

himself.  Only,  it  is  true,  in  the  fashion  in  which  ideals  are  usually

attained  according  to  the  general  judgement  of  humanity.  Not

completely; in some respects not at all, in others only half way. Man

has, as it were, become a kind of prosthetic God. When he puts on all

his auxiliary organs he is truly magnificent; but those organs have not

grown  on  to  him  and  they  still  give  him  much  trouble  at  times.

Nevertheless, he is entitled to console himself with the thought that

this development will not come to an end precisely with the year 1930

A.D. Future ages will bring with them new and probably unimaginably

great  advances  in  this  field  of  civilization  and  will  increase  man’s

likeness to God still more. But in the interests of our investigations, we

will not forget that present-day man does not feel happy in his Godlike

character.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4490

    We recognize, then, that countries have attained a high level of

civilization if we find that in them everything which can assist in the

exploitation  of  the  earth  by  man  and  in  his  protection  against  the

forces  of  nature  -  everything,  in  short,  which  is  of  use  to  him  -  is

attended to and effectively carried out. In such countries rivers which

threaten to flood the land are regulated in their flow, and their water is

directed through canals to places where there is a shortage of it. The

soil is carefully cultivated and planted with the vegetation which it is

suited to support; and the mineral wealth below ground is assiduously

brought to the surface and fashioned into the required implements and

utensils. The means of communication are ample, rapid and reliable.

Wild  and  dangerous  animals  have  been  exterminated,  and  the

breeding  of  domesticated  animals  flourishes.  But  we  demand  other

things from civilization besides these, and it is a noticeable fact that

we hope to find them realized in these same countries. As though we

were seeking to repudiate the first demand we made, we welcome it

as a sign of civilization as well if we see people directing their care too

to what has no practical value whatever, to what is useless - if, for

instance, the green spaces necessary in a town as playgrounds and

as reservoirs of fresh air are also laid out with flower-beds, or if the

windows of the houses are decorated with pots of flowers. We soon

observe that this useless thing which we expect civilization to value is

beauty.  We  require  civilized  man  to  reverence  beauty  wherever  he

sees it in nature and to create it in the objects of his handiwork so far

as  he  is  able.  But  this  is  far  from  exhausting  our  demands  on

civilization.  We  expect  besides  to  see  the  signs  of  cleanliness  and

order. We do not think highly of the cultural level of an English country

town in Shakespeare’s time when we read that there was a big dung

heap in front of his father’s house in Stratford; we are indignant and

call it ‘barbarous’ (which is the opposite of civilized) when we find the

paths  in  the  Wiener  Wald  littered  with  paper.  Dirtiness  of  any  kind

seems to us incompatible with civilization. We extend our demand for

cleanliness to the human body too. We are astonished to learn of the

objectionable  smell  which  emanated  from  the Roi  Soleil;  and  we

shake our heads on the Isola Bella when we are shown the tiny wash-

basin in which Napoleon made his morning toilet. Indeed, we are not

surprised  by  the  idea  of  setting  up  the  use  of  soap  as  an  actualyardstick of civilization. The same is true of order. It, like cleanliness,

applies solely to the works of man. But whereas cleanliness is not to

be expected in nature, order, on the contrary, has been imitated from

her. Man’s observation of the great astronomical regularities not only

furnished him with a model for introducing order into his life, but gave

him  the  first  points  of  departure  for  doing  so.  Order  is  a  kind  of

compulsion to repeat which, when a regulation has been laid down

once and for all, decides when, where and how a thing shall be done,

so  that  in  every  similar  circumstance  one  is  spared  hesitation  and

indecision. The benefits of order are incontestable. It enables men to

use  space  and  time  to  the  best  advantage,  while  conserving  their

psychical forces. We should have a right to expect that order would

have  taken  its  place  in  human  activities  from  the  start  and  without

difficulty; and we may well wonder that this has not happened - that,

on  the  contrary,  human  beings  exhibit  an  inborn  tendency  to

carelessness,  irregularity  and  unreliability  in  their  work,  and  that  a

laborious training is needed before they learn to follow the example of

their celestial models.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4491

 

   Beauty, cleanliness and order obviously occupy a special position

among the requirements of civilization. No one will maintain that they

are as important for life as control over the forces of nature or as some

other factors with which we shall become acquainted. And yet no one

would  care  to  put  them  in  the  background  as  trivialities.  That

civilization is not exclusively taken up with what is useful is already

shown  by  the  example  of  beauty,  which  we  decline  to  omit  from

among the interests of civilization. The usefulness of order is quite

evident. With regard to cleanliness, we must bear in mind that it is

demanded of us by hygiene as well, and we may suspect that even

before the days of scientific prophylaxis the connection between the

two was not altogether strange to man. Yet utility does not entirely

explain these efforts; something else must be at work besides.

   No feature, however, seems better to characterize civilization thanits esteem and encouragement of man’s higher mental activities - his

intellectual, scientific and artistic achievements and the leading role

that it assigns to ideas in human life. Foremost among those ideas are

the  religious  systems,  on  whose  complicated  structure  I  have

endeavoured to throw light elsewhere. Next come the speculations of

philosophy; and finally what might be called man’s ‘ideals’ - his ideas

of a possible perfection of individuals, or of peoples or of the whole of

humanity, and the demands he sets up on the basis of such ideas.

The  fact  that  these  creations  of  his  are  not  independent  of  one

another,  but  are  on  the  contrary  closely  interwoven,  increases  the

difficulty not only of describing them but of tracing their psychological

derivation. If we assume quite generally that the motive force of all

human activities is a striving towards the two confluent goals of utility

and a yield of pleasure, we must suppose that this is also true of the

manifestations  of  civilization  which  we  have  been  discussing  here,

although this is easily visible only in scientific and aesthetic activities.

But it cannot be doubted that the other activities, too, correspond to

strong needs in men - perhaps to needs which are only developed in a

minority. Nor must we allow ourselves to be misled by judgements of

value  concerning  any  particular  religion,  or  philosophic  system,  or

ideal. Whether we think to find in them the highest achievements of

the  human  spirit,  or  whether  we  deplore  them  as  aberrations,  we

cannot but recognize that where they are present, and, in especial,

where they are dominant, a high level of civilization is implied.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4492

 

   The last, but certainly not the least important, of the characteristic

features of civilization remains to be assessed: the manner in which

the relationships of men to one another, their social relationships, are

regulated - relationships which affect a person as a neighbour, as a

source of help, as another person’s sexual object, as a member of a

family and of a State. Here it is especially difficult to keep clear of

particular  ideal  demands  and  to  see  what  is  civilized  in  general.

Perhaps we may begin by explaining that the element of civilizationenters  on  the  scene  with  the  first  attempt  to  regulate  these  social

relationships. If the attempt were not made, the relationships would be

subject  to  the  arbitrary  will  of  the  individual:  that  is  to  say,  the

physically stronger man would decide them in the sense of his own

interests and instinctual impulses. Nothing would be changed in this if

this stronger man should in his turn meet someone even stronger than

he.  Human  life  in  common  is  only  made  possible  when  a  majority

comes  together  which  is  stronger  than  any  separate  individual  and

which remains united against all separate individuals. The power of

this community is then set up as ‘right’ in opposition to the power of

the individual, which is condemned as ‘brute force’. This replacement

of the power of the individual by the power of a community constitutes

the decisive step of civilization. The essence of it lies in the fact that

the members of the community restrict themselves in their possibilities

of satisfaction, whereas the individual knew no such restrictions. The

first requisite of civilization, therefore, is that of justice - that is, the

assurance that a law once made will not be broken in favour of an

individual. This implies nothing as to the ethical value of such a law.

The  further  course  of  cultural  development  seems  to  tend  towards

making  the  law  no  longer  an  expression  of  the  will  of  a  small

community - a caste or a stratum of the population or a racial group -

which, in its turn, behaves like a violent individual towards other, and

perhaps  more  numerous,  collections  of  people.  The  final  outcome

should be a rule of law to which all - except those who are not capable

of  entering  a  community  -  have  contributed  by  a  sacrifice  of  their

instincts, and which leaves no one - again with the same exception -

at the mercy of brute force.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4493

 

   The liberty of the individual is no gift of civilization. It was greatest

before there was any civilization, though then, it is true, it had for the

most part no value, since the individual was scarcely in a position to

defend it. The development of civilization imposes restrictions on it,

and justice demands that no one shall escape those restrictions. Whatmakes itself felt in a human community as a desire for freedom may

be  their  revolt  against  some  existing  injustice,  and  so  may  prove

favourable  to  a  further  development  of  civilization;  it  may  remain

compatible with civilization. But it may also spring from the remains of

their original personality, which is still untamed by civilization and may

thus become the basis in them of hostility to civilization. The urge for

freedom, therefore, is directed against particular forms and demands

of  civilization  or  against  civilization  altogether.  It  does  not  seem  as

though any influence could induce a man to change his nature into a

termite’s. No doubt he will always defend his claim to individual liberty

against the will of the group. A good part of the struggles of mankind

centre round the single task of finding an expedient accommodation -

one,  that  is,  that  will  bring  happiness  -  between  this  claim  of  the

individual  and  the  cultural  claims  of  the  group;  and  one  of  the

problems  that  touches  the  fate  of  humanity  is  whether  such  an

accommodation can be reached by means of some particular form of

civilization or whether this conflict is irreconcilable.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4494

 

      By  allowing  common  feeling  to  be  our  guide  in  deciding  what

features  of  human  life  are  to  be  regarded  as  civilized,  we  have

obtained a clear impression of the general picture of civilization; but it

is true that so far we have discovered nothing that is not universally

known. At the same time we have been careful not to fall in with the

prejudice that civilization is synonymous with perfecting, that it is the

road  to  perfection  pre-ordained  for  men.  But  now  a  point  of  view

presents  itself  which  may  lead  in  a  different  direction.  The

development of civilization appears to us as a peculiar process which

mankind undergoes, and in which several things strike us as familiar.

We  may  characterize  this  process  with  reference  to  the  changes

which it brings about in the familiar instinctual dispositions of human

beings, to satisfy which is, after all, the economic task of our lives. A

few of these instincts are used up in such a manner that something

appears  in  their  place  which,  in  an  individual,  we  describe  as  acharacter-trait.  The  most  remarkable  example  of  such  a  process  is

found  in  the  anal  erotism  of  young  human  beings.  Their  original

interest in the excretory function, its organs and products, is changed

in the course of their growth into a group of traits which are familiar to

us as parsimony, a sense of order and cleanliness - qualities which,

though valuable and welcome in themselves, may be intensified till

they become markedly dominant and produce what is called the anal

character. How this happens we do not know, but there is no doubt

about the correctness of the finding.¹ Now we have seen that order

and  cleanliness  are  important  requirements  of  civilization,  although

their vital necessity is not very apparent, any more than their suitability

as sources of enjoyment. At this point we cannot fail to be struck by

the  similarity  between  the  process  of  civilization  and  the  libidinal

development of the individual. Other instincts are induced to displace

the conditions for their satisfaction, to lead them into other paths. In

most  cases  this  process  coincides  with  that  of  the sublimation  (of

instinctual  aims)  with  which  we  are  familiar,  but  in  some  it  can  be

differentiated  from  it.  Sublimation  of  instinct  is  an  especially

conspicuous  feature  of  cultural  development;  it  is  what  makes  it

possible for higher psychical activities, scientific, artistic or ideological,

to play such an important part in civilized life. If one were to yield to a

first impression, one would say that sublimation is a vicissitude which

has been forced upon the instincts entirely by civilization. But it would

be wiser to reflect upon this a little longer. In the third place, finally,

and this seems the most important of all, it is impossible to overlook

the  extent  to  which  civilization  is  built  up  upon  a  renunciation  of

instinct, how much it presupposes precisely the non-satisfaction (by

suppression, repression or some other means?) of powerful instincts.

This  ‘cultural  frustration’  dominates  the  large  field  of  social

relationships between human beings. As we already know, it is the

cause of the hostility against which all civilizations have to struggle. It

will also make severe demands on our scientific work, and we shall

have much to explain here. It is not easy to understand how it can

become possible to deprive an instinct of satisfaction. Nor is doing so

without danger. If the loss is not compensated for economically, one

can be certain that serious disorders will ensue.

   But if we want to know what value can be attributed to our view thatthe development of civilization is a special process, comparable to the

normal  maturation  of  the  individual,  we  must  clearly  attack  another

problem. We must ask ourselves to what influences the development

of civilization owes its origin, how it arose, and by what its course has

been determined.

 

   ¹ Cf. my ‘Character and Anal Erotism’ (1908b), and numerous further contributions, by

Ernest Jones and others.
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4495

 

                                            IV

 

The task seems an immense one, and it is natural to feel diffidence in

the face of it. But here are such conjectures as I have been able to

make.

   After primal man had discovered that it lay in his own hands, literally,

to improve his lot on earth by working, it cannot have been a matter of

indifference to him whether another man worked with or against him.

The  other  man  acquired  the  value  for  him  of  a  fellow-worker,  with

whom  it  was  useful  to  live  together.  Even  earlier,  in  his  ape-like

prehistory,  man  had  adopted  the  habit  of  forming  families,  and  the

members  of  his  family  were  probably  his  first  helpers.  One  may

suppose that the founding of families was connected with the fact that

a moment came when the need for genital satisfaction no longer made

its  appearance  like  a  guest  who  drops  in  suddenly,  and,  after  his

departure, is heard of no more for a long time, but instead took up its

quarters  as  a  permanent  lodger.  When  this  happened,  the  male

acquired  a  motive  for  keeping  the  female,  or,  speaking  more

generally, his sexual objects, near him; while the female, who did not

want to be separated from her helpless young, was obliged, in their

interests, to remain with the stronger male.¹ In this primitive family one

essential feature of civilization is still lacking. The arbitrary will of its

head, the father, was unrestricted. In Totem and Taboo I have tried to

show  how  the  way  led  from  this  family  to  the  succeeding  stage  of

communal life in the form of bands of brothers. In overpowering theirfather, the sons had made the discovery that a combination can be

stronger than a single individual. The totemic culture is based on the

restrictions which the sons had to impose on one another in order to

keep this new state of affairs in being. The taboo-observances were

the  first  ‘right’  or  ‘law.  The  communal  life  of  human  beings  had,

therefore, a two-fold foundation: the compulsion to work, which was

created by external necessity, and the power of love, which made the

man unwilling to be deprived of his sexual object - the woman -, and

made the woman unwilling to be deprived of the part of herself which

had been separated off from her - her child. Eros and Ananke have

become  the  parents  of  human  civilization  too.  The  first  result  of

civilization was that even a fairly large number of people were now

able  to  live  together  in  a  community.  And  since  these  two  great

powers were co-operating in this, one might expect that the further

development of civilization would proceed smoothly towards an even

better control over the external world and towards a further extension

of the number of people included in the community. Nor is it easy to

understand  how  this  civilization  could  act  upon  its  participants

otherwise than to make them happy.

 

   ¹ The organic periodicity of the sexual process has persisted, it is true, but its effect on

psychical sexual excitation has rather been reversed. This change seems most likely to be
connected  with  the  diminution  of  the  olfactory  stimuli  by  means  of  which  the  menstrual
process  produced  an  effect  on  the  male  psyche.  Their  role  was  taken  over  by  visual
excitations, which, in contrast to the intermittent olfactory stimuli, were able to maintain a
permanent effect. The taboo on menstruation is derived from this ‘organic repression’, as a
defence against a phase of development that has been surmounted. All other motives are
probably of a secondary nature. (Cf. C. D. Daly, 1927.) This process is repeated on another
level when the gods of a superseded period of civilization turn into demons. The diminution of
the  olfactory  stimuli  seems  itself  to  be  a  consequence  of  man’s  raising  himself  from  the
ground, of his assumption of an upright gait; this made his genitals, which were previously
concealed, visible and in need of protection, and so provoked feelings of shame in him.
   The fateful process of civilization would thus have set in with man’s adoption of an erect
posture. From that point the chain of events would have proceeded through the devaluation of
olfactory stimuli and the isolation of the menstrual period to the time when visual stimuli were
paramount and the genitals became visible, and thence to the continuity of sexual excitation,
the  founding  of  the  family  and  so  to  the  threshold  of  human  civilization.  This  is  only  a
theoretical speculation, but it is important enough to deserve careful checking with reference
to the conditions of life which obtain among animals closely related to man.
   A social factor is also unmistakably present in the cultural trend towards cleanliness, which
has received ex post facto justification in hygienic considerations but which manifested itself
before their discovery. The incitement to cleanliness originates in an urge to get rid of the
excreta, which have become disagreeable to the sense perceptions. We know that in thenursery things are different. The excreta arouse no disgust in children. They seem valuable to
them as being a part of their own body which has come away from it. Here upbringing insists
with special energy on hastening the course of development which lies ahead, and which
should make the excreta worthless, disgusting, abhorrent and abominable. Such a reversal of
values would scarcely be possible if the substances that are expelled from the body were not
doomed by their strong smells to share the fate which overtook olfactory stimuli after man
adopted  the  erect  posture.  Anal  erotism,  therefore,  succumbs  in  the  first  instance  to  the
‘organic repression’ which paved the way to civilization. The existence of the social factor
which  is  responsible  for  the  further  transformation  of  anal  erotism  is  attested  by  the
circumstance that, in spite of all man’s developmental advances, he scarcely finds the smell of
his own excreta repulsive, but only that of other people’s. Thus a person who is not clean -
who does not hide his excreta - is offending other people; he is showing no consideration for
them. And this is confirmed by our strongest and commonest terms of abuse. It would be
incomprehensible, too, that man should use the name of his most faithful friend in the animal
world - the dog - as a term of abuse if that creature had not incurred his contempt through two
characteristics: that it is an animal whose dominant sense is that of smell and one which has
no horror of excrement, and that it is not ashamed of its sexual functions.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4496

 

   Before we go on to enquire from what quarter an interference might

arise, this recognition of love as one of the foundations of civilization

may serve as an excuse for a digression which will enable us to fill in

a gap which we left in an earlier discussion. We said there that man’s

discovery  that  sexual  (genital)  love  afforded  him  the  strongest

experiences of satisfaction, and in fact provided him with the prototype

of all happiness, must have suggested to him that he should continue

to seek the satisfaction of happiness in his life along the path of sexual

relations and that he should make genital erotism the central point of

his  life.  We  went  on  to  say  that  in  doing  so  he  made  himself

dependent  in  a  most  dangerous  way  on  a  portion  of  the  external

world,  namely,  his  chosen  love-object,  and  exposed  himself  to

extreme suffering if he should be rejected by that object or should lose

it through unfaithfulness or death. For that reason the wise men of

every age have warned us most emphatically against this way of life;

but in spite of this it has not lost its attraction for a great number of

people.

   A small minority are enabled by their constitution to find happiness,

in spite of everything, along the path of love. But far-reaching mental

changes in the function of love are necessary before this can happen.These  people  make  themselves  independent  of  their  object’s

acquiescence by displacing what they mainly value from being loved

on to loving; they protect themselves against the loss of the object by

directing their love, not to single objects but to all men alike; and they

avoid the uncertainties and disappointments of genital love by turning

away  from  its  sexual  aims  and  transforming  the  instinct  into  an

impulse with an inhibited aim. What they bring about in themselves in

this way is a state of evenly suspended, steadfast, affectionate feeling,

which  has  little  external  resemblance  any  more  to  the  stormy

agitations  of  genital  love,  from  which  it  is  nevertheless  derived.

Perhaps St. Francis of Assisi went furthest in thus exploiting love for

the benefit of an inner feeling of happiness. Moreover, what we have

recognized as one of the techniques for fulfilling the pleasure principle

has often been brought into connection with religion; this connection

may lie in the remote regions where the distinction between the ego

and objects or between objects themselves is neglected. According to

one ethical view, whose deeper motivation will become clear to us

presently, this readiness for a universal love of mankind and the world

represents the highest standpoint which man can reach. Even at this

early stage of the discussion I should like to bring forward my two

main objections to this view. A love that does not discriminate seems

to me to forfeit a part of its own value, by doing an injustice to its

object; and secondly, not all men are worthy of love.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4497

 

   The love which founded the family continues to operate in civilization

both in its original form, in which it does not renounce direct sexual

satisfaction,  and  in  its  modified  form  as  aim-inhibited  affection.  In

each,  it  continues  to  carry  on  its  function  of  binding  together

considerable numbers of people, and it does so in a more intensive

fashion than can be effected through the interest of work in common.

The  careless  way  in  which  language  uses  the  word  ‘love’  has  its

genetic  justification.  People  give  the  name  ‘love’  to  the  relation

between a man and a woman whose genital needs have led them tofound  a  family;  but  they  also  give  the  name  ‘love’  to  the  positive

feelings between parents and children, and between the brothers and

sisters of a family, although we are obliged to describe this as ‘aim-

inhibited  love’  or  ‘affection’.  Love  with  an  inhibited  aim  was  in  fact

originally fully sensual love, and it is so still in man’s unconscious.

Both - fully sensual love and aim-inhibited love - extend outside the

family and create new bonds with people who before were strangers.

Genital love leads to the formation of new families, and aim-inhibited

love to ‘friendships’ which become valuable from a cultural standpoint

because they escape some of the limitations of genital love, as, for

instance,  its  exclusiveness.  But  in  the  course  of  development  the

relation of love to civilization loses its unambiguity. On the one hand

love comes into opposition to the interests of civilization; on the other,

civilization threatens love with substantial restrictions.

   This rift between them seems unavoidable. The reason for it is not

immediately  recognizable.  It  expresses  itself  at  first  as  a  conflict

between the family and the larger community to which the individual

belongs. We have already perceived that one of the main endeavours

of  civilization  is  to  bring  people  together  into  large  unities.  But  the

family will not give the individual up. The more closely the members of

a family are attached to one another, the more often do they tend to

cut themselves off from others, and the more difficult is it for them to

enter into the wider circle of life. The mode of life in common which is

phylogenetically  the  older,  and  which  is  the  only  one  that  exists  in

childhood, will not let itself be superseded by the cultural mode of life

which  has  been  acquired  later.  Detaching  himself  from  his  family

becomes  a  task  that  faces  every  young  person,  and  society  often

helps him in the solution of it by means of puberty and initiation rites.

We get the impression that these are difficulties which are inherent in

all psychical - and, indeed, at bottom, in all organic - development.

   Furthermore, women soon come into opposition to civilization and

display their retarding and restraining influence - those very women

who, in the beginning, laid the foundations of civilization by the claims

of  their  love.  Women  represent  the  interests  of  the  family  and  of

sexual  life.  The  work  of  civilization  has  become  increasingly  the

business of men, it confronts them with ever more difficult tasks and

compels them to carry out instinctual sublimations of which womenare little capable. Since a man does not have unlimited quantities of

psychical energy at his disposal, he has to accomplish his tasks by

making an expedient distribution of his libido. What he employs for

cultural aims he to a great extent withdraws from women and sexual

life. His constant association with men, and his dependence on his

relations with them, even estrange him from his duties as a husband

and father. Thus the woman finds herself forced into the background

by the claims of civilization and she adopts a hostile attitude towards

it.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4498

 

   The tendency on the part of civilization to restrict sexual life is no

less clear than its other tendency to expand the cultural unit. Its first,

totemic,  phase  already  brings  with  it  the  prohibition  against  an

incestuous  choice  of  object,  and  this  is  perhaps  the  most  drastic

mutilation which man’s erotic life has in all time experienced. Taboos,

laws and customs impose further restrictions, which affect both men

and  women.  Not  all  civilizations  go  equally  far  in  this;  and  the

economic structure of the society also influences the amount of sexual

freedom  that  remains.  Here,  as  we  already  know,  civilization  is

obeying the laws of economic necessity, since a large amount of the

psychical  energy  which  it  uses  for  its  own  purposes  has  to  be

withdrawn from sexuality. In this respect civilization behaves towards

sexuality as a people or a stratum of its population does which has

subjected  another  one  to  its  exploitation.  Fear  of  a  revolt  by  the

suppressed elements drives it to stricter precautionary measures. A

high-water  mark  in  such  a  development  has  been  reached  in  our

Western  European  civilization.  A  cultural  community  is  perfectly

justified, psychologically, in starting by proscribing manifestations of

the sexual life of children, for there would be no prospect of curbing

the sexual lusts of adults if the ground had not been prepared for it in

childhood. But such a community cannot in any way be justified in

going to the length of actually disavowing such easily demonstrable,

and,  indeed,  striking  phenomena.  As  regards  the  sexually  matureindividual, the choice of an object is restricted to the opposite sex, and

most  extra-genital  satisfactions  are  forbidden  as  perversions.  The

requirement, demonstrated in these prohibitions, that there shall be a

single kind of sexual life for everyone, disregards the dissimilarities,

whether  innate  or  acquired,  in  the  sexual  constitution  of  human

beings; it cuts off a fair number of them from sexual enjoyment, and so

becomes the source of serious injustice. The result of such restrictive

measures  might  be  that  in  people  who  are  normal  -  who  are  not

prevented  by  their  constitution  -  the  whole  of  their  sexual  interests

would  flow  without  loss  into  the  channels  that  are  left  open.  But

heterosexual genital love, which has remained exempt from outlawry,

is itself restricted by further limitations, in the shape of insistence upon

legitimacy and monogamy. Present-day civilization makes it plain that

it  will  only  permit  sexual  relationships  on  the  basis  of  a  solitary,

indissoluble bond between one man and one woman, and that it does

not like sexuality as a source of pleasure in its own right and is only

prepared to tolerate it because there is so far no substitute for it as a

means of propagating the human race.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4499

 

   This, of course, is an extreme picture. Everybody knows that it has

proved impossible to put it into execution, even for quite short periods.

Only  the  weaklings  have  submitted  to  such  an  extensive

encroachment upon their sexual freedom, and stronger natures have

only  done  so  subject  to  a  compensatory  condition,  which  will  be

mentioned later. Civilized society has found itself obliged to pass over

in silence many transgressions which, according to its own prescripts,

it ought to have punished. But we must not err on the other side and

assume that, because it does not achieve all its aims, such an attitude

on the part of society is entirely innocuous. The sexual life of civilized

man  is  notwithstanding  severely  impaired;  it  sometimes  gives  the

impression of being in process of involution as a function, just as our

teeth  and  hair  seem  to  be  as  organs.  One  is  probably  justified  in

assuming that its importance as a source of feelings of happiness, andtherefore in the fulfilment of our aim in life, has sensibly diminished.¹

Sometimes one seems to perceive that it is not only the pressure of

civilization  but  something  in  the  nature  of  the  function  itself  which

denies us full satisfaction and urges us along other paths. This may be

wrong; it is hard to decide.²

 

   ¹ Among the works of that sensitive English writer, John Galsworthy, who enjoys general

recognition to-day, there is a short story of which I early formed a high opinion. It is called ‘The
Apple-Tree’, and it brings home to us how the life of present-day civilized people leaves no
room for the simple natural love of two human beings.

   ² The view expressed above is supported by the following considerations. Man is an animal

organism with (like others) an unmistakably bisexual disposition. The individual corresponds
to a fusion of two symmetrical halves, of which, according to some investigators, one is purely
male and the other female. It is equally possible that each half was originally hermaphrodite.
Sex is a biological fact which, although it is of extraordinary importance in mental life, is hard
to grasp psychologically. We are accustomed to say that every human being displays both
male and female instinctual impulses, needs and attributes; but though anatomy, it is true, can
point out the characteristic of maleness and femaleness, psychology cannot. For psychology
the contrast between the sexes fades away into one between activity and passivity, in which
we far too readily identify activity with maleness and passivity with femaleness, a view which
is by no means universally confirmed in the animal kingdom. The theory of bisexuality is still
surrounded by many obscurities and we cannot but feel it as a serious impediment in psycho-
analysis that it has not yet found any link with the theory of the instincts. However this may be,
if we assume it as a fact that each individual seeks to satisfy both male and female wishes in
his sexual life, we are prepared for the possibility that those demands are not fulfilled by the
same object, and that they interfere with each other unless they can be kept apart and each
impulse guided into a particular channel that is suited to it. Another difficulty arises from the
circumstance that there is so often associated with the erotic relationship, over and above its
own sadistic components, a quota of plain inclination to aggression. The love-object will not
always view these complications with the degree of understanding and tolerance shown by
the peasant woman who complained that her husband did not love her any more, since he
had not beaten her for a week.
   The conjecture which goes deepest, however, is the one which takes its start from what I
have said above (p. 4495) in my footnote. It is to the effect that, with the assumption of an
erect posture by man and with the depreciation of his sense of smell, it was not only his anal
erotism which threatened to fall a victim to organic repression, but the whole of his sexuality;
so that since this, the sexual function has been accompanied by a repugnance which cannot
further be accounted for, and which prevents its complete satisfaction and forces it away from
the sexual aim into sublimations and libidinal displacements. I know that Bleuler (1913) once
pointed  to  the  existence  of  a  primary  repelling  attitude  like  this  towards  sexual  life.  All
neurotics, and many others besides, take exception to the fact that ‘inter urinas et faeces
nascimur’. The genitals, too, give rise to strong sensations of smell which many people cannot
tolerate and which spoil sexual intercourse for them. Thus we should find that the deepest
root of the sexual repression which advances along with civilization is the organic defence of
the new form of life achieved with man’s erect gait against his earlier animal existence. This
result of scientific research coincides in a remarkable way with commonplace prejudices that
have often made themselves heard. Nevertheless, these things are at present no more than
unconfirmed possibilities which have not been substantiated by science. Nor should we forgetthat, in spite of the undeniable depreciation of olfactory stimuli, there exist even in Europe
people among whom the strong genital odours which are so repellent to us are highly prized
as sexual stimulants and who refuse to give them up. (Cf. the collections of folklore obtained
from Iwan Bloch’s questionnaire on the sense of smell in sexual life published in different
volumes of Friedrich S. Krauss’s Anthropophyteia.)
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4500

 

                                            V

 

Psycho-analytic  work  has  shown  us  that  it  is  precisely  these

frustrations  of  sexual  life  which  people  known  as  neurotics  cannot

tolerate. The neurotic creates substitutive satisfactions for himself in

his symptoms, and these either cause him suffering in themselves or

become  sources  of  suffering  for  him  by  raising  difficulties  in  his

relations  with  his  environment  and  the  society  he  belongs  to.  The

latter fact is easy to understand; the former presents us with a new

problem.  But  civilization  demands  other  sacrifices  besides  that  of

sexual satisfaction.

   We have treated the difficulty of cultural development as a general

difficulty of development by tracing it to the inertia of the libido, to its

disinclination to give up an old position for a new one. We are saying

much  the  same  thing  when  we  derive  the  antithesis  between

civilization and sexuality from the circumstance that sexual love is a

relationship  between  two  individuals  in  which  a  third  can  only  be

superfluous  or  disturbing,  whereas  civilization  depends  on

relationships between a considerable number of individuals. When a

love-relationship is at its height there is no room left for any interest in

the environment; a pair of lovers are sufficient to themselves, and do

not even need the child they have in common to make them happy. In

no other case does Eros so clearly betray the core of his being, his

purpose  of  making  one  out  of  more  than  one;  but  when  he  has

achieved this in the proverbial way through the love of two human

beings, he refuses to go further.

   So far, we can quite well imagine a cultural community consisting of

double individuals like this, who, libidinally satisfied in themselves, are

connected with one another through the bonds of common work andcommon  interests.  If  this  were  so,  civilization  would  not  have  to

withdraw any energy from sexuality. But this desirable state of things

does not, and never did, exist. Reality shows us that civilization is not

content with the ties we have so far allowed it. It aims at binding the

members  of  the  community  together  in  a  libidinal  way  as  well  and

employs  every  means  to  that  end.  It  favours  every  path  by  which

strong identifications can be established between the members of the

community,  and  it  summons  up  aim-inhibited  libido  on  the  largest

scale  so  as  to  strengthen  the  communal  bond  by  relations  of

friendship. In order for these aims to be fulfilled, a restriction upon

sexual life is unavoidable. But we are unable to understand what the

necessity is which forces civilization along this path and which causes

its  antagonism  to  sexuality.  There  must  be  some  disturbing  factor

which we have not yet discovered.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4501

 

   The clue may be supplied by one of the ideal demands, as we have

called them, of civilized society. It runs: ‘Thou shalt love thy neighbour

as thyself.’ It is known throughout the world and is undoubtedly older

than Christianity, which puts it forward as its proudest claim. Yet it is

certainly not very old; even in historical times it was still strange to

mankind. Let us adopt a naïve attitude towards it, as though we were

hearing it for the first time; we shall be unable then to suppress a

feeling  of  surprise  and  bewilderment.  Why  should  we  do  it?  What

good will it do us? But, above all, how shall we achieve it? How can it

be possible? My love is something valuable to me which I ought not to

throw  away  without  reflection.  It  imposes  duties  on  me  for  whose

fulfilment I must be ready to make sacrifices. If I love someone, he

must deserve it in some way. (I leave out of account the use he may

be to me, and also his possible significance for me as a sexual object,

for  neither  of  these  two  kinds  of  relationship  comes  into  question

where the precept to love my neighbour is concerned.) He deserves it

if he is so like me in important ways that I can love myself in him; and

he deserves it if he is so much more perfect than myself that I canlove my ideal of my own self in him. Again, I have to love him if he is

my friend’s son, since the pain my friend would feel if any harm came

to him would be my pain too - I should have to share it. But if he is a

stranger to me and if he cannot attract me by any worth of his own or

any significance that he may already have acquired for my emotional

life, it will be hard for me to love him. Indeed, I should be wrong to do

so,  for  my  love  is  valued  by  all  my  own  people  as  a  sign  of  my

preferring them, and it is an injustice to them if I put a stranger on a

par with them. But if I am to love him (with this universal love) merely

because he, too, is an inhabitant of this earth, like an insect, an earth-

worm or a grass-snake, then I fear that only a small modicum of my

love will fall to his share - not by any possibility as much as, by the

judgement of my reason, I am entitled to retain for myself. What is the

point of a precept enunciated with so much solemnity if its fulfilment

cannot be recommended as reasonable?

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4502

 

   On closer inspection, I find still further difficulties. Not merely is this

stranger in general unworthy of my love; I must honestly confess that

he has more claim to my hostility and even my hatred. He seems not

to have the least trace of love for me and shows me not the slightest

consideration. If it will do him any good he has no hesitation in injuring

me, nor does he ask himself whether the amount of advantage he

gains bears any proportion to the extent of the harm he does to me.

Indeed, he need not even obtain an advantage; if he can satisfy any

sort of desire by it, he thinks nothing of jeering at me, insulting me,

slandering me and showing his superior power; and the more secure

he feels and the more helpless I am, the more certainly I can expect

him to behave like this to me. If he behaves differently, if he shows me

consideration and forbearance as a stranger, I am ready to treat him

in  the  same  way,  in  any  case  and  quite  apart  from  any  precept.

Indeed, if this grandiose commandment had run ‘Love thy neighbour

as thy neighbour loves thee’, I should not take exception to it. And

there  is  a  second  commandment,  which  seems  to  me  even  moreincomprehensible  and  arouses  still  stronger  opposition  in  me.  It  is

‘Love thine enemies’. If I think it over, however, I see that I am wrong

in treating it as a greater imposition. At bottom it is the same thing.¹

 

   ¹ A great imaginative writer may permit himself to give expression - jokingly, at all events -

to psychological truths that are severely proscribed. Thus Heine confesses: ‘Mine is a most
peaceable disposition. My wishes are: a humble cottage with a thatched roof, but a good bed,
good food, the freshest milk and butter, flowers before my window, and a few fine trees before
my door; and if God wants to make my happiness complete, he will grant me the joy of seeing
some six or seven of my enemies hanging from those trees. Before their death I shall, moved
in my heart, forgive them all the wrong they did me in their lifetime. One must, it is true, forgive
one’s enemies - but not before they have been hanged.’ (Gedanken und Einfälle.)
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4503

 

      I  think  I  can  now  hear  a  dignified  voice  admonishing  me:  ‘It  is

precisely because your neighbour is not worthy of love, and is on the

contrary  your  enemy,  that  you  should  love  him  as  yourself.’  I  then

understand that the case is one like that of Credo quia absurdum.

   Now it is very probable that my neighbour, when he is enjoined to

love me as himself, will answer exactly as I have done and will repel

me for the same reasons. I hope he will not have the same objective

grounds for doing so, but he will have the same idea as I have. Even

so, the behaviour of human beings shows differences, which ethics,

disregarding the fact that such differences are determined, classifies

as ‘good’ or ‘bad’. So long as these undeniable differences have not

been removed, obedience to high ethical demands entails damage to

the aims of civilization, for it puts a positive premium on being bad.

One  is  irresistibly  reminded  of  an  incident  in  the  French  Chamber

when  capital  punishment  was  being  debated.  A  member  had  been

passionately  supporting  its  abolition  and  his  speech  was  being

received with tumultuous applause, when a voice from the hall called

out: ‘Que messieurs les assassins commencent!’

   The element of truth behind all this, which people are so ready to

disavow, is that men are not gentle creatures who want to be loved,

and who at the most can defend themselves if they are attacked; they

are, on the contrary, creatures among whose instinctual endowmentsis to be reckoned a powerful share of aggressiveness. As a result,

their neighbour is for them not only a potential helper or sexual object,

but also someone who tempts them to satisfy their aggressiveness on

him, to exploit his capacity for work without compensation, to use him

sexually without his consent, to seize his possessions, to humiliate

him, to cause him pain, to torture and to kill him. Homo homini lupus.

Who, in the face of all his experience of life and of history, will have

the  courage  to  dispute  this  assertion?  As  a  rule  this  cruel

aggressiveness waits for some provocation or puts itself at the service

of some other purpose, whose goal might also have been reached by

milder measures. In circumstances that are favourable to it, when the

mental counter-forces which ordinarily inhibit it are out of action, it also

manifests itself spontaneously and reveals man as a savage beast to

whom consideration towards his own kind is something alien. Anyone

who calls to mind the atrocities committed during the racial migrations

or  the  invasions  of  the  Huns,  or  by  the  people  known  as  Mongols

under Jenghiz Khan and Tamerlane, or at the capture of Jerusalem by

the pious Crusaders, or even, indeed, the horrors of the recent World

War - anyone who calls these things to mind will have to bow humbly

before the truth of this view.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4504

 

   The existence of this inclination to aggression, which we can detect

in ourselves and justly assume to be present in others, is the factor

which  disturbs  our  relations  with  our  neighbour  and  which  forces

civilization  into  such  a  high  expenditure.  In  consequence  of  this

primary  mutual  hostility  of  human  beings,  civilized  society  is

perpetually  threatened  with  disintegration.  The  interest  of  work  in

common would not hold it together; instinctual passions are stronger

than reasonable interests. Civilization has to use its utmost efforts in

order  to  set  limits  to  man’s  aggressive  instincts  and  to  hold  the

manifestations  of  them  in  check  by  psychical  reaction-formations.

Hence, therefore, the use of methods intended to incite people into

identifications  and  aim-inhibited  relationships  of  love,  hence  therestriction upon sexual life, and hence too the ideal’s commandment

to love one’s neighbour as oneself - a commandment which is really

justified by the fact that nothing else runs so strongly counter to the

original nature of man. In spite of every effort, these endeavours of

civilization have not so far achieved very much. It hopes to prevent the

crudest excesses of brutal violence by itself assuming the right to use

violence against criminals, but the law is not able to lay hold of the

more cautious and refined manifestations of human aggressiveness

The time comes when each one of us has to give up as illusions the

expectations which, in his youth, he pinned upon his fellow men, and

when he may learn how much difficulty and pain has been added to

his life by their ill-will. At the same time, it would be unfair to reproach

civilization with trying to eliminate strife and competition from human

activity. These things are undoubtedly indispensable. But opposition is

not necessarily enmity; it is merely misused and made an occasion for

enmity.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4505

 

      The  communists  believe  that  they  have  found  the  path  to

deliverance from our evils. According to them, man is wholly good and

is well-disposed to his neighbour; but the institution of private property

has corrupted his nature. The ownership of private wealth gives the

individual power, and with it the temptation to ill-treat his neighbour;

while the man who is excluded from possession is bound to rebel in

hostility against his oppressor. If private property were abolished, all

wealth  held  in  common,  and  everyone  allowed  to  share  in  the

enjoyment of it, ill-will and hostility would disappear among men. Since

everyone’s needs would be satisfied, no one would have any reason

to regard another as his enemy; all would willingly undertake the work

that was necessary. I have no concern with any economic criticisms of

the communist system; I cannot enquire into whether the abolition of

private  property  is  expedient  or  advantageous.¹  But  I  am  able  to

recognize that the psychological premisses on which the system is

based  are  an  untenable  illusion.  In  abolishing  private  property  wedeprive  the  human  love  of  aggression  of  one  of  its  instruments,

certainly a strong one, though certainly not the strongest; but we have

in no way altered the differences in power and influence which are

misused  by  aggressiveness,  nor  have  we  altered  anything  in  its

nature. Aggressiveness was not created by property. It reigned almost

without limit in primitive times, when property was still very scanty, and

it already shows itself in the nursery almost before property has given

up its primal, anal form; it forms the basis of every relation of affection

and  love  among  people  (with  the  single  exception,  perhaps,  of  the

mother’s relation to her male child). If we do away with personal rights

over  material  wealth,  there  still  remains  prerogative  in  the  field  of

sexual  relationships,  which  is  bound  to  become  the  source  of  the

strongest  dislike  and  the  most  violent  hostility  among  men  who  in

other  respects  are  on  an  equal  footing.  If  we  were  to  remove  this

factor,  too,  by  allowing  complete  freedom  of  sexual  life  and  thus

abolishing the family, the germ-cell of civilization, we cannot, it is true,

easily foresee what new paths the development of civilization could

take; but one thing we can expect, and that is that this indestructible

feature of human nature will follow it there.

 

   ¹ Anyone who has tasted the miseries of poverty in his own youth and has experienced the

indifference and arrogance of the well-to-do, should be safe from the suspicion of having no
understanding or good will towards endeavours to fight against the inequality of wealth among
men and all that it leads to. To be sure, if an attempt is made to base this fight upon an
abstract demand, in the name of justice, for equality for all men, there is a very obvious
objection to be made - that nature, by endowing individuals with extremely unequal physical
attributes and mental capacities, has introduced injustices against which there is no remedy.
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4506

 

      It  is  clearly  not  easy  for  men  to  give  up  the  satisfaction  of  this

inclination to aggression. They do not feel comfortable without it. The

advantage  which  a  comparatively  small  cultural  group  offers  of

allowing this instinct an outlet in the form of hostility against intruders

is  not  to  be  despised.  It  is  always  possible  to  bind  together  a

considerable  number  of  people  in  love,  so  long  as  there  are  other

people left over to receive the manifestations of their aggressiveness.I once discussed the phenomenon that it is precisely communities with

adjoining territories, and related to each other in other ways as well,

who are engaged in constant feuds and in ridiculing each other - like

the Spaniards and Portuguese, for instance, the North Germans and

South  Germans,  the  English  and  Scotch,  and  so  on.  I  gave  this

phenomenon  the  name  of  ‘the  narcissism  of  minor  differences’,  a

name which does not do much to explain it. We can now see that it is

a convenient and relatively harmless satisfaction of the inclination to

aggression, by means of which cohesion between the members of the

community  is  made  easier.  In  this  respect  the  Jewish  people,

scattered  everywhere,  have  rendered  most  useful  services  to  the

civilizations  of  the  countries  that  have  been  their  hosts;  but

unfortunately all the massacres of the Jews in the Middle Ages did not

suffice  to  make  that  period  more  peaceful  and  secure  for  their

Christian fellows. When once the Apostle Paul had posited universal

love  between  men  as  the  foundation  of  his  Christian  community,

extreme intolerance on the part of Christendom towards those who

remained  outside  it  became  the  inevitable  consequence.  To  the

Romans, who had not founded their communal life as a State upon

love, religious intolerance was something foreign, although with them

religion was a concern of the State and the State was permeated by

religion. Neither was it an unaccountable chance that the dream of a

Germanic world-dominion called for anti-Semitism as its complement;

and it is intelligible that the attempt to establish a new, communist

civilization  in  Russia  should  find  its  psychological  support  in  the

persecution of the bourgeois. One only wonders, with concern, what

the Soviets will do after they have wiped out their bourgeois.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4507

 

      If  civilization  imposes  such  great  sacrifices  not  only  on  man’s

sexuality but on his aggressivity, we can understand better why it is

hard for him to be happy in that civilization. In fact, primitive man was

better off in knowing no restrictions of instinct. To counterbalance this,

his prospects of enjoying this happiness for any length of time werevery  slender.  Civilized  man  has  exchanged  a  portion  of  his

possibilities of happiness for a portion of security. We must not forget,

however,  that  in  the  primal  family  only  the  head  of  it  enjoyed  this

instinctual freedom; the rest lived in slavish suppression. In that primal

period of civilization, the contrast between a minority who enjoyed the

advantages of civilization and a majority who were robbed of those

advantages  was,  therefore,  carried  to  extremes.  As  regards  the

primitive  peoples  who  exist  to-day,  careful  researches  have  shown

that their instinctual life is by no means to be envied for its freedom. It

is  subject  to  restrictions  of  a  different  kind  but  perhaps  of  greater

severity than those attaching to modern civilized man.

   When we justly find fault with the present state of our civilization for

so inadequately fulfilling our demands for a plan of life that shall make

us happy, and for allowing the existence of so much suffering which

could probably be avoided - when, with unsparing criticism, we try to

uncover the roots of its imperfection, we are undoubtedly exercising a

proper right and are not showing ourselves enemies of civilization. We

may  expect  gradually  to  carry  though  such  alterations  in  our

civilization  as  will  better  satisfy  our  needs  and  will  escape  our

criticisms. But perhaps we may also familiarize ourselves with the idea

that there are difficulties attaching to the nature of civilization which

will not yield to any attempt at reform. Over and above the tasks of

restricting the instincts, which we are prepared for, there forces itself

on our notice the danger of a state of things which might be termed

‘the psychological poverty of groups’. This danger is most threatening

where  the  bonds  of  a  society  are  chiefly  constituted  by  the

identification of its members with one another, while individuals of the

leader type do not acquire the importance that should fall to them in

the formation of a group.¹ The present cultural state of America would

give  us  a  good  opportunity  for  studying  the  damage  to  civilization

which is thus to be feared. But I shall avoid the temptation of entering

upon  a  critique  of  American  civilization;  I  do  not  wish  to  give  an

impression of wanting myself to employ American methods.

 

   ¹ See Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (1921c).

                           Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4508

 

                                            VI

 

In none of my previous writings have I had so strong a feeling as now

that what I am describing is common knowledge and that I am using

up paper and ink and, in due course, the compositor’s and printer’s

work and material in order to expound things which are, in fact, self-

evident. For that reason I should be glad to seize the point if it were to

appear  that  the  recognition  of  a  special,  independent  aggressive

instinct  means  an  alteration  of  the  psycho-analytic  theory  of  the

instincts.

   We shall see, however, that this is not so and that it is merely a

matter of bringing into sharper focus a turn of thought arrived at long

ago and of following out its consequences. Of all the slowly developed

parts of analytic theory, the theory of the instincts is the one that has

felt  its  way  the  most  painfully  forward.  And  yet  that  theory  was  so

indispensable to the whole structure that something had to be put in

its place. In what was at first my utter perplexity, I took as my starting-

point a saying of the poet-philosopher, Schiller, that ‘hunger and love

are what moves the world’. Hunger could be taken to represent the

instincts which aim at preserving the individual; while love strives after

objects, and its chief function, favoured in every way by nature, is the

preservation  of  the  species.  Thus,  to  begin  with,  ego-instincts  and

object-instincts confronted each other. It was to denote the energy of

the latter and only the latter instinct that I introduced the term ‘libido’.

Thus the antithesis was between the ego-instincts and the ‘libidinal’

instincts of love (in its widest sense) which were directed to an object.

One of these object-instincts, the sadistic instinct, stood out from the

rest,  it  is  true,  in  that  its  aim  was  so  very  far  from  being  loving.

Moreover  it  was  obviously  in  some  respects  attached  to  the  ego-

instincts: it could not hide its close affinity with instincts of mastery

which  have  no  libidinal  purpose.  But  these  discrepancies  were  got

over; after all, sadism was clearly a part of sexual life, in the activities

of  which  affection  could  be  replaced  by  cruelty.  Neurosis  was

regarded as the outcome of a struggle between the interest of self-preservation and the demands of the libido, a struggle in which the

ego  had  been  victorious  but  at  the  price  of  severe  sufferings  and

renunciations.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4509

 

   Every analyst will admit that even to-day this view has not the sound

of  a  long-discarded  error.  Nevertheless,  alterations  in  it  became

essential,  as  our  enquiries  advanced  from  the  repressed  to  the

repressing forces, from the object-instincts to the ego. The decisive

step forward was the introduction of the concept of narcissism - that is

to say, the discovery that the ego itself is cathected with libido, that the

ego, indeed, is the libido’s original home, and remains to some extent

its  headquarters.  This  narcissistic  libido  turns  towards  objects,  and

thus becomes object-libido; and it can change back into narcissistic

libido once more. The concept of narcissism made it possible to obtain

an analytic understanding of the traumatic neuroses and of many of

the  affections  bordering  on  the  psychoses,  as  well  as  of  the  latter

themselves. It was not necessary to give up our interpretation of the

transference neuroses as attempts made by the ego to defend itself

against sexuality; but the concept of libido was endangered. Since the

ego-instincts, too, were libidinal, it seemed for a time inevitable that

we should make libido coincide with instinctual energy in general, as

C.  G.  Jung  had  already  advocated  earlier.  Nevertheless,  there  still

remained in me a kind of conviction, for which I was not as yet able to

find reasons, that the instincts could not all be of the same kind. My

next step was taken in Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920g), when

the compulsion to repeat and the conservative character of instinctual

life  first  attracted  my  attention.  Starting  from  speculations  on  the

beginning of life and from biological parallels, I drew the conclusion

that, besides the instinct to preserve living substance and to join it into

ever larger units,¹ there must exist another, contrary instinct seeking to

dissolve  those  units  and  to  bring  them  back  to  their  primaeval,

inorganic state. That is to say, as well as Eros there was an instinct of

death. The phenomena of life could be explained from the concurrentor mutually opposing action of these two instincts. It was not easy,

however, to demonstrate the activities of this supposed death instinct.

The manifestations of Eros were conspicuous and noisy enough. It

might be assumed that the death instinct operated silently within the

organism towards its dissolution, but that, of course, was no proof. A

more fruitful idea was that a portion of the instinct is diverted towards

the external world and comes to light as an instinct of aggressiveness

and destructiveness. In this way the instinct itself could be pressed

into the service of Eros, in that the organism was destroying some

other thing, whether animate or inanimate, instead of destroying its

own self. Conversely, any restriction of this aggressiveness directed

outwards would be bound to increase the self-destruction, which is in

any  case  proceeding.  At  the  same  time  one  can  suspect  from  this

example that the two kinds of instinct seldom - perhaps never - appear

in isolation from each other, but are alloyed with each other in varying

and very different proportions and so become unrecognizable to our

judgement. In sadism, long since known to us as a component instinct

of sexuality, we should have before us a particularly strong alloy of

this kind between trends of love and the destructive instinct; while its

counterpart, masochism, would be a union between destructiveness

directed  inwards  and  sexuality  -  a  union  which  makes  what  is

otherwise an imperceptible trend into a conspicuous and tangible one.

 

    ¹ The  opposition  which  thus  emerges  between  the  ceaseless  trend  by  Eros  towards

extension and the general conservative nature of the instincts is striking, and it may become
the starting-point for the study of further problems.
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4510

 

      The  assumption  of  the  existence  of  an  instinct  of  death  or

destruction  has  met  with  resistance  even  in  analytic  circles;  I  am

aware that there is a frequent inclination rather to ascribe whatever is

dangerous and hostile in love to an original bipolarity in its own nature.

To begin with it was only tentatively that I put forward the views I have

developed here, but in the course of time they have gained such a

hold upon me that I can no longer think in any other way. To my mind,they are far more serviceable from a theoretical standpoint than any

other  possible  ones;  they  provide  that  simplification,  without  either

ignoring or doing violence to the facts, for which we strive in scientific

work. I know that in sadism and masochism we have always seen

before us manifestations of the destructive instinct (directed outwards

and  inwards),  strongly  alloyed  with  erotism;  but  I  can  no  longer

understand how we can have overlooked the ubiquity of non-erotic

aggressivity and destructiveness and can have failed to give it its due

place in our interpretation of life. (The desire for destruction when it is

directed inwards mostly eludes our perception, of course, unless it is

tinged with erotism.) I remember my own defensive attitude when the

idea  of  an  instinct  of  destruction  first  emerged  in  psycho-analytic

literature, and how long it took before I became receptive to it. That

others  should  have  shown,  and  still  show,  the  same  attitude  of

rejection surprises me less. For ‘little children do not like it’ when there

is talk of the inborn human inclination to ‘badness’, to aggressiveness

and destructiveness, and so to cruelty as well. God has made them in

the image of His own perfection; nobody wants to be reminded how

hard it is to reconcile the undeniable existence of evil - despite the

protestations of Christian Science - with His all-powerfulness or His

all-goodness. The Devil would be the best way out as an excuse for

God; in that way he would be playing the same part as an agent of

economic discharge as the Jew does in the world of the Aryan ideal.

But even so, one can hold God responsible for the existence of the

Devil just as well as for the existence of the wickedness which the

Devil embodies. In view of these difficulties, each of us will be well

advised, on some suitable occasion, to make a low bow to the deeply

moral nature of mankind; it will help us to be generally popular and

much will be forgiven us for it.¹

 

   ¹ In Goethe’s Mephistopheles we have a quite exceptionally convincing identification of the

principle of evil with the destructive instinct:
 
                                                                Denn alles, was entsteht,
                                                Ist wert, dass es zu Grunde geht . . .
                                                So ist dann alles, was Ihr Sünde,
                                                Zerstörung, kurz das Böse nennt,
                                                Mein eigentliches Element.
    The Devil himself names as his adversary, not what is holy and good, but Nature’s power to
create, to multiply life - that is, Eros:
 
                                                Der Luft, dem Wasser, wie der Erden
                                                Entwinden tausend Keime sich,
                                                Im Trocknen, Feuchten, Warmen, Kalten!
                                                Hätt’ ich mir nicht die Flamme vorbehalten,
                                                Ich hätte nichts Aparts für mich.
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4511

 

      The  name  ‘libido’  can  once  more  be  used  to  denote  the

manifestations of the power of Eros in order to distinguish them from

the energy of the death instinct.¹ It must be confessed that we have

much greater difficulty in grasping that instinct; we can only suspect it,

as  it  were,  as  something  in  the  background  behind  Eros,  and  it

escapes detection unless its presence is betrayed by its being alloyed

with Eros. It is in sadism, where the death instinct twists the erotic aim

in its own sense and yet at the same time fully satisfies the erotic

urge, that we succeed in obtaining the clearest insight into its nature

and its relation to Eros. But even where it emerges without any sexual

purpose,  in  the  blindest  fury  of  destructiveness,  we  cannot  fail  to

recognize that the satisfaction of the instinct is accompanied by an

extraordinarily  high  degree  of  narcissistic  enjoyment,  owing  to  its

presenting  the  ego  with  a  fulfilment  of  the  latter’s  old  wishes  for

omnipotence. The instinct of destruction, moderated and tamed, and,

as  it  were,  inhibited  in  its  aim,  must,  when  it  is  directed  towards

objects, provide the ego with the satisfaction of its vital needs and with

control  over  nature.  Since  the  assumption  of  the  existence  of  the

instinct is mainly based on theoretical grounds, we must also admit

that it is not entirely proof against theoretical objections. But this is

how things appear to us now, in the present state of our knowledge;

future research and reflection will no doubt bring further light which will

decide the matter.

 

   ¹ Our present point of view can be roughly expressed in the statement that libido has a

share in every instinctual manifestation, but that not everything in that manifestation is libido.
                           Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4512

 

      In  all  that  follows  I  adopt  the  standpoint,  therefore,  that  the

inclination  to  aggression  is  an  original,  self-subsisting  instinctual

disposition  in  man,  and  I  return  to  my  view  that  it  constitutes  the

greatest impediment to civilization. At one point in the course of this

enquiry I was led to the idea that civilization was a special process

which mankind undergoes, and I am still under the influence of that

idea. I may now add that civilization is a process in the service of

Eros,  whose  purpose  is  to  combine  single  human  individuals,  and

after  that  families,  then  races,  peoples  and  nations,  into  one  great

unity, the unity of mankind. Why this has to happen, we do not know;

the work of Eros is precisely this. 1 These collections of men are to be

libidinally bound to one another. Necessity alone, the advantages of

work  in  common,  will  not  hold  them  together.  But  man’s  natural

aggressive instinct, the hostility of each against all and of all against

each, opposes this programme of civilization. This aggressive instinct

is  the  derivative  and  the  main  representative  of  the  death  instinct

which  we  have  found  alongside  of  Eros  and  which  shares  world-

dominion with it. And now, I think, the meaning of the evolution of

civilization  is  no  longer  obscure  to  us.  It  must  present  the  struggle

between Eros and Death, between the instinct of life and the instinct of

destruction, as it works itself out in the human species. This struggle is

what all life essentially consists of, and the evolution of civilization may

therefore be simply described as the struggle for life of the human

species.¹ And it is this battle of the giants that our nurse-maids try to

appease with their lullaby about Heaven.

 

   ¹ And we may probably add more precisely, a struggle for life in the shape it was bound to

assume after a certain event which still remains to be discovered.
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4513

 

                                          VII

 Why  do  our  relatives,  the  animals,  not  exhibit  any  such  cultural

struggle? We do not know. Very probably some of them - the bees,

the  ants,  the  termites  -  strove  for  thousands  of  years  before  they

arrived at the State institutions, the distribution of functions and the

restrictions on the individual, for which we admire them to-day. It is a

mark of our present condition that we know from our own feelings that

we should not think ourselves happy in any of these animal States or

in any of the roles assigned in them to the individual. In the case of

other animal species it may be that a temporary balance has been

reached between the influences of their environment and the mutually

contending  instincts  within  them,  and  that  thus  a  cessation  of

development has come about. It may be that in primitive man a fresh

access of libido kindled a renewed burst of activity on the part of the

destructive instinct. There are a great many questions here to which

as yet there is no answer.

      Another  question  concerns  us  more  nearly.  What  means  does

civilization  employ  in  order  to  inhibit  the  aggressiveness  which

opposes it, to make it harmless, to get rid of it, perhaps? We have

already become acquainted with a few of these methods, but not yet

with the one that appears to be the most important. This we can study

in the history of the development of the individual. What happens in

him to render his desire for aggression innocuous? Something very

remarkable,  which  we  should  never  have  guessed  and  which  is

nevertheless  quite  obvious.  His  aggressiveness  is  introjected,

internalized; it is, in point of fact, sent back to where it came from -

that is, it is directed towards his own ego. There it is taken over by a

portion of the ego, which sets itself over against the rest of the ego as

super-ego, and which now, in the form of ‘conscience’, is ready to put

into action against the ego the same harsh aggressiveness that the

ego  would  have  liked  to  satisfy  upon  other,  extraneous  individuals.

The  tension  between  the  harsh  super-ego  and  the  ego  that  is

subjected to it, is called by us the sense of guilt; it expresses itself as

a need for punishment. Civilization, therefore, obtains mastery over

the  individual’s  dangerous  desire  for  aggression  by  weakening  and

disarming it and by setting up an agency within him to watch over it,

like a garrison in a conquered city.

                           Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4514

 

   As to the origin of the sense of guilt, the analyst has different views

from other psychologists; but even he does not find it easy to give an

account of it. To begin with, if we ask how a person comes to have a

sense of guilt, we arrive at an answer which cannot be disputed: a

person  feels  guilty  (devout  people  would  say  ‘sinful’)  when  he  has

done something which he knows to be ‘bad’. But then we notice how

little this answer tells us. Perhaps, after some hesitation, we shall add

that even when a person has not actually done the bad thing but has

only recognized in himself an intention to do it, he may regard himself

as guilty; and the question then arises of why the intention is regarded

as equal to the deed. Both cases, however, presuppose that one had

already recognized that what is bad is reprehensible, is something that

must not be carried out. How is this judgement arrived at? We may

reject  the  existence  of  an  original,  as  it  were  natural,  capacity  to

distinguish  good  from  bad.  What  is  bad  is  often  not  at  all  what  is

injurious  or  dangerous  to  the  ego;  on  the  contrary,  it  may  be

something  which  is  desirable  and  enjoyable  to  the  ego.  Here,

therefore, there is an extraneous influence at work, and it is this that

decides  what  is  to  be  called  good  or  bad.  Since  a  person’s  own

feelings would not have led him along this path, he must have had a

motive for submitting to this extraneous influence. Such a motive is

easily discovered in his helplessness and his dependence on other

people, and it can best be designated as fear of loss of love. If he

loses the love of another person upon whom he is dependent, he also

ceases to be protected from a variety of dangers. Above all, he is

exposed  to  the  danger  that  this  stronger  person  will  show  his

superiority in the form of punishment. At the beginning, therefore, what

is bad is whatever causes one to be threatened with loss of love. For

fear of that loss, one must avoid it. This, too, is the reason why it

makes little difference whether one has already done the bad thing or

only intends to do it. In either case the danger only sets in if and when

the  authority  discovers  it,  and  in  either  case  the  authority  would

behave in the same way.

                           Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4515

 

   This state of mind is called a ‘bad conscience’; but actually it does

not deserve this name, for at this stage the sense of guilt is clearly

only  a  fear  of  loss  of  love,  ‘social’  anxiety.  In  small  children  it  can

never be anything else, but in many adults, too, it has only changed to

the extent that the place of the father or the two parents is taken by

the larger human community. Consequently, such people habitually

allow  themselves  to  do  any  bad  thing  which  promises  them

enjoyment, so long as they are sure that the authority will not know

anything about it or cannot blame them for it; they are afraid only of

being found out.¹ Present-day society has to reckon in general with

this state of mind.

   A great change takes place only when the authority is internalized

through  the  establishment  of  a  super-ego.  The  phenomena  of

conscience then reach a higher stage. Actually, it is not until now that

we should speak of conscience or a sense of guilt.² At this point, too,

the fear of being found out comes to an end; the distinction, moreover,

between doing something bad and wishing to do it disappears entirely,

since nothing can be hidden from the super-ego, not even thoughts. It

is true that the seriousness of the situation from a real point of view

has passed away, for the new authority, the super-ego, has no motive

that we know of for ill-treating the ego, with which it is intimately bound

up; but genetic influence, which leads to the survival of what is past

and  has  been  surmounted,  makes  itself  felt  in  the  fact  that

fundamentally  things  remain  as  they  were  at  the  beginning.  The

super-ego torments the sinful ego with the same feeling of anxiety and

is on the watch for opportunities of getting it punished by the external

world.

 

   ¹ This reminds one of Rousseau’s famous mandarin.

   ² Everyone  of  discernment  will  understand  and  take  into  account  the  fact  that  in  this

summary  description  we  have  sharply  delimited  events  which  in  reality  occur  by  gradual
transitions, and that it is not merely a question of the existence of a super-ego but of its
relative strength and sphere of influence. All that has been said above about conscience and
guilt is, moreover, common knowledge and almost undisputed.
                           Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4516

 

      At  this  second  stage  of  development,  the  conscience  exhibits  a

peculiarity  which  was  absent  from  the  first  stage  and  which  is  no

longer easy to account for. For the more virtuous a man is, the more

severe and distrustful is its behaviour, so that ultimately it is precisely

those  people  who  have  carried  saintliness  furthest  who  reproach

themselves with the worst sinfulness. This means that virtue forfeits

some part of its promised reward; the docile and continent ego does

not enjoy the trust of its mentor, and strives in vain, it would seem, to

acquire it. The objection will at once be made that these difficulties are

artificial  ones,  and  it  will  be  said  that  a  stricter  and  more  vigilant

conscience is precisely the hallmark of a moral man. Moreover, when

saints call themselves sinners, they are not so wrong, considering the

temptations to instinctual satisfaction to which they are exposed in a

specially high degree - since, as is well known, temptations are merely

increased by constant frustration, whereas an occasional satisfaction

of them causes them to diminish, at least for the time being. The field

of ethics, which is so full of problems, presents us with another fact:

namely that ill-luck - that is, external frustration - so greatly enhances

the power of the conscience in the super-ego. As long as things to

well with a man, his conscience is lenient and lets the ego do all sorts

of  things;  but  when  misfortune  befalls  him,  he  searches  his  soul,

acknowledges  his  sinfulness,  heightens  the  demands  of  his

conscience,  imposes  abstinences  on  himself  and  punishes  himself

with penances.¹ Whole peoples have behaved in this may, and still do.

This,  however,  is  easily  explained  by  the  original  infantile  stage  of

conscience, which, as we see, is not given up after the introjection into

the  super-ego,  but  persists  alongside  of  it  and  behind  it.  Fate  is

regarded  as  a  substitute  for  the  parental  agency.  If  a  man  is

unfortunate it means that he is no longer loved by this highest power;

and, threatened by such a loss of love, he once more bows to the

parental representative in his super-ego - a representative whom, in

his  days  of  good  fortune,  he  was  ready  to  neglect.  This  becomes

especially  clear  where  Fate  is  looked  upon  in  the  strictly  religious

sense of being nothing else than an expression of the Divine Will. Thepeople of Israel had believed themselves to be the favourite child of

God, and when the great Father caused misfortune after misfortune to

rain down upon this people of his, they were never shaken in their

belief  in  his  relationship  to  them  or  questioned  his  power  or

righteousness. Instead, they produced the prophets, who held up their

sinfulness before them; and out of their sense of guilt they created the

over-strict  commandments  of  their  priestly  religion.  It  is  remarkable

how  differently  a  primitive  man  behaves.  If  he  has  met  with  a

misfortune, he does not throw the blame on himself but on his fetish,

which  has  obviously  not  done  its  duty,  and  he  gives  it  a  thrashing

instead of punishing himself.

 

   ¹ This enhancing of morality as a consequence of ill-luck has been illustrated by Mark

Twain in a delightful little story, The First Melon I ever Stole. This first melon happened to be
unripe. I heard Mark Twain tell the story himself in one of his public readings. After he had
given out the title, he stopped and asked himself as though he was in doubt: ‘Was it the first?’
With this, everything had been said. The first melon was evidently not the only one.
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4517

 

   Thus we know of two origins of the sense of guilt: one arising from

fear of an authority, and the other, later on, arising from fear of the

super-ego.  The  first  insists  upon  a  renunciation  of  instinctual

satisfactions;  the  second,  as  well  as  doing  this,  presses  for

punishment, since the continuance of the forbidden wishes cannot be

concealed from the super-ego. We have also learned how the severity

of the super-ego - the demands of conscience - is to be understood. It

is  simply  a  continuation  of  the  severity  of  the  external  authority,  to

which it has succeeded and which it has in part replaced. We now see

in what relationship the renunciation of instinct stands to the sense of

guilt. Originally, renunciation of instinct was the result of fear of an

external authority: one renounced one’s satisfactions in order not to

lose its love. If one has carried out this renunciation, one is, as it were,

quits with the authority and no sense of guilt should remain. But with

fear  of  the  super-ego  the  case  is  different.  Here,  instinctual

renunciation  is  not  enough,  for  the  wish  persists  and  cannot  be

concealed from the super-ego. Thus, in spite of the renunciation thathas been made, a sense of guilt comes about. This constitutes a great

economic disadvantage in the erection of a super-ego, or, as we may

put it, in the formation of a conscience. Instinctual renunciation now no

longer  has  a  completely  liberating  effect;  virtuous  continence  is  no

longer  rewarded  with  the  assurance  of  love.  A  threatened  external

unhappiness - loss of love and punishment on the part of the external

authority - has been exchanged for a permanent internal unhappiness,

for the tension of the sense of guilt.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4518

 

   These interrelations are so complicated and at the same time so

important that, at the risk of repeating myself, I shall approach them

from yet another angle. The chronological sequence, then, would be

as  follows.  First  comes  renunciation  of  instinct  owing  to  fear  of

aggression by the external authority. (This is, of course, what fear of

the  loss  of  love  amounts  to,  for  love  is  a  protection  against  this

punitive  aggression.)  After  that  comes  the  erection  of  an internal

authority, and renunciation of instinct owing to fear of it - owing to fear

of conscience. In this second situation bad intentions are equated with

bad  actions,  and  hence  come  a  sense  of  guilt  and  a  need  for

punishment.  The  aggressiveness  of  conscience  keeps  up  the

aggressiveness  of  the  authority.  So  far  things  have  no  doubt  been

made  clear;  but  where  does  this  leave  room  for  the  reinforcing

influence of misfortune (of renunciation imposed from without), and for

the extraordinary severity of conscience in the best and most tractable

people?  We  have  already  explained  both  these  peculiarities  of

conscience,  but  we  probably  still  have  an  impression  that  those

explanations  do  not  go  to  the  bottom  of  the  matter,  and  leave  a

residue  still  unexplained.  And  here  at  last  an  idea  comes  in  which

belongs entirely to psycho-analysis and which is foreign to people’s

ordinary way of thinking. This idea is of a sort which enables us to

understand why the subject-matter was bound to seem so confused

and obscure to us. For it tells us that conscience (or more correctly,

the anxiety which later becomes conscience) is indeed the cause ofinstinctual renunciation to begin with, but that later the relationship is

reversed.  Every  renunciation  of  instinct  now  becomes  a  dynamic

source  of  conscience  and  every  fresh  renunciation  increases  the

latter’s severity and intolerance. If we could only bring it better into

harmony with what we already know about the history of the origin of

conscience,  we  should  be  tempted  to  defend  the  paradoxical

statement that conscience is the result of instinctual renunciation, or

that  instinctual  renunciation  (imposed  on  us  from  without)  creates

conscience, which then demands further instinctual renunciation.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4519

 

      The  contradiction  between  this  statement  and  what  we  have

previously said about the genesis of conscience is in point of fact not

so very great, and we see a way of further reducing it. In order to

make our exposition easier, let us take as our example the aggressive

instinct, and let us assume that the renunciation in question is always

a renunciation of aggression. (This, of course, is only to be taken as a

temporary assumption.) The effect of instinctual renunciation on the

conscience then is that every piece of aggression whose satisfaction

the subject gives up is taken over by the super-ego and increases the

latter’s  aggressiveness  (against  the  ego).  This  does  not  harmonize

well with the view that the original aggressiveness of conscience is a

continuance of the severity of the external authority and therefore has

nothing to do with renunciation. But the discrepancy is removed if we

postulate a different derivation for this first instalment of the super-

ego’s aggressivity. A considerable amount of aggressiveness must be

developed in the child against the authority which prevents him from

having his first, but none the less his most important, satisfactions,

whatever the kind of instinctual deprivation that is demanded of him

may  be;  but  he  is  obliged  to  renounce  the  satisfaction  of  this

revengeful aggressiveness. He finds his way out of this economically

difficult situation with the help of familiar mechanisms. By means of

identification  he  takes  the  unattackable  authority  into  himself.  The

authority now turns into his super-ego and enters into possession ofall  the  aggressiveness  which  a  child  would  have  liked  to  exercise

against it. The child’s ego has to content itself with the unhappy role of

the authority - the father - who has been thus degraded. Here, as so

often, the situation is reversed: ‘If I were the father and you were the

child, I should treat you badly.’ The relationship between the super-

ego  and  the  ego  is  a  return,  distorted  by  a  wish,  of  the  real

relationships  between  the  ego,  as  yet  undivided,  and  an  external

object.  That  is  typical,  too.  But  the  essential  difference  is  that  the

original severity of the super-ego does not - or does not so much -

represent the severity which one has experienced from it, or which

one  attributes  to  it;  it  represents  rather  one’s  own  aggressiveness

towards it. If this is correct, we may assert truly that in the beginning

conscience arises through the suppression of an aggressive impulse,

and  that  it  is  subsequently  reinforced  by  fresh  suppressions  of  the

same kind.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4520

 

      Which  of  these  two  views  is  correct?  The  earlier  one,  which

genetically seemed so unassailable, or the newer one, which rounds

off  the  theory  in  such  a  welcome  fashion?  Clearly,  and  by  the

evidence, too, of direct observations, both are justified. They do not

contradict each other, and they even coincide at one point, for the

child’s  revengeful  aggressiveness  will  be  in  part  determined  by  the

amount  of  punitive  aggression  which  he  expects  from  his  father.

Experience shows, however, that the severity of the super-ego which

a child develops in no way corresponds to the severity of treatment

which he has himself met with.¹ The severity of the former seems to

be  independent  of  that  of  the  latter.  A  child  who  has  been  very

leniently brought up can acquire a very strict conscience. But it would

also be wrong to exaggerate this independence; it is not difficult to

convince oneself that severity of upbringing does also exert a strong

influence on the formation of the child’s super-ego. What it amounts to

is  that  in  the  formation  of  the  super-ego  and  the  emergence  of  a

conscience innate constitutional factors and influences from the realenvironment act in combination. This is not at all surprising; on the

contrary, it is a universal aetiological condition for all such processes.²

 

   ¹ As has rightly been emphasized by Melanie Klein and by other English writers.

   ² The two main types of pathogenic methods of upbringing - over-strictness and spoiling -

have been accurately assessed by Franz Alexander in his book The Psychoanalysis of the
Total Personality  (1927)  in  connection  with  Aichhorn’s  study  of  delinquency.  The  ‘unduly
lenient  and  indulgent  father’  is  the  cause  of  children’s  forming  an  over-severe  super-ego,
because, under the impression of the love that they receive, they have no other outlet for their
aggressiveness  but  turning  it  inwards.  In  delinquent  children,  who  have  been  brought  up
without  love,  the  tension  between  ego  and  super-ego  is  lacking,  and  the  whole  of  their
aggressiveness can be directed outwards. Apart from a constitutional factor which may be
supposed to be present, it can be said, therefore, that a severe conscience arises from the
joint operation of two factors: the frustration of instinct, which unleashes aggressiveness, and
the experience of being loved, which turns the aggressiveness inwards and hands it over to
the super-ego.
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4521

 

   It can also be asserted that when a child reacts to his first great

instinctual  frustrations  with  excessively  strong  aggressiveness  and

with  a  correspondingly  severe  super-ego,  he  is  following  a

phylogenetic model and is going beyond the response that would be

currently justified; for the father of prehistoric times was undoubtedly

terrible, and an extreme amount of aggressiveness may be attributed

to  him.  Thus,  if  one  shifts  over  from  individual  to  phylogenetic

development, the differences between the two theories of the genesis

of conscience are still further diminished. On the other hand, a new

and  important  difference  makes  its  appearance  between  these  two

developmental processes. We cannot get away from the assumption

that man’s sense of guilt springs from the Oedipus complex and was

acquired at the killing of the father by the brothers banded together.

On that occasion an act of aggression was not suppressed but carried

out; but it was the same act of aggression whose suppression in the

child is supposed to be the source of his sense of guilt. At this point I

should not be surprised if the reader were to exclaim angrily: ‘So it

makes no difference whether one kills one’s father or not - one gets a

feeling of guilt in either case! We may take leave to raise a few doubtshere.  Either  it  is  not  true  that  the  sense  of  guilt  comes  from

suppressed aggressiveness, or else the whole story of the killing of

the father is a fiction and the children of primaeval man did not kill

their fathers any more often than children do nowadays. Besides, if it

is not fiction but a plausible piece of history, it would be a case of

something happening which everyone expects to happen - namely, of

a person feeling guilty because he really has done something which

cannot be justified. And of this event, which is after all an everyday

occurrence, psycho-analysis has not yet given any explanation.’

   That is true, and we must make good the omission. Nor is there any

great secret about the matter. When one has a sense of guilt after

having committed a misdeed, and because of it, the feeling should

more properly be called remorse. It relates only to a deed that has

been done, and, of course, it presupposes that a conscience - the

readiness to feel guilty - was already in existence before the deed took

place. Remorse of this sort can, therefore, never help us to discover

the origin of conscience and of the sense of guilt in general. What

happens in these everyday cases is usually this: an instinctual need

acquires  the  strength  to  achieve  satisfaction  in  spite  of  the

conscience,  which  is,  after  all,  limited  in  its  strength;  and  with  the

natural weakening of the need owing to its having been satisfied, the

former balance of power is restored. Psycho-analysis is thus justified

in excluding from the present discussion the case of a sense of guilt

due to remorse, however frequently such cases occur and however

great their practical importance.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4522

 

   But if the human sense of guilt goes back to the killing of the primal

father, that was after all a case of ‘remorse’. Are we to assume that a

conscience and a sense of guilt were not, as we have presupposed, in

existence before the deed? If not, where, in this case, did the remorse

come from? There is no doubt that this case should explain the secret

of the sense of guilt to us and put an end to our difficulties. And I

believe  it  does.  This  remorse  was  the  result  of  the  primordialambivalence of feeling towards the father. His sons hated him, but

they loved him, too. After their hatred had been satisfied by their act of

aggression, their love came to the fore in their remorse for the deed. It

set  up  the  super-ego  by  identification  with  the  father;  it  gave  that

agency the father’s power, as though as a punishment for the deed of

aggression  they  had  carried  out  against  him,  and  it  created  the

restrictions which were intended to prevent a repetition of the deed.

And  since  the  inclination  to  aggressiveness  against  the  father  was

repeated  in  the  following  generations,  the  sense  of  guilt,  too,

persisted,  and  it  was  reinforced  once  more  by  every  piece  of

aggressiveness that was suppressed and carried over to the super-

ego. Now, I think, we can at last grasp two things perfectly clearly: the

part played by love in the origin of conscience and the fatal inevitability

of  the  sense  of  guilt.  Whether  one  has  killed  one’s  father  or  has

abstained from doing so is not really the decisive thing. One is bound

to feel guilty in either case, for the sense of guilt is an expression of

the conflict due to ambivalence, of the eternal struggle between Eros

and the instinct of destruction or death. This conflict is set going as

soon as men are faced with the task of living together. So long as the

community assumes no other form than that of the family, the conflict

is bound to express itself in the Oedipus complex, to establish the

conscience and to create the first sense of guilt. When an attempt is

made to widen the community, the same conflict is continued in forms

which are dependent on the past; and it is strengthened and results in

a further intensification of the sense of guilt. Since civilization obeys

an internal erotic impulsion which causes human beings to unite in a

closely-knit  group,  it  can  only  achieve  this  aim  through  an  ever-

increasing reinforcement of the sense of guilt. What began in relation

to the father is completed in relation to the group. If civilization is a

necessary course of development from the family to humanity as a

whole,  then  -  as  a  result  of  the  inborn  conflict  arising  from

ambivalence, of the eternal struggle between the trends of love and

death - there is inextricably bound up with it an increase of the sense

of guilt, which will perhaps reach heights that the individual finds hard

to tolerate. One is reminded of the great poet’s moving arraignment of

the ‘Heavenly Powers’:-

                                                 Ihr führt in’s Leben uns hinein.
                                                Ihr lasst den Armen schuldig werden,
                                                Dann überlasst Ihr ihn den Pein,

                                                Denn iede Schuld rächt sich auf Erden.¹

 

And  we  may  well  heave  a  sigh  of  relief  at  the  thought  that  it  is

nevertheless vouchsafed to a few to salvage without effort from the

whirlpool of their own feelings the deepest truths, towards which the

rest of us have to find our way through tormenting uncertainty and with

restless groping.

 

   ¹ One of the Harp-player’s songs in Goethe’s Wilhelm Meister.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4523

 

                                          VIII

 

Having  reached  the  end  of  his  journey,  the  author  must  ask  his

readers’ forgiveness for not having been a more skilful guide and for

not  having  spared  them  empty  stretches  of  road  and  troublesome

détours. There is no doubt that it could have been done better. I will

attempt, late in the day, to make some amends.

 

   In the first place, I suspect that the reader has the impression that

our  discussions  on  the  sense  of  guilt  disrupt  the  framework  of  this

essay:  that  they  take  up  too  much  space,  so  that  the  rest  of  its

subject-matter, with which they are not always closely connected, is

pushed to one side. This may have spoilt the structure of my paper;

but it corresponds faithfully to my intention to represent the sense of

guilt as the most important problem in the development of civilization

and to show that the price we pay for our advance in civilization is a

loss  of  happiness  through  the  heightening  of  the  sense  of  guilt.¹

Anything that still sounds strange about this statement, which is the

final  conclusion  of  our  investigation,  can  probably  be  traced  to  the

quite peculiar relationship - as yet completely unexplained - which the

sense  of  guilt  has  to  our  consciousness.  In  the  common  case  ofremorse, which we regard as normal, this feeling makes itself clearly

enough perceptible to consciousness. Indeed, we are accustomed to

speak of a ‘consciousness of guilt’ instead of a ‘sense of guilt’. Our

study of the neuroses, to which, after all we owe the most valuable

pointers  to  an  understanding  of  normal  conditions,  brings  us  up

against some contradictions. In one of those affections, obsessional

neurosis,  the  sense  of  guilt  makes  itself  noisily  heard  in

consciousness; it dominates the clinical picture and the patient’s life

as well, and it hardly allows anything else to appear alongside of it.

But in most other cases and forms of neurosis it remains completely

unconscious,  without  on  that  account  producing  any  less  important

effects.  Our  patients  do  not  believe  us  when  we  attribute  an

‘unconscious sense of guilt’ to them. In order to make ourselves at all

intelligible  to  them,  we  tell  them  of  an  unconscious  need  for

punishment,  in  which  the  sense  of  guilt  finds  expression.  But  its

connection  with  a  particular  form  of  neurosis  must  not  be  over-

estimated. Even in obsessional neurosis there are types of patients

who are not aware of their sense of guilt, or who only feel it as a

tormenting uneasiness, a kind of anxiety, if they are prevented from

carrying  out  certain  actions.  It  ought  to  be  possible  eventually  to

understand these things; but as yet we cannot. Here perhaps we may

be  glad  to  have  it  pointed  out  that  the  sense  of  guilt  is  at  bottom

nothing else but a topographical variety of anxiety; in its later phases it

coincides completely with fear of the super-ego. And the relations of

anxiety  to  consciousness  exhibit  the  same  extraordinary  variations.

Anxiety is always present somewhere or other behind every symptom;

but  at  one  time  it  takes  noisy  possession  of  the  whole  of

consciousness, while at another it conceals itself so completely that

we are obliged to speak of unconscious anxiety or, if we want to have

a  clearer  psychological  conscience,  since  anxiety  is  in  the  first

instance simply a feeling, of possibilities of anxiety. Consequently it is

very conceivable that the sense of guilt produced by civilization is not

perceived as such either, and remains to a large extent unconscious,

or appears as a sort of malaise, a dissatisfaction, for which people

seek other motivations. Religions, at any rate, have never overlooked

the part played in civilization by a sense of guilt. Furthermore - a point

which  I  failed  to  appreciate  elsewhere²  -  they  claim  to  redeemmankind from this sense of guilt, which they call sin. From the manner

in which, in Christianity, this redemption is achieved - by the sacrificial

death of a single person, who in this manner takes upon himself a guilt

that is common to everyone - we have been able to infer what the first

occasion may have been on which this primal guilt, which was also the

beginning of civilization, was acquired.³

 

   ¹ ‘Thus conscience does make cowards of us all . . .’

   That the education of young people at the present day conceals from them the part which
sexuality will play in their lives is not the only reproach which we are obliged to make against
it. Its other sin is that it does not prepare them for the aggressiveness of which they are
destined  to  become  the  objects.  In  sending  the  young  out  into  life  with  such  a  false
psychological orientation, education is behaving as though one were to equip people starting
on a Polar expedition with summer clothing and maps of the Italian Lakes. In this it becomes
evident  that  a  certain  misuse  is  being  made  of  ethical  demands.  The  strictness  of  those
demands would not do so much harm if education were to say: ‘This is how men ought to be,
in order to be happy and to make others happy; but you have to reckon on their not being like
that.’ Instead of this the young are made to believe that everyone else fulfils those ethical
demands - that is, that everyone else is virtuous. It is on this that the demand is based that the
young, too, shall become virtuous.

   ² In The Future of an Illusion (1927c)

   ³ Totem and Taboo (1912-13).

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4524

 

   Though it cannot be of great importance, it may not be superfluous

to  elucidate  the  meaning  of  a  few  words  such  as  ‘super-ego’,

‘conscience’,  ‘sense  of  guilt’,  ‘need  for  punishment’  and  ‘remorse’,

which we have often, perhaps, used too loosely and interchangeably.

They  all  relate  to  the  same  state  of  affairs,  but  denote  different

aspects of it. The super-ego is an agency which has been inferred by

us,  and  conscience  is  a  function  which  we  ascribe,  among  other

functions, to that agency. This function consists in keeping a watch

over  the  actions  and  intentions  of  the  ego  and  judging  them,  in

exercising  a  censorship.  The  sense  of  guilt,  the  harshness  of  the

super-ego, is thus the same thing as the severity of the conscience. It

is the perception which the ego has of being watched over in this way,

the  assessment  of  the  tension  between  its  own  strivings  and  thedemands  of  the  super-ego.  The  fear  of  this  critical  agency  (a  fear

which  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  whole  relationship),  the  need  for

punishment,  is  an  instinctual  manifestation  on  the  part  of  the  ego,

which  has  become  masochistic  under  the  influence  of  a  sadistic

super-ego; it is a portion, that is to say, of the instinct towards internal

destruction  present  in  the  ego,  employed  for  forming  an  erotic

attachment to the super-ego. We ought not to speak of a conscience

until a super-ego is demonstrably present. As to a sense of guilt, we

must admit that it is in existence before the super-ego, and therefore

before conscience, too. At that time it is the immediate expression of

fear of the external authority, a recognition of the tension between the

ego and that authority. It is the direct derivative of the conflict between

the  need  for  the  authority’s  love  and  the  urge  towards  instinctual

satisfaction, whose inhibition produces the inclination to aggression.

The superimposition of these two strata of the sense of guilt - one

coming from fear of the external authority, the other from fear of the

internal  authority  -  has  hampered  our  insight  into  the  position  of

conscience in a number of ways. Remorse is a general term for the

ego’s reaction in a case of sense of guilt. It contains, in little altered

form, the sensory material of the anxiety which is operating behind the

sense of guilt; it is itself a punishment and can include the need for

punishment. Thus remorse, too, can be older than conscience.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4525

 

   Nor will it do any harm if we once more review the contradictions

which have for a while perplexed us during our enquiry. Thus, at one

point the sense of guilt was the consequence of acts of aggression

that had been abstained from; but at another point - and precisely at

its  historical  beginning,  the  killing  of  the  father  -  it  was  the

consequence of an act of aggression that had been carried out. But a

way out of this difficulty was found. For the institution of the internal

authority, the super-ego, altered the situation radically. Before this, the

sense of guilt coincided with remorse. (We may remark, incidentally,

that the term ‘remorse’ should be reserved for the reaction after an actof aggression has actually been carried out.) After this, owing to the

omniscience of the super-ego, the difference between an aggression

intended and an aggression carried out lost its force. Henceforward a

sense of guilt could be produced not only by an act of violence that is

actually carried out (as all the world knows), but also by one that is

merely intended (as psycho-analysis has discovered). Irrespectively of

this alteration in the psychological situation, the conflict arising from

ambivalence - the conflict between the two primal instincts - leaves the

same result behind. We are tempted to look here for the solution of

the problem of the varying relation in which the sense of guilt stands to

consciousness. It might be thought that a sense of guilt arising from

remorse for an evil deed must always be conscious, whereas a sense

of  guilt  arising  from  the  perception  of  an  evil impulse  may  remain

unconscious. But the answer is not so simple as that. Obsessional

neurosis speaks energetically against it.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4526

 

      The  second  contradiction  concerned  the  aggressive  energy  with

which we suppose the super-ego to be endowed. According to one

view, that energy merely carries on the punitive energy of the external

authority and keeps it alive in the mind; while, according to another

view,  it  consists,  on  the  contrary,  of  one’s  own  aggressive  energy

which  has  not  been  used  and  which  one  now  directs  against  that

inhibiting  authority.  The  first  view  seemed  to  fit  in  better  with  the

history, and the second with the theory, of the sense of guilt. Closer

reflection  has  resolved  this  apparently  irreconcilable  contradiction

almost too completely; what remained as the essential and common

factor was that in each case we were dealing with an aggressiveness

which  had  been  displaced  inwards.  Clinical  observation,  moreover,

allows  us  in  fact  to  distinguish  two  sources  for  the  aggressiveness

which  we  attribute  to  the  super-ego;  one  or  the  other  of  them

exercises the stronger effect in any given case, but as a general rule

they operate in unison.

      This  is,  I  think,  the  place  at  which  to  put  forward  for  seriousconsideration a view which I have earlier recommended for provisional

acceptance.  In  the  most  recent  analytic  literature  a  predilection  is

shown for the idea that any kind of frustration, any thwarted instinctual

satisfaction, results, or may result, in a heightening of the sense of

guilt.¹ A great theoretical simplification will, I think, be achieved if we

regard this as applying only to the aggressive instincts, and little will

be found to contradict this assumption. For how are we to account, on

dynamic and economic grounds, for an increase in the sense of guilt

appearing in place of an unfulfilled erotic demand? This only seems

possible  in  a  round-about  way  -  if  we  suppose,  that  is,  that  the

prevention of an erotic satisfaction calls up a piece of aggressiveness

against the person who has interfered with the satisfaction, and that

this aggressiveness has itself to be suppressed in turn. But if this is

so, it is after all only the aggressiveness which is transformed into a

sense of guilt, by being suppressed and made over to the super-ego. I

am convinced that many processes will admit of a simpler and clearer

exposition  if  the  findings  of  psycho-analysis  with  regard  to  the

derivation  of  the  sense  of  guilt  are  restricted  to  the  aggressive

instincts. Examination of the clinical material gives us no unequivocal

answer here, because, as our hypothesis tells us, the two classes of

instinct hardly ever appear in a pure form, isolated from each other;

but  an  investigation  of  extreme  cases  would  probably  point  in  the

direction I anticipate.

 

   ¹ This view is taken in particular by Ernest Jones, Susan Isaacs and Melanie Klein; and

also, I understand, by Reik and Alexander.
 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4527

 

   I am tempted to extract a first advantage from this more restricted

view of the case by applying it to the process of repression. As we

have  learned,  neurotic  symptoms  are,  in  their  essence,  substitutive

satisfactions for unfulfilled sexual wishes. In the course of our analytic

work we have discovered to our surprise that perhaps every neurosis

conceals  a  quota  of  unconscious  sense  of  guilt,  which  in  its  turn

fortifies the symptoms by making use of them as a punishment. It now