purposes: we had to discover from the start both our methods and the

theoretical hypotheses behind them. So I worked in this direction, first

in collaboration with Breuer and afterwards independently of him. In

the end I made it a part of my technique to require my patients to tell

me  without  criticism  whatever  occurred  to  their  minds,  even  if  they

were  ideas  which  did  not  seem  to  make  sense  or  which  it  was

distressing to report.

 


                    My Contact With Josef Popper-Lynkeus

                                                                                      4808

 

   When they fell in with my instructions they told me their dreams,

amongst other things, as though they were of the same kind as their

other thoughts. This was a plain hint that I should assign as much

importance  to  these  dreams  as  to  other,  intelligible,  phenomena.

They, however, were not intelligible, but strange, confused, absurd:

like dreams, in fact - which for that very reason, were condemned by

science as random and senseless twitchings of the organ of the mind.

If my patients were right - and they seemed only to be repeating the

ancient beliefs held by unscientific men for thousands of years - I was

faced by the task of ‘interpreting dreams’ in a way that could stand up

against scientific criticism.

   To begin with, I naturally understood no more about my patients’

dreams than the dreamers did themselves. But by applying to these

dreams,  and  more  particularly  to  my  own  dreams,  the  procedure

which  I  had  already  used  for  the  study  of  other  abnormal

psychological  structures,  I  succeeded  in  answering  most  of  the

questions which could be raised by an interpretation of dreams. There

were many such questions: What do we dream about? Why do we

dream at all? What is the origin of all the strange characteristics which

distinguish dreams from waking life? - and many more such questions

besides. Some of the answers were easily given and turned out to

confirm views that had already been put forward; but others involved

completely  new  hypotheses  with  regard  to  the  structure  and

functioning  of  the  apparatus  of  the  mind.  People  dream  about  the

things that have engaged their minds during the waking day. Peopledream in order to allay impulses that seek to disturb sleep, and in

order to be able to sleep on. But why was it possible for dreams to

present  such  a  strange  appearance,  so  confusedly  senseless,  so

obviously contrasted with the content of waking thought, in spite of

being concerned with the same material? There could be no doubt

that dreams were only a substitute for a rational process of thought

and  could  be  interpreted  -  that  is  to  say,  translated  into  a  rational

process.  But  what  needed  explaining  was  the  fact  of  the distortion

which the dream-work had carried out upon the rational and intelligible

material.

 


                    My Contact With Josef Popper-Lynkeus

                                                                                      4809

 

   Dream-distortion was the profoundest and most difficult problem of

dream life. And light was thrown on it by the following consideration,

which placed dreams in a class along with other psychopathological

formations and revealed them, as it were, as the normal psychoses of

human  beings.  For  our  mind,  that  precious  instrument  by  whose

means we maintain ourselves in life, is no peacefully self-contained

unity. It is rather to be compared with a modern State in which a mob,

eager for enjoyment and destruction, has to be held down forcibly by a

prudent  superior  class.  The  whole  flux  of  our  mental  life  and

everything that finds expression in our thoughts are derivations and

representatives  of  the  multifarious  instincts  that  are  innate  in  our

physical constitution. But these instincts are not all equally susceptible

to direction and education, or equally ready to fall in with the demands

of the external world and of human society. A number of them have

retained their primitive, ungovernable nature; if we let them have their

way, they would infallibly bring us to ruin. Consequently, learning by

experience, we have developed organizations in our mind which, in

the  form  of  inhibitions,  set  themselves  up  against  the  direct

manifestations of the instincts. Every impulse in the nature of a wish

that arises from the sources of instinctual energy must submit itself to

examination  by  the  highest  agencies  of  our  mind,  and,  if  it  is  not

approved,  is  rejected  and  restrained  from  exercising  any  influenceupon  our  movements  -  that  is,  from  coming  into  execution.  Often

enough,  indeed,  such  wishes  are  even  forbidden  to  enter

consciousness, which is habitually unaware even of the existence of

these dangerous instinctual sources. We describe such impulses as

being repressed  from  the  point  of  view  of  consciousness,  and  as

surviving  only  in  the  unconscious.  If  what  is  repressed  contrives

somehow to force its way into consciousness or into movement or into

both,  we  are  no  longer  normal:  at  that  point  the  whole  range  of

neurotic  and  psychotic  symptoms  arise.  The  maintenance  of  the

necessary inhibitions and repressions imposes upon our mind a great

expenditure of energy, from which it is glad to be relieved. A good

opportunity for this seems to be offered at night by the state of sleep,

since sleep involves a cessation of our motor functions. The situation

seems safe, and the severity of our internal police-force may therefore

be relaxed. It is not entirely withdrawn, since one cannot be certain: it

may  be  that  the  unconscious  never  sleeps  at  all.  And  now  the

reduction of pressure upon the repressed unconscious produces its

effect. Wishes arise from it which during sleep might find the entrance

to  consciousness  open.  If  we  were  to  know  them  we  should  be

appalled, alike by their subject-matter, their unrestraint and indeed the

mere possibility of their existence. This, however, occurs only seldom,

and when it does we awake as speedily as possible, in a state of fear.

But as a rule our consciousness does not experience the dream as it

really was. It is true that the inhibitory forces (the dream censorship,

as we may call them) are not completely awake, but neither are they

wholly asleep. They have had an influence on the dream while it was

struggling to find an expression in words and pictures, they have got

rid of what was most objectionable, they have altered other parts of it

till they are unrecognizable, they have severed real connections while

introducing  false  ones,  until  the  honest  but  brutal  wishful  phantasy

which lay behind the dream has turned into the manifest dream as we

remember it - more or less confused and almost always strange and

incomprehensible.  Thus  the  dream  (or  the  distortion  which

characterizes it) is the expression of a compromise, the evidence of a

conflict between the mutually incompatible impulses and strivings of

our mental life. And do not let us forget that the same process, the

same  interplay  of  forces,  which  explains  the  dreams  of  a  normalsleeper,  gives  us  the  key  to  understanding  all  the  phenomena  of

neurosis and psychosis.

 


                    My Contact With Josef Popper-Lynkeus

                                                                                      4810

 

   I must apologize if I have hitherto talked so much about myself and

my  work  on  the  problems  of  the  dream;  but  it  was  a  necessary

preliminary  to  what  follows.  My  explanation  of  dream-distortion

seemed to me new: I had nowhere found anything like it. Years later (I

can  no  longer  remember  when)  I  came  across  Josef  Popper-

Lynkeus’s  book Phantasien  eines  Realisten.  One  of  the  stories

contained in it bore the title of ‘Träumen wie Wachen’, and it could not

fail to arouse my deepest interest. There was a description in it of a

man who could boast that he had never dreamt anything nonsensical.

His  dreams  might  be  fantastic,  like  fairy  tales,  but  they  were  not

enough out of harmony with the waking world for it to be possible to

say  definitely  that  ‘they  were  impossible  or  absurd  in  themselves’.

Translated into my manner of speech this meant that in the case of

this man no dream-distortion occurred; and the reason produced for

its absence put one at the same time in possession of the reason for

its  occurrence.  Popper  allowed  the  man  complete  insight  into  the

reasons  for  his  peculiarity.  He  made  him  say:  ‘Order  and  harmony

reign both in my thoughts and in my feelings, nor do the two struggle

with each other.... I am one and undivided. Other people are divided

and their two parts - waking and dreaming - are almost perpetually at

war with each other.’ And again, on the question of the interpretation

of dreams: ‘That is certainly no easy task; but with a little attention on

the part of the dreamer himself it should no doubt always succeed. -

You ask why it is that for the most part it does not succeed? In you

other people there seems always to be something that lies concealed

in your dreams, something unchaste in a special and higher sense, a

certain secret quality in your being which it is hard to follow. And that

is why your dreams so often seem to be without meaning or even to

be  nonsense.  But  in  the  deepest  sense  this  is  not  in  the  least  so;

indeed, it cannot be so at all - for it is always the same man, whetherhe is awake or dreaming.’

   Now, if we leave psychological terminology out of account, this was

the  very  same  explanation  of  dream-distortion  that  I  had  arrived  at

from my study of dreams. Distortion was a compromise, something in

its very nature disingenuous, the product of a conflict between thought

and feeling, or, as I had put it, between what is conscious and what is

repressed.  Where  a  conflict  of  this  kind  was  not  present  and

repression  was  unnecessary,  dreams  could  not  be  strange  or

senseless. The man who dreamed in a way no different from that in

which  he  thought  while  awake  was  granted  by  Popper  the  very

condition of internal harmony which, as a social reformer, he aimed at

producing in the body politic. And if Science informs us that such a

man, wholly without evil and falseness and devoid of all repressions,

does not exist and could not survive, yet we may guess that, so far as

an approximation to this ideal is possible, it had found its realization in

the person of Popper himself.

 


                    My Contact With Josef Popper-Lynkeus

                                                                                      4811

 

   Overwhelmed by meeting with such wisdom, I began to read all his

works - his books on Voltaire, on Religion, on War, on the Universal

Provision of Subsistence, etc. - till there was built up clearly before my

eyes a picture of this simple-minded, great man, who was a thinker

and a critic and at the same time a kindly humanitarian and reformer. I

reflected much over the rights of the individual which he advocated

and to which I should gladly have added my support had I not been

restrained by the thought that neither the processes of Nature nor the

aims of human society quite justified such claims. A special feeling of

sympathy  drew  me  to  him,  since  he  too  had  clearly  had  painful

experience of the bitterness of the life of a Jew and of the hollowness

of the ideals of present-day civilization. Yet I never saw him in the

flesh. He knew of me through common acquaintances, and I once had

occasion to answer a letter from him in which he asked for some piece

of  information.  But  I  never  sought  him  out.  My  innovations  in

psychology  had  estranged  me  from  my  contemporaries,  andespecially  from  the  older  among  them:  often  enough  when  I

approached some man whom I had honoured from a distance, I found

myself repelled, as it were, by his lack of understanding for what had

become my whole life to me. And after all Josef Popper had been a

physicist: he had been a friend of Ernst Mach. I was anxious that the

happy  impression  of  our  agreement  upon  the  problem  of  dream-

distortion should not be spoilt. So it came about that I put off calling

upon him till it was too late and I could now only salute his bust in the

gardens in front of our Rathaus.

  4812

 

                                  SÁNDOR FERENCZI

                                        (1933)

 


                                                                                      4813

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4814

 

                                  SÁNDOR FERENCZI

 

We  have  learnt  by  experience  that  wishing  costs  little;  so  we

generously present one another with the best and warmest of wishes.

And of these the foremost is for a long life. A well known Eastern tale

reveals the double-sidedness of precisely this wish. The Sultan had

his horoscope cast by two wise men. ‘Thy lot is happy, master!’ said

one  of  them.  ‘It  is  written  in  the  stars  that  thou  shalt  see  all  thy

kinsmen  die  before  thee.’  This  prophet  was  executed.  ‘Thy  lot  is

happy!’ said the other too, ‘for I read in the stars that thou shalt outlive

all  thy  kinsmen.’  This  one  was  richly  rewarded.  Both  had  given

expression to the fulfilment of the same wish.

      It  fell  to  me  in  January,  1926,  to  write  an  obituary  of  our

unforgettable  friend,  Karl  Abraham.  A  few  years  earlier,  in  1923,  I

could congratulate Sándor Ferenczi on the completion of his fiftieth

year.  To-day,  scarcely  a  decade  later,  it  grieves  me  that  I  have

outlived him too. In what I wrote for his birthday I was able to celebrate

openly his versatility and originality and the richness of his gifts; but

the discretion imposed on a friend forbade my speaking of his lovable

and affectionate personality, with its readiness to welcome everything

of significance.

   Since the days when he was led to me by his interest in psycho-

analysis,  still  in  its  youth,  we  have  shared  many  things  with  eachother. I invited him to go with me to Worcester, Massachusetts, when

in  1909  I  was  called  upon  to  lecture  there  during  a  week  of

celebrations. In the morning, before the time had come for my lecture

to begin, we would walk together in front of the University building and

I  would  ask  him  to  suggest  what  I  should  talk  about  that  day.  He

thereupon gave me a sketch of what, half an hour later, I improvised in

my  lecture.  In  this  way  he  had  a  share  in  the  origin  of  the Five

Lectures.  Soon  after  this,  at  the  Nuremberg  Congress  of  1910,  I

arranged that he should propose the organization of analysts into an

international  association  -  a  scheme  which  we  had  thought  out

together. With slight modifications it was accepted and is in force to

this day. For many successive years we spent the autumn holidays

together in Italy, and a number of papers that appeared later in the

literature under his or my name took their first shape in our talks there.

When the outbreak of the World War put an end to our freedom of

movement, and paralysed our analytic activity as well, he made use of

the interval to begin his analysis with me. This met with a break when

he was called up for military service, but he was able to resume it

later. The feeling of a secure common bond, which grew up between

us from so many shared experiences, was not interrupted when, late

in  life  unfortunately,  he  was  united  to  the  outstanding  woman  who

mourns him to-day as his widow.

 


                                    Sandor Ferenczi

                                                                                      4815

 

      Ten  years  ago,  when  the Internationale  Zeitschrift  dedicated  a

special  number  to  Ferenczi  on  his  fiftieth  birthday,  he  had  already

published most of the works which have made all analysts into his

pupils.  But  he  was  holding  back  his  most  brilliant  and  most  fertile

achievement.  I  knew  of  it,  and  in  the  closing  sentence  of  my

contribution I urged him to give it to us. Then, in 1924, his Versuch

einer Genitaltheorie  appeared.  This  little  book  is  a  biological  rather

than a psycho-analytic study; it is an application of the attitudes and

insights associated with psycho-analysis to the biology of the sexual

processes and, beyond them, to organic life in general. It was perhapsthe boldest application of psycho-analysis that was ever attempted. As

its governing thought it lays stress on the conservative nature of the

instincts,  which  seek  to  re-establish  every  state  of  things  that  has

been  abandoned  owing  to  an  external  interference.  Symbols  are

recognized as evidence of ancient connections. Impressive instances

are  adduced  to  show  how  the  characteristics  of  what  is  psychical

preserve traces of primaeval changes in the bodily substance. When

one has read this work, one seems to understand many peculiarities

of sexual life of which one had never previously been able to obtain a

comprehensive view, and one finds oneself the richer for hints that

promise a deep insight into wide fields of biology. It is a vain task to

attempt  already  to-day  to  distinguish  what  can  be  accepted  as  an

authentic  discovery  from  what  seeks,  in  the  fashion  of  a  scientific

phantasy, to guess at future knowledge. We lay the little book aside

with a feeling: ‘This is almost too much to take in at a first reading; I

will read it again after a while.’ But it is not only I who feel like this. It is

probable  that  some  time  in  the  future  there  will  really  be  a  ‘bio-

analysis’, as Ferenczi has prophesied, and it will have to cast back to

the Versuch einer Genitaltheorie.

 


                                    Sandor Ferenczi

                                                                                      4816

 

      After  this  summit  of  achievement,  it  came  about  that  our  friend

slowly drifted away from us. On his return from a period of work in

America he seemed to withdraw more and more into solitary work,

though he had previously taken the liveliest share in all that happened

in analytic circles. We learnt that one single problem had monopolized

his interest. The need to cure and to help had become paramount in

him.  He  had  probably  set  himself  aims  which,  with  our  therapeutic

means, are altogether out of reach to-day. From unexhausted springs

of emotion the conviction was borne in upon him that one could effect

far  more  with  one’s  patients  if  one  gave  them  enough  of  the  love

which they had longed for as children. He wanted to discover how this

could  be  carried  out  within  the  framework  of  the  psycho-analytic

situation; and so long as he had not succeeded in this, he kept apart,no longer certain, perhaps, of agreement with his friends. Wherever it

may have been that the road he had started along would have led

him, he could not pursue it to the end. Signs were slowly revealed in

him  of  a  grave  organic  destructive  process  which  had  probably

overshadowed  his  life  for  many  years  already.  Shortly  before

completing his sixtieth year he succumbed to pernicious anaemia. It is

impossible to believe that the history of our science will ever forget

him.

 

May 1933

                                                                                     4817

 

                  THE SUBTLETIES OF A FAULTY ACTION

                                        (1935)

 


                                                                                    4818

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                    4819

 

                  THE SUBTLETIES OF A FAULTY ACTION

 

I  was  preparing  a  birthday  present  for  a  woman  friend  -  a  small

engraved gem for insertion into a ring. It was fixed in the centre of a

piece  of  stout  cardboard  and  on  this  I  wrote  the  following  words:

‘Voucher for the supply by Messrs. L., jewellers, of a gold ring . . . for

the attached stone bearing an engraved ship with sail and oars.’ But at

the point at which I have here left a gap, between ‘ring’ and ‘for’ there

stood a word which I was obliged to cross out since it was entirely

irrelevant. It was the little word ‘bis’. Why should I have written it at all?

   When I read the short inscription through, I was struck by the fact

that  it  contained  the  word  ‘für’  twice  in  rapid  succession:  ‘for  the

supply’ - ‘for the attached stone’. That sounded ugly and should be

avoided. It then occurred to me that ‘bis’ had been substituted for ‘für’

in an attempt to escape this stylistic awkwardness. No doubt that was

so; but it was an attempt that made use of remarkably inadequate

means. The preposition ‘bis’ was quite out of place in this context and

could  not  possibly  be  substituted  for  the  necessary  ‘für’.  So  why

precisely ‘bis’?

   But perhaps the word ‘bis’ was not the preposition determining a

time-limit. It may have been something totally different - the Latin ‘bis’

- ‘for a second time’, which has retained its meaning in French. ‘Ne bis

in idem’ is a maxim of Roman law. ‘Bis! bis!’ cries a Frenchman if hewants a performance repeated. So that must be the explanation of my

senseless slip of the pen. I was being warned against the second ‘für’,

against a repetition of the same word. Something else must be put

instead of it. The chance identity in sound between the foreign word

‘bis’ which embodied the criticism of the original phraseology and the

German preposition made it possible to insert ‘bis’ instead of ‘für’ as

though by a slip of the pen. But this mistake gained its purpose not by

being made, but only after it had been corrected. I had to cross out the

‘bis’ and in so doing I had myself, so to speak, done away with the

repetition which was disturbing me. A variant, not without interest, of

the mechanism of a parapraxis!

 


                          The Subtleties Of A Faulty Action

                                                                                    4820

 

   I felt very much pleased with this solution. But in self-analysis the

danger  of  incompleteness  is  particularly  great.  One  is  too  soon

satisfied with a part explanation, behind which resistance may easily

be keeping back something that is more important perhaps. I related

this little analysis to my daughter, and she immediately saw how it

went on:

   ‘But you gave her a stone like that for a ring once before. That’s

probably the repetition you want to avoid. One doesn’t like always to

be making the same present.’ I was convinced by this; the objection

was obviously to a repetition of the same present, not of the same

word. There had been a displacement on to something trivial with the

object  of  diverting  attention  from  something  more  important:  an

aesthetic difficulty, perhaps, in place of an instinctual conflict.

   For it was easy to discover the further sequel. I was looking for a

motive for not making a present of the stone, and that motive was

provided by the reflection that I had already made the same (or a very

similar) present. Why should this objection have been concealed and

disguised? Very soon I saw clearly why. I wanted not to give the stone

away at all. I liked it very much myself.

   The explanation of this parapraxis was found without raising any

great difficulties. Indeed, a consoling thought soon occurred to me:regrets of this kind only enhance the value of a gift. What sort of gift

would it be if one were not a little bit sorry to part with it? Nevertheless

the episode enables one to realize once more how complicated the

most unobtrusive and apparently simplest mental processes may be. I

made a slip in writing out some instructions - put in a ‘bis’ where a ‘für’

was needed - I noticed it and corrected it: a small mistake, or rather

attempt  at  a  mistake,  and  yet  based  upon  this  large  number  of

premisses and dynamic determinants! Indeed, the mistake could not

have occurred if the material had not been particularly favourable.

  4821

 

          A DISTURBANCE OF MEMORY ON THE ACROPOLIS

                                        (1936)

 


                                                                                      4822

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4823

 

          A DISTURBANCE OF MEMORY ON THE ACROPOLIS

 

            AN OPEN LETTER TO ROMAIN ROLLAND ON THE

                  OCCASION OF HIS SEVENTIETH BIRTHDAY

 

My dear Friend,

   I have been urgently pressed to make some written contribution to

the  celebration  of  your  seventieth  birthday  and  I  have  made  long

efforts to find something that might in any way be worthy of you and

might give expression to my admiration for your love of the truth, for

your  courage  in  your  beliefs  and  for  your  affection  and  good  will

towards humanity; or, again, something that might bear witness to my

gratitude to you as a writer who has afforded me so many moments of

exaltation and pleasure. But it was in vain. I am ten years older than

you and my powers of production are at an end. All that I can find to

offer you is the gift of an impoverished creature, who has ‘seen better

days’.

   You know that the aim of my scientific work was to throw light upon

unusual, abnormal or pathological manifestations of the mind - that is

to say, to trace them back to the psychical forces operating behind

them and to indicate the mechanisms at work. I began by attempting

this upon myself and then went on to apply it to other people and

finally, by a bold extension, to the human race as a whole. During thelast  few  years,  a  phenomenon  of  this  sort,  which  I  myself  had

experienced  a  generation  ago,  in  1904,  and  which  I  had  never

understood, has kept on recurring to my mind. I did not at first see

why;  but  at  last  I  determined  to  analyse  the  incident  -  and  I  now

present you with the results of that enquiry. In the process, I shall

have, of course, to ask you to give more attention to some events in

my private life than they would otherwise deserve.

 


                  A Disturbance Of Memory On The Acropolis

                                                                                      4824

 

 

   Every year, at that time, towards the end of August or the beginning

of September, I used to set out with my younger brother on a holiday

trip, which would last for some weeks and would take us to Rome or to

some other region of Italy or to some part of the Mediterranean sea-

board. My brother is ten years younger than I am, so he is the same

age as you - a coincidence which has only now occurred to me. In that

particular year my brother told me that his business affairs would not

allow him to be away for long: a week would be the most that he could

manage and we should have to shorten our trip. So we decided to

travel by way of Trieste to the island of Corfu and there spend the few

days  of  our  holiday.  At  Trieste  he  called  upon  a  business

acquaintance who lived there, and I went with him. Our host enquired

in a friendly way about our plans and, hearing that it was our intention

to go to Corfu, advised us strongly against it: ‘What makes you think of

going there at this time of year? It would be too hot for you to do

anything. You had far better go to Athens instead. The Lloyd boat sails

this afternoon; it will give you three days there to see the town and will

pick you up on its return voyage. That would be more agreeable and

more worth while.’

   As we walked away from this visit, we were both in remarkably

depressed  spirits.  We  discussed  the  plan  that  had  been  proposed,

agreed that it was quite impracticable and saw nothing but difficulties

in the way of carrying it out; we assumed, moreover, that we should

not  be  allowed  to  land  in  Greece  without  passports.  We  spent  thehours that elapsed before the Lloyd offices opened in wandering about

the town in a discontented and irresolute frame of mind. But when the

time came, we went up to the counter and booked our passages for

Athens as though it were a matter of course, without bothering in the

least  about  the  supposed  difficulties  and  indeed  without  having

discussed  with  one  another  the  reasons  for  our  decision.  Such

behaviour,  it  must  be  confessed,  was  most  strange.  Later  on  we

recognized that we had accepted the suggestion that we should go to

Athens instead of Corfu instantly and most readily. But, if so, why had

we spent the interval before the offices opened in such a gloomy state

and foreseen nothing but obstacles and difficulties?

 


                  A Disturbance Of Memory On The Acropolis

                                                                                      4825

 

      When,  finally,  on  the  afternoon  after  our  arrival,  I  stood  on  the

Acropolis and cast my eyes around upon the landscape, a surprising

thought suddenly entered my mind: ‘So all this really does exist, just

as we learnt at school!’ To describe the situation more accurately, the

person  who  gave  expression  to  the  remark  was  divided,  far  more

sharply than was usually noticeable, from another person who took

cognizance of the remark; and both were astonished, though not by

the same thing. The first behaved as though he were obliged, under

the impact of an unequivocal observation, to believe in something the

reality of which had hitherto seemed doubtful. If I may make a slight

exaggeration,  it  was  as  if  someone,  walking  beside  Loch  Ness,

suddenly  caught  sight  of  the  form  of  the  famous  Monster  stranded

upon the shore and found himself driven to the admission: ‘So it really

does  exist  -  the  sea-serpent  we’ve  never  believed  in!’  The  second

person, on the other hand, was justifiably astonished, because he had

been unaware that the real existence of Athens, the Acropolis, and the

landscape  around  it  had  ever  been  objects  of  doubt.  What  he  had

been expecting was rather some expression of delight or admiration.

      Now  it  would  be  easy  to  argue  that  this  strange  thought  that

occurred to me on the Acropolis only serves to emphasize the fact that

seeing  something  with  one’s  own  eyes  is  after  all  quite  a  differentthing  from  hearing  or  reading  about  it.  But  it  would  remain  a  very

strange way of clothing an uninteresting commonplace. Or it would be

possible to maintain that it was true that when I was a schoolboy I had

thought I was convinced of the historical reality of the city of Athens

and its history, but that the occurrence of this idea on the Acropolis

had precisely shown that in my unconscious I had not believed in it,

and that I was only now acquiring a conviction that ‘reached down to

the unconscious’. An explanation of this sort sounds very profound,

but it is easier to assert than to prove; moreover, it is very much open

to  attack  upon  theoretical  grounds.  No.  I  believe  that  the  two

phenomena, the depression at Trieste and the idea on the Acropolis,

were  intimately  connected.  And  the  first  of  these  is  more  easily

intelligible and may help us towards an explanation of the second.

   The experience at Trieste was, it will be noticed, also no more than

an expression of incredulity: ‘We’re going to see Athens? Out of the

question! - it will be far too difficult!’ The accompanying depression

corresponded to a regret that it was out of the question: it would have

been so lovely. And now we know where we are. It is one of those

cases of ‘too good to be true’ that we come across so often. It is an

example of the incredulity that arises so often when we are surprised

by a piece of good news, when we hear we have won a prize, for

instance, or drawn a winner, or when a girl learns that the man whom

she  has  secretly  loved  has  asked  her  parents  for  leave  to  pay  his

addresses to her.

 


                  A Disturbance Of Memory On The Acropolis

                                                                                      4826

 

   When we have established the existence of a phenomenon, the next

question  is  of  course  as  to  its  cause.  Incredulity  of  this  kind  is

obviously  an  attempt  to  repudiate  a  piece  of  reality;  but  there  is

something strange about it. We should not be in the least astonished if

an attempt of this kind were aimed at a piece of reality that threatened

to  bring  unpleasure:  the  mechanism  of  our  mind  is,  so  to  speak,

planned to work along just such lines. But why should such incredulity

arise in something which, on the contrary, promises to bring a highdegree of pleasure? Truly paradoxical behaviour! But I recollect that

on a previous occasion I dealt with the similar case of the people who,

as I put it, are ‘wrecked by success’. As a rule people fall ill as a result

of frustration, of the non-fulfilment of some vital necessity or desire.

But with these people the opposite is the case; they fall ill, or even go

entirely to pieces, because an overwhelmingly powerful wish of theirs

has been fulfilled. But the contrast between the two situations is not so

great as it seems at first. What happens in the paradoxical case is

merely that the place of the external frustration is taken by an internal

one.  The  sufferer  does  not  permit  himself  happiness:  the  internal

frustration  commands  him  to  cling  to  the  external  one.  But  why?

Because - so runs the answer in a number of cases - one cannot

expect Fate to grant one anything so good. In fact, another instance of

‘too good to be true’, the expression of a pessimism of which a large

portion seems to find a home in many of us. In another set of cases,

just as in those who are wrecked by success, we find a sense of guilt

or  inferiority,  which  can  be  translated:  ‘I’m  not  worthy  of  such

happiness, I don’t deserve it.’ But these two motives are essentially

the same, for one is only a projection of the other. For, as has long

been  known,  the  Fate  which  we  expect  to  treat  us  so  badly  is  a

materialization of our conscience, of the severe super-ego within us,

itself a residue of the punitive agency of our childhood.

 


                  A Disturbance Of Memory On The Acropolis

                                                                                      4827

 

   This, I think, explains our behaviour in Trieste. We could not believe

that we were to be given the joy of seeing Athens. The fact that the

piece of reality that we were trying to repudiate was to begin with only

a possibility determined the character of our immediate reactions. But

when we were standing on the Acropolis the possibility had become

an actuality, and the same disbelief found a different but far clearer

expression.  In  an  undistorted  form  this  should  have  been:  ‘I  could

really not have imagined it possible that I should ever be granted the

sight of Athens with my own eyes - as is now indubitably the case!’

When I recall the passionate desire to travel and see the world bywhich I was dominated at school and later, and how long it was before

that desire began to find its fulfilment, I am not surprised at its after-

effect on the Acropolis; I was then forty-eight years old. I did not ask

my  younger  brother  whether  he  felt  anything  of  the  same  sort.  A

certain amount of reserve surrounded the whole episode; and it was

this  which  had  already  interfered  with  our  exchanging  thoughts  at

Trieste.

   If I have rightly guessed the meaning of the thought that came to me

on the Acropolis and if it did in fact express my joyful astonishment at

finding myself at that spot, the further question now arises why this

meaning should have been subjected in the thought itself to such a

distorted and distorting disguise.

   The essential subject-matter of the thought, to be sure, was retained

even  in  the  distortion  -  that  is,  incredulity:  ‘By  the  evidence  of  my

senses I am now standing on the Acropolis, but I cannot believe it.’

This incredulity, however, this doubt of a piece of reality, was doubly

displaced in its actual expression: first, it was shifted back into the

past, and secondly it was transposed from my relation to the Acropolis

on to the very existence of the Acropolis. And so something occurred

which was equivalent to an assertion that at some time in the past I

had doubted the real existence of the Acropolis - which, however, my

memory rejected as being incorrect and, indeed, impossible.

 


                  A Disturbance Of Memory On The Acropolis

                                                                                      4828

 

      The  two  distortions  involve  two  independent  problems.  We  can

attempt  to  penetrate  deeper  into  the  process  of  transformation.

Without for the moment particularizing as to how I have arrived at the

idea, I will start from the presumption that the original factor must have

been a sense of some feeling of the unbelievable and the unreal in the

situation at the moment. The situation included myself, the Acropolis

and my perception of it. I could not account for this doubt; I obviously

could not attach the doubt to my sensory impressions of the Acropolis.

But I remembered that in the past I had had a doubt about something

which had to do with this precise locality, and I thus found the meansfor  shifting  the  doubt  into  the  past.  In  the  process,  however,  the

subject-matter of the doubt was changed. I did not simply recollect

that in my early years I had doubted whether I myself would ever see

the Acropolis, but I asserted that at that time I had disbelieved in the

reality  of  the  Acropolis  itself.  It  is  precisely  this  effect  of  the

displacement that leads me to think that the actual situation on the

Acropolis contained an element of doubt of reality. I have certainly not

yet  succeeded  in  making  the  process  clear;  so  I  will  conclude  by

saying  briefly  that  the  whole  psychical  situation,  which  seems  so

confused and is so difficult to describe, can be satisfactorily cleared up

by assuming that at the time I had (or might have had) a momentary

feeling: ‘What I see here is not real.’ Such a feeling is known as a

‘feeling of derealization’. I made an attempt to ward that feeling off,

and I succeeded, at the cost of making a false pronouncement about

the past.

   These derealizations are remarkable phenomena which are still little

understood.  They  are  spoken  of  as  ‘sensations’,  but  they  are

obviously  complicated  processes,  attached  to  particular  mental

contents  and  bound  up  with  decisions  made  about  those  contents.

They arise very frequently in certain mental diseases, but they are not

unknown  among  normal  people,  just  as  hallucinations  occasionally

occur  in  the  healthy.  Nevertheless  they  are  certainly  failures  in

functioning  and,  like  dreams,  which,  in  spite  of  their  regular

occurrence  in  healthy  people,  serve  us  as  models  of  psychological

disorder, they are abnormal structures. These phenomena are to be

observed in two forms: the subject feels either that a piece of reality or

that a piece of his own self is strange to him. In the latter case we

speak  of  ‘depersonalizations’;  derealizations  and  depersonalizations

are intimately connected. There is another set of phenomena which

may be regarded as their positive counterparts - what are known as

‘fausse  reconnaissance’,  ‘déià  vu’,  ‘déjà  raconté’  etc.,  illusions  in

which we seek to accept something as belonging to our ego, just as in

the  derealizations  we  are  anxious  to  keep  something  out  of  us.  A

naïvely  mystical  and  unpsychological  attempt  at  explaining  the

phenomena of ‘déjà vu’ endeavours to find evidence in it of a former

existence  of  our  mental  self.  Depersonalization  leads  us  on  to  the

extraordinary condition of ‘double conscience’, which is more correctlydescribed as ‘split personality’. But all of this is so obscure and has

been  so  little  mastered  scientifically  that  I  must  refrain  from  talking

about it any more to you.

 


                  A Disturbance Of Memory On The Acropolis

                                                                                      4829

 

      It  will  be  enough  for  my  purposes  if  I  return  to  two  general

characteristics of the phenomena of derealization. The first is that they

all serve the purpose of defence; they aim at keeping something away

from the ego, at disavowing it. Now, new elements, which may give

occasion  for  defensive  measures,  approach  the  ego  from  two

directions - from the real external world and from the internal world of

thoughts and impulses that emerge in the ego. It is possible that this

alternative  coincides  with  the  choice  between  derealizations  proper

and depersonalizations. There are an extraordinarily large number of

methods  (or  mechanisms,  as  we  say)  used  by  our  ego  in  the

discharge of its defensive functions. An investigation is at this moment

being carried on close at hand which is devoted to the study of these

methods of defence: my daughter, the child analyst, is writing a book

upon them. The most primitive and thorough-going of these methods,

‘repression’,  was  the  starting  point  of  the  whole  of  our  deeper

understanding of psychopathology. Between repression and what may

be  termed  the  normal  method  of  fending  off  what  is  distressing  or

unbearable,  by  means  of  recognizing  it,  considering  it,  making  a

judgement upon it and taking appropriate action about it, there lie a

whole series of more or less clearly pathological methods of behaviour

on the part of the ego. May I stop for a moment to remind you of a

marginal  case  of  this  kind  of  defence?  You  remember  the  famous

lament of the Spanish Moors ‘Ay de mi Alhama’, which tells how King

Boabdil received the news of the fall of his city of Alhama. He feels

that this loss means the end of his rule. But he will not ‘let it be true’,

he determines to treat the news as ‘non arrivé’. The verse runs:

 

                                                                ‘Cartas le fueron venidas
                                                                que Alhama era ganada:
                                                                las cartas echo en el fuego,                                                                y al mensajero matara.’

 

It is easy to guess that a further determinant of this behaviour of the

king was his need to combat a feeling of powerlessness. By burning

the letters and having the messenger killed he was still trying to show

his absolute power.

 


                  A Disturbance Of Memory On The Acropolis

                                                                                      4830

 

      The  second  general  characteristic  of  the  derealizations  -  their

dependence upon the past, upon the ego’s store of memories and

upon earlier distressing experiences which have since perhaps fallen

victim to repression - is not accepted without dispute. But precisely my

own  experience  on  the  Acropolis,  which  actually  culminated  in  a

disturbance  of  memory  and  a  falsification  of  the  past,  helps  us  to

demonstrate this connection. It is not true that in my schooldays I ever

doubted the real existence of Athens. I only doubted whether I should

ever see Athens. It seemed to me beyond the realms of possibility that

I should travel so far - that I should ‘go such a long way’. This was

linked up with the limitations and poverty of our conditions of life in my

youth. My longing to travel was no doubt also the expression of a wish

to  escape  from  that  pressure,  like  the  force  which  drives  so  many

adolescent children to run away from home. I had long seen clearly

that a great part of the pleasure of travel lies in the fulfilment of these

early wishes - that it is rooted, that is, in dissatisfaction with home and

family. When first one catches sight of the sea, crosses the ocean and

experiences as realities cities and lands which for so long had been

distant, unattainable things of desire - one feels oneself like a hero

who has performed deeds of improbable greatness. I might that day

on the Acropolis have said to my brother: ‘Do you still remember how,

when we were young, we used day after day to walk along the same

streets on our way to school, and how every Sunday we used to go to

the Prater or on some excursion we knew so well? And now, here we

are in Athens, and standing on the Acropolis! We really have gone a

long way!’ So too, if I may compare such a small event with a greater

one,  Napoleon,  during  his  coronation  as  Emperor  in  Notre  Dame,turned to one of his brothers - it must no doubt have been the eldest

one, Joseph - and remarked: ‘What would Monsieur notre Père have

said to this, if he could have been here to-day?’

 


                  A Disturbance Of Memory On The Acropolis

                                                                                      4831

 

   But here we come upon the solution of the little problem of why it

was that already at Trieste we interfered with our enjoyment of the

voyage to Athens. It must be that a sense of guilt was attached to the

satisfaction  in  having  gone  such  a  long  way:  there  was  something

about it that was wrong, that from earliest times had been forbidden. It

was  something  to  do  with  a  child’s  criticism  of  his  father,  with  the

undervaluation  which  took  the  place  of  the  overvaluation  of  earlier

childhood. It seems as though the essence of success was to have

got further than one’s father, and as though to excel one’s father was

still something forbidden.

   As an addition to this generally valid motive there was a special

factor present in our particular case. The very theme of Athens and

the Acropolis in itself contained evidence of the son’s superiority. Our

father had been in business, he had had no secondary education, and

Athens could not have meant much to him. Thus what interfered with

our enjoyment of the journey to Athens was a feeling filial piety. And

now you will no longer wonder that the recollection of this incident on

the Acropolis should have troubled me so often since I myself have

grown old and stand in need of forbearance and can travel no more.

 

                                                        I am ever sincerely yours,

                                                                        SIGM. FREUD

January, 1936

                                                                                       4832

 

                            LETTER TO GEORG FUCHS

                                        (1931)

 

After reading your letter I felt a wave of the deepest sympathy, but it

was  soon  halted  by  two  reflections  -  an  internal  difficulty  and  an

external obstacle. A sentence from your own preface offers me an apt

expression of the former: ‘No doubt, however, there are people who

have so poor an opinion of the civilized humanity of to-day that they

deny the existence of a world conscience.’ I believe I am one of those

people. For instance, I could not subscribe to the assertion that the

treatment of convicted prisoners is a disgrace to our civilization. On

the contrary, a voice would tell me, it is in perfect harmony with our

civilization,  a  necessary  expression  of  the  brutality  and  lack  of

understanding which dominate the civilized humanity of the present

time. And if by some miracle people suddenly became convinced that

the reform of the penal system is the first and most urgent task before

our  civilization,  what  else  would  emerge  than  that  capitalist  society

has not now the means for meeting the expenditure which that reform

would demand? The second, the external, difficulty is brought to light

in the passages in your letter in which you exalt me into a recognized

intellectual  leader  and  cultural  innovator  and  attribute  to  me  the

privilege of having the ear of the civilized world. I only wish, my dear

Sir, that it were so: I should not in that case refuse your request. But it

seems to me that I am persona ingrata, if not ingratissima, with the

German people - and moreover with the learned and the unlearned

alike. I hope most positively that you will not think that I feel seriously

aggrieved by these signs of disapproval. It is tens of years since I

have been so foolish; measured by your example, moreover, it would

be too ridiculous. I only mention these trivialities to confirm the fact

that I am no desirable advocate for a book which seeks to kindle its

readers’ sympathies on behalf of a good cause. Let me add that your

book is a moving one, noble, wise and good.

                                                                                       4833

 

    PREFACE TO RICHARD STERBA’S DICTIONARY OF PSYCHO-

                                      ANALYSIS

                                        (1936)

 

                                                                          July 3, 1932.

Dear Dr. Sterba, Your Dictionary gives me the impression of being a

valuable aid to learners and of being a fine achievement on its own

account. The precision and correctness of the individual entries is in

fact of commendable excellence. English and French translations of

the headings are not indispensable but would add further to the value

of the work. I do not overlook the fact that the path from the letter A to

the end of the alphabet is a very long one, and that to follow it would

mean an enormous burden of work for you. So do not do it unless you

feel an internal obligation - only obey a compulsion of that kind and

certainly not any external pressure.

                                                                      Yours sincerely,

                                                                                  Freud.

                                                                                       4834

 

                      PREFACE TO MARIE BONAPARTE’S

    THE LIFE AND WORKS OF EDGAR ALLAN POE: A PSYCHO-

                          ANALYTIC INTERPRETATION

                                        (1933)

 

In this volume my friend and pupil, Marie Bonaparte, has directed the

light of psycho-analysis upon the life and work of a great writer of a

pathological  type.  Thanks  to  her  interpretative  efforts,  we  can  now

understand  how  much  of  the  characteristics  of  his  work  were

determined by their author’s special nature; but we also learn that this

was  itself  the  precipitate  of  powerful  emotional  ties  and  painful

experiences  in  his  early  youth.  Investigations  of  this  kind  are  not

intended to explain an author’s genius, but they show what motive

forces aroused it and what material was offered to him by destiny.

There is a particular fascination in studying the laws of the human

mind as exemplified in outstanding individuals.

                                                                                       4835

 

            TO THOMAS MANN ON HIS SIXTIETH BIRTHDAY

                                        (1935)

 

My Dear Thomas Mann, Accept as a friend my affectionate greetings

on  your  sixtieth  birthday.  I  am  one  of  your  ‘oldest’  readers  and

admirers and I might wish you a very long and happy life as is the

custom on such occasions. But I shall not do so. Wishing is cheap and

strikes me as a relapse into the days when people believed in the

magical omnipotence of thoughts. I think, too, from my most personal

experience, that it is well if a compassionate fate sets a timely end to

the length of our life.

   Nor do I think the practice deserves imitation by which affection on

these festive occasions disregards respect, and by which the subject

of the celebration is compelled to hear himself loaded with praise as a

man and analysed and criticized as an artist. I shall not be guilty of

such presumption. I can allow myself something else however. In the

name of a countless number of your contemporaries I can express to

you  our  confidence  that  you  will  never  do  or  say  -  for  an  author’s

words are deeds - anything that is cowardly or base. Even in times

and circumstances that perplex the judgement you will take the right

path and point it out to others.

                                                                Yours very sincerely,

                                                                                    Freud

June 1935.

                                                                                       4836

 

                            MOSES AND MONOTHEISM

                                    THREE ESSAYS

                                        (1939)

 


                                                                                      4837

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4838

 

                                              I

 

                                MOSES AN EGYPTIAN

 

To  deprive  a  people  of  the  man  whom  they  take  pride  in  as  the

greatest  of  their  sons  is  not  a  thing  to  be  gladly  or  carelessly

undertaken, least of all by someone who is himself one of them. But

we cannot allow any such reflection to induce us to put the truth aside

in  favour  of  what  are  supposed  to  be  national  interests;  and,

moreover, the clarification of a set of facts may be expected to bring

us a gain in knowledge.

   The man Moses, who set the Jewish people free, who gave them

their laws and founded their religion, dates from such remote times

that we cannot evade a preliminary enquiry as to whether he was a

historical personage or a creature of legend. If he lived, it was in the

thirteenth, though it may have been in the fourteenth, century before

Christ.  We  have  no  information  about  him  except  from  the  sacred

books of the Jews and their traditions as recorded in writing. Although

a decision on the question thus lacks final certainty, an overwhelming

majority of historians have nevertheless pronounced in favour of the

view that Moses was a real person and that the Exodus from Egypt

associated with him did in fact take place. It is justly argued that thelater history of the people of Israel would be incomprehensible if this

premiss  were  not  accepted.  Indeed,  science  to-day  has  become

altogether  more  circumspect  and  handles  traditions  far  more

indulgently than in the early days of historical criticism.

   The first thing that attracts our attention about the figure of Moses is

his name, which is ‘Mosheh’ in Hebrew. ‘What is its origin?’ we may

ask, ‘and what does it mean?’ As we know, the account in the second

chapter of Exodus already provides an answer. We are told there that

the Egyptian princess who rescued the infant boy from exposure in the

Nile  gave  him  that  name,  putting  forward  an  etymological  reason:

‘because I drew him out of the water’. This explanation, however, is

clearly inadequate. ‘The Biblical interpretation of the name as "he who

was  drawn  out  of  the  water"’,  argues  a  writer  in  the Jüdisches

Lexicon,¹  ‘is  popular  etymology,  with  which,  to  begin  with,  it  is

impossible  to  harmonize  the active  form  of  the  Hebrew  word  -  for

"Mosheh" can at most only mean "he who draws out".’ We can support

this rejection by two further arguments: in the first place, it is absurd to

attribute to an Egyptian princess a derivation of the name from the

Hebrew, and secondly, the water out of which the child was drawn

was most probably not the water of the Nile.

 

   ¹ Herlitz and Kirschner (1930), 4 (1), 303.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4839

 

   On the other hand, a suspicion has long been expressed, and in

many  different  quarters,  that  the  name  ‘Moses’  is  derived  from  the

Egyptian vocabulary. Instead of enumerating all the authorities who

have argued in this sense, I will quote the relevant passage from a

comparatively recent book, The Dawn of Conscience (1934), by J. H.

Breasted, a writer whose History of Egypt  (1906)  is  regarded  as  a

standard work: ‘It is important to notice that his name, Moses, was

Egyptian. It is simply the Egyptian word "mose" meaning "child", and is

an  abridgement  of  a  fuller  form  of  such  names  as  "Amen-mose"

meaning "Amon-a-child" or "Ptah-mose" meaning "Ptah-a-child", these

forms themselves being likewise abbreviations for the complete form  "Amon-(has-given)-a-child"  or  "Ptah-(has  given)-a-child".  The

abbreviation  "child"  early  became  a  convenient  rapid  form  for  the

cumbrous full name, and the name Mose, "child", is not uncommon on

the Egyptian monuments. The father of Moses without doubt prefixed

to his son’s name that of an Egyptian god like Amon or Ptah, and this

divine name was gradually lost in current usage, till the boy was called

"Mose". (The final s is an addition drawn from the Greek translation of

the Old Testament. It is not in the Hebrew which has "Mosheh").’¹ I

have repeated this passage word for word and I am by no means

ready to share responsibility for its details. I am also rather surprised

that  Breasted  has  failed  to  mention  precisely  the  analogous

theophorous names which figure in the list of Egyptian kings, such as

Ahmose, Thoth-mose and Ra-mose.

 

   ¹ Breasted, 1934, 350.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4840

 

   Now we should have expected that one of the many people who

have recognized that ‘Moses’ is an Egyptian name would also have

drawn the conclusion or would at least have considered the possibility

that the person who bore this Egyptian name may himself have been

an  Egyptian.  In  relation  to  modern  times  we  have  no  hesitation  in

drawing  such  conclusions,  though  nowadays  people  bear  not  one

name but two - a family name and a personal name - and though a

change  of  name  or  the  adoption  of  a  similar  one  in  fresh

circumstances is not beyond possibility. Thus we are not in the least

surprised to find it confirmed that the poet Chamisso was French by

birth,  that  Napoleon  Buonaparte,  on  the  other  hand,  was  of  Italian

extraction and that Benjamin Disraeli was indeed an Italian Jew, as we

should  expect  from  his  name.  In  relation  to  ancient  and  primitive

times, one would have thought that a conclusion such as this as to a

person’s nationality based on his name would have seemed far more

reliable and in fact unimpeachable. Nevertheless, so far as I know, no

historian has drawn this conclusion in the case of Moses - not even

any of those who, once again like Breasted himself (1934, 354), areready to assume that ‘Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the

Egyptians’.¹

      What  prevented  their  doing  so  cannot  be  judged  with  certainty.

Possibly their reverence for Biblical tradition was invincible. Possibly

the  notion  that  the  man  Moses  might  have  been  anything  but  a

Hebrew seemed too monstrous. However that may be, it emerges that

the  recognition  that  the  name  of  Moses  is  Egyptian  has  not  been

looked upon as affording decisive evidence of his origin, and that no

further conclusions have been drawn from it. If the question of this

great man’s nationality is regarded as important, it would seem to be

desirable  to  bring  forward  fresh  material  that  would  help  towards

answering it.

 

   ¹ Although  the  suspicion  that  Moses  was  an  Egyptian  has  been  voiced  often  enough

without reference to his name, from the earliest times up to the present.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4841

 

   That is what my short paper aims at doing. Its claim to be given a

place in the pages of Imago rests on the fact that the substance of

what  it  has  to  contribute  is  an  application  of  psycho-analysis.  The

argument  arrived  at  in  this  way  will  undoubtedly  only  impress  that

minority of readers who are familiar with analytic thinking and who are

able  to  appreciate  its  findings.  To  them,  however,  it  will,  I  hope,

appear significant.

 

   In 1909 Otto Rank, who was at that time still under my influence,

published, following a suggestion of mine, a book bearing the title Der

Mythus von der Geburt des Helden.¹ It deals with the fact that ‘almost

all the prominent civilized nations... began at an early stage to glorify

their  heroes,  legendary  kings  and  princes,  founders  of  religions,

dynasties, empires or cities, in brief their national heroes, in a number

of poetic tales and legends. The history of the birth and of the early life

of these personalities came to be especially invested with phantastic

features, which, indifferent peoples, even though widely separated by

space  and  entirely  independent  of  each  other,  present  a  bafflingsimilarity and in part, indeed, a literal conformity. Many investigators

have been impressed with this fact, which has long been recognized.’

If, following Rank, we construct (by a technique a little like Galton’s)

an ‘average legend’ that brings into prominence the essential features

of all these stories, we arrive at the following picture:

   ‘The hero is the child of the most aristocratic parents; usually the

son of a king.

   ‘His conception is preceded by difficulties, such as abstinence or

prolonged  barrenness  or  his  parents  having  to  have  intercourse  in

secret  owing  to  external  prohibitions  or  obstacles.  During  the

pregnancy, or even earlier, there is a prophecy (in the form of a dream

or oracle) cautioning against his birth, usually threatening danger to

his father.

 

   ¹ It is far from being my intention to belittle the value of Rank’s independent contributions to

the work.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4842

 

   ‘As a result of this the new-born child is condemned to death or to

exposure,  usually  by  the  orders  of his  father  or  of  someone

representing him; as a rule he is given over to the water in a casket.

   ‘He is afterwards rescued by animals or by humble people (such as

shepherds) and is suckled by a female animal or by a humble woman.

   ‘After he has grown up, he rediscovers his aristocratic parents after

highly variegated experiences, takes his revenge on his father, on the

one hand, and is acknowledged on the other and achieves greatness

and fame.’

   The oldest of the historical figures to whom this myth of birth is

attached is Sargon of Agade, the founder of Babylon (c. 2800 B.C.).

For us in particular it will not be without interest to quote the account

of it, which is attributed to him himself:

   ‘Sargon, the mighty King, the King of Agade am I. My mother was a

Vestal, my father I knew not, while my father’s brother dwelt in the

mountains.  In  my  city,  Azupirani,  which  lies  on  the  bank  of  the

Euphrates, my mother, the Vestal, conceived me. Secretly she boreme. She laid me in a coffer made of reeds, closed my doorway with

pitch, and let me down into the river, which did not drown me. The

river carried me to Akki, the drawer of water. Akki, the drawer of water,

lifted me out in the kindness of his heart. Akki, the drawer of water,

brought me up as his own son. Akki, the drawer of water, made me his

gardener, While I worked as a gardener, Ishtar grew fond of me, I

became King and for forty-five years I held kingly sway.’

      The  names  most  familiar  to  us  in  the  series  which  begins  with

Sargon of Agade are Moses, Cyrus and Romulus. But in addition to

these  Rank  has  brought  together  a  whole  number  of  other  heroic

figures from poetry or legend, of whom the same story of their youth is

told, either in its entirety or in easily recognizable fragments - including

Oedipus,  Karna,  Paris,  Telephos,  Perseus,  Heracles,  Gilgamesh,

Amphion and Zethos, and others.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4843

 

   Rank’s researches have made us acquainted with the source and

purpose  of  this  myth.  I  need  only  refer  to  them  with  some  brief

indications.  A  hero  is  someone  who  has  had  the  courage  to  rebel

against his father and has in the end victoriously overcome him. Our

myth traces this struggle back as far as the individual’s prehistory, for

it represents him as being born against his father’s will and rescued

despite  his  father’s  evil  intention.  The  exposure  in  a  casket  is  an

unmistakable symbolic representation of birth: the casket is the womb

and  the  water  is  the  amniotic  fluid.  The  parent-child  relationship  is

represented  in  countless  dreams  by  pulling  out  of  the  water  or

rescuing from the water. When a people’s imagination attaches the

myth of birth which we are discussing to an outstanding figure, it is

intending in that way to recognize him as a hero and to announce that

he has fulfilled the regular pattern of a hero’s life. In fact, however, the

source of the whole poetic fiction is what is known as a child’s ‘family

romance’, in which the son reacts to a change in his emotional relation

to his parents and in particular to his father. A child’s earliest years are

dominated by an enormous overvaluation of his father; in accordancewith this a king and queen in dreams and fairy tales invariably stand

for parents. Later, under the influence of rivalry and of disappointment

in real life, the child begins to detach himself from his parents and to

adopt a critical attitude towards his father. Thus the two families in the

myth - the aristocratic one and the humble one - are both of them

reflections  of  the  child’s  own  family  as  they  appeared  to  him  in

successive periods of his life.

   We may fairly say that these explanations make the widespread and

uniform nature of myths of the birth of heroes fully intelligible. For that

reason it is all the more deserving of interest that the legend of the

birth and exposure of Moses occupies a special position and, indeed,

in one essential respect contradicts the rest.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4844

 

   Let us start from the two families between which, according to the

legend,  the  child’s  destiny  is  played  out.  According  to  the  analytic

interpretation, as we know, the families are one and the same and are

only differentiated chronologically. In the typical form of the legend, it

is the first family, the one into which the child is born, which is the

aristocratic one, most often of royal rank; the second family, the one in

which the child grows up: is the one that is humble or has fallen on evil

days.  This  tallies,  moreover,  with  the  circumstances  to  which  the

interpretation traces the legend back. Only in the legend of Oedipus is

this difference blurred: the child which has been exposed by one royal

family  is  received  by  another  royal  couple.  It  can  scarcely  be  by

chance, one feels, that precisely in this example the original identity of

the two families may be dimly perceived in the legend itself. The social

contrast between the two families provides the myth - which, as we

know, is designed to stress the heroic nature of a great man with a

second function which becomes of special significance when applied

to historical personages. For the myth can also be employed to create

a patent of nobility for the hero, to raise his social standing. To the

Medes, Cyrus was a foreign conqueror; but by means of a legend of

exposure he became the grandson of their king. The same applies toRomulus.  If  any  such  person  existed,  he  must  have  been  an

adventurer of unknown origin, an upstart; the legend, however, made

him offspring and heir of the royal house of Alba Longa.

   With Moses things were quite different. In his case the first family,

elsewhere the aristocratic one, was sufficiently modest. He was the

child of Jewish Levites. But the place of the second family, elsewhere

the humble one, was taken by the royal house of Egypt; the princess

brought him up as her own son. This deviation from type has puzzled

many people. Eduard Meyer, and others following him, assumed that

originally the legend was different. Pharaoh, according to them, had

been warned by a prophetic dream¹ that a son born to his daughter

would bring danger to him and his kingdom. He therefore had the child

exposed  in  the  Nile  after  his  birth.  But  he  was  rescued  by  Jewish

people and brought up as their child. For ‘nationalist motives’ (as Rank

puts it²) the legend would then have been given the modified form in

which we know it.

 

   ¹ This is also mentioned in the account given by Flavius Josephus.

   ² Rank, 1909, 80 n.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4845

 

   A moment’s reflection, however, tells us that an original legend of

Moses  like  this,  one  no  longer  deviating  from  the  other  legends,

cannot have existed. For it was either of Egyptian or of Jewish origin.

The  first  alternative  is  ruled  out:  the  Egyptians  had  no  motive  for

glorifying Moses, since he was no hero to them. We are to suppose,

then, that the legend was created among the Jewish people - that is to

say, that it was attached in its familiar form to the figure of their leader.

But it was totally unsuitable for that purpose, for what would be the

use  to  a  people  of  a  legend  which  made  their  great  man  into  a

foreigner?

   The legend of Moses, in the form in which we have it to-day, falls

notably short of its secret intention. If Moses was not of royal birth, the

legend could not stamp him as a hero; if it left him as a Jewish child, it

had done nothing to raise his social standing. Only one small fragmentof the entire myth remains effective: the assurance that the child had

survived in the face of powerful external forces. (This feature recurs in

the story of the childhood of Jesus, in which King Herod takes over the

role of Pharaoh.) Thus we are in fact free to suppose that some later

and clumsy adapter of the material of the legend found an opportunity

for  introducing  into  the  story  of  his  hero  Moses  something  which

resembled  the  classical  exposure  legends  marking  out  a  hero,  but

which, on account of the special circumstances of the case, was not

applicable to Moses,

 

      Our  investigations  might  have  had  to  rest  content  with  this

inconclusive and, moreover, uncertain outcome, and they might have

done nothing towards answering the question of whether Moses was

an Egyptian. There is, however, another and perhaps more hopeful

line of approach to an assessment of the legend of exposure.

   Let us return to the two families of the myth. At the level of analytic

interpretation they are, as we know, identical; whereas at the level of

the  myth  they  are  differentiated  into  an  aristocratic  family  and  a

humble one. Where, however, the figure to whom the myth is attached

is a historical one, there is a third level - that of reality. One of the

families is the real one, in which the person in question (the great

man) was actually born and grew up; the other is fictitious, fabricated

by the myth in pursuit of its own intentions. As a rule the humble family

is  the  real  one  and  the  aristocratic  family  the  fabricated  one.  The

situation in the case of Moses seemed somehow different. And here

the new line of approach will perhaps lead to a clarification: in every

instance which it has been possible to test, the first family, the one

from  which  the  child  was  exposed,  was  the  invented  one,  and  the

second one, in which he was received and grew up, was the real one.

If we have the courage to recognize this assertion as universally true

and as applying also to the legend of Moses, then all at once we see

things clearly: Moses was an Egyptian - probably an aristocrat - whom

the legend was designed to turn into a Jew. And that would be our

conclusion. The exposure in the water was at its correct point in the

story; but, in order to fit in with the fresh purpose, its aim had to be

somewhat violently twisted. From being a way of sacrificing the child,

it was turned into a means of rescuing him. 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4846

 

   The deviation of the legend of Moses from all the others of its kind

can  be  traced  back  to  a  special  feature  of  his  history.  Whereas

normally  a  hero,  in  the  course  of  his  life,  rises  above  his  humble

beginnings, the heroic life of the man Moses began with his stepping

down  from  his  exalted  position  and  descending  to  the  level  of  the

Children of Israel.

 

   We started on this brief enquiry in the expectation of deriving a fresh

argument  from  it  in  support  of  the  suspicion  that  Moses  was  an

Egyptian. We have seen that the first argument, based on his name,

failed with many people to carry conviction.¹ We must be prepared to

find that this new argument, based on an analysis of the legend of

exposure, may have no better success. It will no doubt be objected

that  the  circumstances  of  the  construction  and  transformation  of

legends are, after all, too obscure to justify a conclusion such as ours

and that the traditions surrounding the heroic figure of Moses - with all

their  confusion  and  contradictions  and  their  unmistakable  signs  of

centuries  of  continuous  and  tendentious  revisions  and

superimpositions - are bound to baffle every effort to bring to light the

kernel of historical truth that lies behind them. I do not myself share

this dissenting attitude but neither am I in a position to refute it.

 

   ¹ Thus Eduard Meyer writes (1905, 651): ‘The name "Moses" is probably Egyptian, and the

name "Pinchas" in the priestly family of Shiloh . . . is undoubtedly Egyptian. Of course this
does  not  prove  that  these  families  were  of  Egyptian  origin,  but,  no  doubt,  that  they  had
connections with Egypt.’ We may ask, to be sure, what sort of connections this is supposed to
make us think of.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4847

 

   If no more certainty could be reached than this, why, it may be

asked, have I brought this enquiry into public notice at all? I am sorryto say that even my justification for doing so cannot go beyond hints.

For if one allows oneself to be carried away by the two arguments

which  I  have  put  forward  here,  and  if  one  sets  out  to  take  the

hypothesis  seriously  that  Moses  was  an  aristocratic  Egyptian,  very

interesting and far-reaching prospects are opened up. With the help of

some  not  very  remote  assumptions,  we  shall,  I  believe,  be  able  to

understand the motives which led Moses in the unusual step he took

and, closely related to this, to obtain a grasp of the possible basis of a

number of the characteristics and peculiarities of the laws and religion

which he gave to the Jewish people; and we shall even be led on to

important considerations regarding the origin of monotheist religions in

general. Such weighty conclusions cannot, however, be founded on

psychological  probabilities  alone.  Even  if  one  accepts  the  fact  of

Moses being an Egyptian as a first historical foothold, one would need

to have at least a second firm fact in order to defend the wealth of

emerging possibilities against the criticism of their being a product of

the imagination and too remote from reality. Objective evidence of the

period to which the life of Moses and with it the Exodus from Egypt are

to be referred would perhaps have fulfilled this requirement. But this

has  not  been  obtainable,  and  it  will  therefore  be  better  to  leave

unmentioned any further implications of the discovery that Moses was

an Egyptian.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4848

 

                                              II

 

                      IF MOSES WAS AN EGYPTIAN . . .

 

In an earlier contribution to this periodical,¹ I attempted to bring up a

fresh argument in support of the hypothesis that the man Moses, the

liberator and law-giver of the Jewish people, was not a Jew but an

Egyptian. It had long been observed that his name was derived from

the  Egyptian  vocabulary,  though  the  fact  had  not  been  properly

appreciated. What I added was that the interpretation of the myth ofexposure  which  was  linked  with  Moses  necessarily  led  to  the

inference that he was an Egyptian whom the needs of a people sought

to make into a Jew. I remarked at the end of my paper that important

and far-reaching implications followed from the hypothesis that Moses

was  an  Egyptian,  but  that  I  was  not  prepared  to  argue  publicly  in

favour  of  these  implications,  since  they  were  based  only  on

psychological probabilities and lacked any objective proof. The greater

the importance of the views arrived at in this way, the more strongly

one feels the need to beware of exposing them without a secure basis

to the critical assaults of the world around one - like a bronze statue

with feet of clay. Not even the most tempting probability is a protection

against error; even if all the parts of a problem seem to fit together like

the pieces of a jig-saw puzzle, one must reflect that what is probable

is not necessarily the truth and that the truth is not always probable.

And lastly, it did not seem attractive to find oneself classed with the

schoolmen  and  Talmudists  who  delight  in  exhibiting  their  ingenuity

without regard to how remote from reality their thesis may be.

   Notwithstanding these hesitations, which weigh as much with me to-

day as they did before, the outcome of my conflicting motives is a

decision to produce the present sequel to my earlier communication.

But once again this is not the whole story nor the most important part

of the whole story.

 

   ¹ Imago, 23 (1937).

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4849

 

                                          (1)

 

   If, then, Moses was an Egyptian - our first yield from this hypothesis

is a fresh enigma and one which it is hard to solve. If a people or a

tribe¹ sets out upon a great undertaking, it is only to be expected that

one of its members will take his place as their leader or will be chosen

for  that  post.  But  it  is  not  easy  to  guess  what  could  induce  an

aristocratic Egyptian - a prince, perhaps, or a priest or high official - to

put  himself  at  the  head  of  a  crowd  of  immigrant  foreigners  at  abackward level of civilization and to leave his country with them. The

well known contempt felt by the Egyptians for foreign nationals makes

such a proceeding particularly unlikely. Indeed I could well believe that

this  has  been  precisely  why  even  those  historians  who  have

recognized  that  the  man’s  name  was  Egyptian,  and  who  have

ascribed to him all the wisdom of the Egyptians, have been unwilling

to accept the obvious possibility that Moses was an Egyptian.

   This first difficulty is promptly followed by another. We must not

forget that Moses was not only the political leader of the Jews settled

in Egypt but was also their law-giver and educator and forced them

into the service of a new religion, which to this very day is known after

him as the Mosaic one. But is it so easy for one single man to create a

new  religion?  And  if  anyone  wishes  to  influence  another  person’s

religion,  would  he  not  most  naturally  convert  him  to  his  own?  The

Jewish people in Egypt were certainly not without a religion of some

form  or  other;  and  if  Moses,  who  gave  them  a  new  one,  was  an

Egyptian,  the  presumption  cannot  be  put  aside  that  this  other  new

religion was the Egyptian one.

   There is something that stands in the way of this possibility: the fact

of there being the most violent contrast between the Jewish religion

which is attributed to Moses and the religion of Egypt. The former is a

rigid monotheism on the grand scale: there is only one God, he is the

sole  God,  omnipotent,  unapproachable;  his  aspect  is  more  than

human eyes can tolerate, no image must be made of him, even his

name may not be spoken. In the Egyptian religion there is an almost

innumerable  host  of  deities  of  varying  dignity  and  origin:  a  few

personifications of great natural forces such as heaven and earth, sun

and moon, an occasional abstraction such as Ma’at (truth or justice) or

a caricature such as the dwarf-like Bes; but most of them local gods,

dating from the period when the country was divided into numerous

provinces,  with  the  shape  of  animals,  as  though  they  had  not  yet

completed their evolution from the old totem animals, with no sharp

distinctions  between  them,  and  scarcely  differing  in  the  functions

allotted to them. The hymns in honour of these gods say almost the

same  things  about  all  of  them,  and  identify  them  with  one  another

unhesitatingly, in a manner hopelessly confusing to us. The names of

gods are combined with one another, so that one of them may almostbe reduced to being an epithet of the other. Thus, in the heyday of the

‘New  Kingdom’  the  principal  god  of  the  city  of  Thebes  was  called

Amen-Re’; the first part of this compound stands for the ram-headed

god of the city, while Re’ is the name of the falcon-headed sun-god of

On. Magical and ceremonial acts, charms and amulets dominated the

service of these gods as they did the daily life of the Egyptians.

 

   ¹ We have no notion of what numbers were concerned in the Exodus from Egypt.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4850

 

      Some  of  these  differences  may  easily  be  derived  from  the

fundamental contrast between a strict monotheism and an unrestricted

polytheism. Others are evidently the result of a difference in spiritual

and  intellectual  level,  since  one  of  these  religions  is  very  close  to

primitive phases, while the other has risen to the heights of sublime

abstraction. It may be due to these two factors that one occasionally

has  an  impression  that  the  contrast  between  the  Mosaic  and  the

Egyptian  religions  is  a  deliberate  one  and  has  been  intentionally

heightened - when, for instance, one of them condemns magic and

sorcery in the severest terms, while in the other they proliferate with

the  greatest  luxuriance,  or  when  the  insatiable  appetite  of  the

Egyptians for embodying their gods in clay, stone and metal (to which

our  museums  owe  so  much  to-day)  is  confronted  with  the  harsh

prohibition  against  making  an  image  of  any  living  or  imagined

creature.

   But there is still another contrast between the two religions which is

not met by the explanations we have attempted. No other people of

antiquity  did  so  much  to  deny  death  or  took  such  pains  to  make

existence in the next world possible. And accordingly Osiris, the god

of the dead, the ruler of this other world, was the most popular and

undisputed of all the gods of Egypt. On the other hand the ancient

Jewish  religion  renounced  immortality  entirely;  the  possibility  of

existence  continuing  after  death  is  nowhere  and  never  mentioned.

And  this  is  all  the  more  remarkable  since  later  experiences  have

shown  that  belief  in  an  after-life  is  perfectly  well  compatible  with  amonotheist religion.

   It was our hope that the hypothesis that Moses was an Egyptian

would turn out to be fruitful and illuminating in various directions. But

the  first  conclusion  we  drew  from  that  hypothesis  -  that  the  new

religion which he gave to the Jews was his own Egyptian one - has

been  invalidated  by  our  realization  of  the  different,  and  indeed

contradictory, character of the two religions.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4851

 

 

                                          (2)

 

   Another possibility is opened to us by a remarkable event in the

history of the Egyptian religion, an event which has only lately been

recognized and appreciated. It remains possible that the religion which

Moses gave to his Jewish people was nevertheless his own - that it

was an Egyptian religion, though not the Egyptian religion.

   In the glorious Eighteenth Dynasty, under which Egypt first became

a world power, a young Pharaoh came to the throne in about the year

1375 B.C. To begin with he was called, like his father, Amenophis (IV),

but later he changed his name and not only his name. This king set

about forcing a new religion on his Egyptian subjects - a religion which

ran contrary to their thousands-of-years-old traditions and to all the

familiar  habits  of  their  lives.  It  was  a  strict  monotheism,  the  first

attempt of the kind, so far as we know, in the history of the world, and

along  with  the  belief  in  a  single  god  religious  intolerance  was

inevitably born, which had previously been alien to the ancient world

and remained so long afterwards. The reign of Amenophis, however,

lasted for only seventeen years. Very soon after his death in 1358

B.C., the new religion was swept away and the memory of the heretic

king was proscribed. What little we know of him is derived from the

ruins of the new royal capital which he built and dedicated to his god

and from the inscriptions in the rock tombs adjacent to it. Whatever we

can  learn  about  this  remarkable  and,  indeed,  unique  personality  isdeserving of the highest interest.¹

 

   ¹ Breasted calls him ‘the first individual in human history’.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4852

 

      Every  novelty  must  have  its  preliminaries  and  preconditions  in

something earlier. The origins of Egyptian monotheism can be traced

back  a  little  way  with  some  certainty.¹  For  a  considerable  time,

tendencies had been at work among the priesthood of the sun temple

at On (Heliopolis) in the direction of developing the idea of a universal

god  and  of  emphasizing  the  ethical  side  of  his  nature.  Ma’at,  the

goddess of truth, order and justice, was a daughter of the sun god Re’.

During the reign of Amenophis III, the father and predecessor of the

reformer,  the  worship  of  the  sun  god  had  already  gained  a  new

impetus - probably in opposition to Amun of Thebes, who had become

too powerful. A very ancient name of the sun god, Aten or Atum, was

brought into fresh prominence, and the young king found in this Aten

religion a movement ready to hand, which he did not have to be the

first to inspire but of which he could become an adherent.

   The political conditions in Egypt had begun at this time to exercise a

lasting influence on the Egyptian religion. As a result of the military

exploits of the great conqueror, Tuthmosis III, Egypt had become a

world power: the empire now included Nubia in the south, Palestine,

Syria and a part of Mesopotamia in the north. This imperialism was

reflected  in  religion  as  universalism  and  monotheism.  Since  the

Pharaoh’s  responsibilities  now  embraced  not  only  Egypt  but  Nubia

and  Syria  as  well,  deity  too  was  obliged  to  abandon  its  national

limitation and, just as the Pharaoh was the sole and unrestricted ruler

of  the  world  known  to  the  Egyptians,  this  must  also  apply  to  the

Egyptians’  new  deity.  Moreover,  with  the  extension  of  the  empire’s

frontiers, it was natural that Egypt would become more accessible to

foreign influences; some of the royal wives were Asiatic princesses,²

and it is possible that direct incitements to monotheism even made

their way in from Syria.

    ¹ What follows is in the main based on the accounts given by Breasted (1906 and 1934)

and in the relevant sections of the Cambridge Ancient History, Vol. II.

   ² This may perhaps be true even of Nefertiti, the beloved wife of Amenophis.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4853

 

   Amenophis never denied his adherence to the sun cult of On. In the

two Hymns to the Aten which have survived in the rock tombs and

which were probably composed by him himself, he praises the sun as

the creator and preserver of all living things both inside and outside

Egypt with an ardour which is not repeated till many centuries later in

the Psalms in honour of the Jewish god Yahweh. He was not content,

however, with this astonishing anticipation of the scientific discovery of

the effect of solar radiation. There is no doubt that he went a step

further: that he did not worship the sun as a material object but as the

symbol of a divine being whose energy was manifested in its rays.¹

   We should not, however, be doing justice to the king if we regarded

him merely as an adherent or promoter of an Aten religion already in

existence  before  his  time.  His  activity  was  a  far  more  energetic

intervention.  He  introduced  something  new,  which  for  the  first  time

converted the doctrine of a universal god into monotheism - the factor

of exclusiveness. In one of his hymns he declares expressly: ‘O thou

sole God, beside whom there is no other!’² And we must not forget

that in assessing the new doctrine a knowledge of its positive contents

is  not  enough:  its negative  side  is  almost  equally  important  -  a

knowledge of what it rejects. It would be a mistake, too, to suppose

that the new religion was completed at a single blow and sprang to life

fully armed, like Athene out of the head of Zeus. Everything suggests,

rather, that in the course of the reign of Amenophis it increased little

by little to ever greater clarity, consistency, harshness and intolerance.

It is likely that this development came about under the influence of the

violent opposition to the king’s reform which arose among the priests

of Amun. In the sixth year of the reign of Amenophis this antagonism

had reached such a pitch that the king changed his name, of which

the  proscribed  name  of  the  god  Amun  formed  a  part.  Instead  of

‘Amenophis’ he now called himself ‘Akhenaten’.³ But it we not onlyfrom his own name that he expunged that of the detested god: he

erased it too from every inscription - even where it occurred in the

name  of  his  father,  Amenophis  III.  Soon  after  changing  his  name

Akhenaten abandoned the Amun-dominated city of Thebes and built

himself  a  new  royal  capital  lower  down  the  river,  which  he  named

Akhetaten (the horizon of the Aten). Its ruined site is now known as

                  4
Tell el-’Amarna.

 

   ¹ ‘But, however evident the Heliopolitan origin of the new state religion might be, it was not

merely  sun-worship;  the  word  Aton  was  employed  in  the  place  of  the  old  word  for  "god"
(nuter), and the god is clearly distinguished from the material sun.’ Breasted, 1906, 360. - ‘It is
evident that what the king was deifying was the force by which the Sun made himself felt on
earth.’ Breasted, 1934, 279. - Erman (1905, 66) makes a similar judgement on a formula in
honour of the god: ‘These are . . . words which are meant to express as abstractly as possible
that it is not the heavenly body itself that is worshipped but the being which reveals itself in it.’

   ² Breasted, 1906, 374 n.

   ³  I adopt here the English spelling of the name (alternatively ‘Akhenaton’). The king’s new

name has approximately the same meaning as his earlier one: ‘The god is satisfied.’ Cf. the
German ‘Gotthold’ and ‘Gottfried’.
4
    It was there that in 1887 the discovery - of such great historical importance - was made of

the Egyptian kings’ correspondence with their friends and vassals in Asia.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4854

 

   The persecution by the king fell most harshly upon Amun, but not on

him  alone.  Throughout  the  kingdom  temples  were  closed,  divine

service forbidden, temple property confiscated. Indeed, the king’s zeal

went so far that he had the ancient monuments examined in order to

have the word ‘god’ obliterated in them where it occurred in the plural.¹

It is not to be wondered at that these measures taken by Akhenaten

provoked a mood of fanatical vindictiveness among the suppressed

priesthood and unsatisfied common people, and this was able to find

free  expression  after  the  king’s  death.  The  Aten  religion  had  not

become popular; it had probably remained restricted to a narrow circle

surrounding  the  king’s  person.  Akhenaten’s  end  remains  veiled  in

obscurity. We hear of a few short-lived, shadowy successors from his

own  family.  His  son-law,  Tut’ankhaten,  was  already  compelled  to

return to Thebes and to replace the name of the god Aten in his nameby that of Amun. There followed a period of anarchy till in 1350 B.C. a

general,  Haremhab,  succeeded  in  restoring  order.  The  glorious

Eighteenth Dynasty was at an end and simultaneously its conquests in

Nubia and Asia were lost. During this gloomy interregnum the ancient

religions  of  Egypt  were  re-established.  The  Aten  religion  was

abolished, Akhenaten’s royal city was destroyed and plundered and

his memory proscribed as that of a criminal.

 

   ¹ Breasted, 1906, 363.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4855

 

   It is with a particular purpose that we shall now emphasize a few

points among the negative characteristics of the Aten religion. In the

first place, everything to do with myths, magic and sorcery is excluded

from  it.¹  In  the  next  place,  the  manner  in  which  the  sun-god  was

represented was no longer, as in the past, by a small pyramid and a

falcon, but - and this seems almost prosaic - by a round disk with rays

proceeding  from  it,  which  end  in  human  hands.  In  spite  of  all  the

exuberant  art  of  the  Amarna  period,  no  other  representation  of  the

sun-god - no personal image of the Aten - has been found, and it may

confidently  be  said  that  none  will  be  found.²  Lastly,  there  was

complete silence about the god of the dead, Osiris, and the kingdom

of the dead. Neither the hymns nor the tomb inscriptions have any

knowledge of what perhaps lay closest to the hearts of the Egyptians.

The  contrast  to  the  popular  religion  cannot  be  more  clearly

demonstrated.³

 

   ¹ Weigall (1922, 120-1) says that Akhenaten would hear nothing of a Hell against whose

terrors people might protect themselves with innumerable magical formulae: ‘Akhnaton flung
all these formulae into the fire. Djins, bogies, spirits, monsters, demigods, demons, and Osiris
himself with all his court, were swept into the blaze and reduced to ashes.’

   ² ‘Akhnaton did not permit any graven image to be made of the Aton. The True God, said

the king, had no form; and he held to this opinion throughout his life.’ (Weigall, 1922, 103.)

   ³ ‘Nothing was to be heard any more of Osiris and his kingdom.’ (Erman, 1905, 70.) - ‘Osiris

is completely ignored. He is never mentioned in any record of Ikhnaton or in any of the tombs
at Amarna.’ (Breasted, 1934, 291.) 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4856

 

                                          (3)

 

   I should now like to venture on this conclusion: if Moses was an

Egyptian and if he communicated his own religion to the Jews, it must

have been Akhenaten’s, the Aten religion.

   I have already compared the Jewish religion with the popular religion

of Egypt and shown the opposition between them, I must now make a

comparison  between  the  Jewish  and  the  Aten  religions  in  the

expectation  of  proving  their  original  identity.  This,  I  am  aware,  will

present no easy task. Thanks to the vindictiveness of the priests of

Amun we may perhaps know too little of the Aten religion. We only

know  the  Mosaic  religion  in  its  final  shape,  as  it  was  fixed  by  the

Jewish priesthood some eight hundred years later in post-exilic times.

If, in spite of this unfavourable state of the material, we find a few

indications which favour our hypothesis, we shall be able to set a high

value on them.

   There would be a short path to proving our thesis that the Mosaic

religion was none other than that of the Aten - namely, if we had a

confession of faith, a declaration. But I fear we shall be told that this

path is closed to us. The Jewish confession of faith, as is well known,

runs:  ‘Schema  Jisroel  Adonai  Elohenu  Adonai  Echod.’  If  it  is  not

merely  by  chance  that  the  name  of  the  Egyptian  Aten  (or  Atum)

sounds like the Hebrew word Adonai and the name of the Syrian deity

Adonis, but if it is due to a primaeval kinship of speech and meaning,

then the Jewish formula might be translated thus: ‘Hear, O Israel: our

god  Aten  (Adonai)  is  a  sole  god.’  Unfortunately  I  am  totally

incompetent to answer this question, and I have been able to find but

little about it in the literature of the subject.¹ But in all probability this is

making things too easy for us. In any case we shall have to come

back once more to the problems concerning the name of the god.

 

   ¹ Only a few passages in Weigall (1922, 12 and 19), to the effect that ‘the god Atum, the

aspect of Ra as the setting sun, was probably of common origin with Aton who was largelyworshipped in North Syria’, and that a ‘foreign queen with her retinue may have therefore felt
more sympathy with Heliopolis than with Thebes.’
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4857

 

   The similarities as well as the differences between the two religions

are easily discernible without giving us much light. Both of them were

forms of a strict monotheism, and we shall be inclined a priori to trace

back  what  they  had  in  common  to  this  fundamental  characteristic.

Jewish  monotheism  behaved  in  some  respects  even  more  harshly

than the Egyptian: for instance in forbidding pictorial representations

of any kind. The most essential difference is to be seen (apart from

their  gods’  names)  in  the  fact  that  the  Jewish  religion  was  entirely

without  sun  worship,  in  which  the  Egyptian  one  still  found  support.

When we were making the comparison with the popular religion of

Egypt,  we  had  an  impression  that,  apart  from  the  fundamental

contrast,  a  factor  of intentional  contradiction  played  a  part  in  the

difference  between  the  two  religions.  This  impression  seems  to  be

justified  if  now,  in  making  the  comparison,  we  replace  the  Jewish

religion by the Aten religion which, as we know, was developed by

Akhenaten in deliberate hostility to the popular one. We were rightly

surprised to find that the Jewish religion would have nothing to do with

the next world or a life after death, though a doctrine of that kind would

have been compatible with the strictest monotheism. But this surprise

vanishes  if  we  turn  back  from  the  Jewish  to  the  Aten  religion  and

suppose that this refusal was taken over from it, since for Akhenaten it

was  a  necessity  in  his  fight  against  the  popular  religion,  in  which

Osiris, the god of the dead, played a greater part, perhaps, than any

god in the upper world. The agreement between the Jewish and the

Aten religions on this important point is the first strong argument in

favour of our thesis. We shall learn that it is not the only one.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4858

    Moses did not only give the Jews a new religion; it can be stated

with equal certainty that he introduced the custom of circumcision to

them.  This  fact  is  of  decisive  importance  for  our  problem  and  has

scarcely  ever  been  considered.  It  is  true  that  the  Biblical  account

contradicts  this  more  than  once.  On  the  one  hand  it  traces

circumcision  back  to  the  patriarchal  age  as  a  mark  of  a  covenant

between God and Abraham; on the other hand it describes in a quite

particularly  obscure  passage  how  God  was  angry  with  Moses  for

having neglected a custom which had become holy,¹ and sought to kill

him;  but  that  his  wife,  a  Midianite,  saved  her  husband  from  God’s

wrath  by  quickly  performing  the  operation.  These,  however,  are

distortions, which should not lead us astray; later on we shall discover

the reason for them. The fact remains that there is only one answer to

the question of where the Jews derived the custom of circumcision

from - namely, from Egypt. Herodotus, the ‘father of history’, tells us

that the custom of circumcision had long been indigenous in Egypt,

and  his  statements  are  confirmed  by  the  findings  in  mummies  and

indeed  by  pictures  on  the  walls  of  tombs.  No  other  people  of  the

Eastern Mediterranean, so far as we know, practised this custom; it

may  safely  be  presumed  that  the  Semites,  Babylonians  and

Sumerians were uncircumcised. The Bible story itself says this is so of

the inhabitants of Canaan; it is a necessary premiss to the adventure

of Jacob’s daughter and the prince of Shechem.² The possibility that

the Jews acquired the custom of circumcision during their sojourn in

Egypt in some way other than in connection with the religious teaching

of  Moses  may  be  rejected  as  completely  without  foundation.  Now,

taking it as certain that circumcision was a universal popular custom in

Egypt, let us for a moment adopt the ordinary hypothesis that Moses

was a Jew, who sought to free his compatriots from bondage in Egypt

and lead them to develop an independent and self-conscious national

existence in another country - which was what in fact happened. What

sense could it have, in that case, that he should at the same time

impose on them a troublesome custom which even, to some extent,

made  them  into  Egyptians  and  which  must  keep  permanently  alive

their memory of Egypt - whereas his efforts could only be aimed in the

opposite direction, towards alienating his people from the land of their

bondage and overcoming their longing for the ‘flesh-pots of Egypt’?No,  the  fact  from  which  we  started  and  the  hypothesis  which  we

added to it are so incompatible with each other that we may be bold

enough to reach this conclusion: if Moses gave the Jews not only a

new religion but also the commandment for circumcision, he was not a

Jew  but  an  Egyptian,  and  in  that  case  the  Mosaic  religion  was

probably an Egyptian one and, in view of its contrast to the popular

religion, the religion of the Aten, with which the later Jewish religion

agrees in some remarkable respects.

 

   ¹ ‘Heilig.’

   ² I am very well aware that in dealing so autocratically and arbitrarily with Biblical tradition -

bringing it up to confirm my views when it suits me and unhesitatingly rejecting it when it
contradicts me - I am exposing myself to serious methodological criticism and weakening the
convincing force of my arguments. But this is the only way in which one can treat material of
which  one  knows  definitely  that  its  trustworthiness  has  been  severely  impaired  by  the
distorting influence of tendentious purposes. It is to be hoped that I shall find some degree of
justification later on, when I come upon the track of these secret motives. Certainty is in any
case unattainable and moreover it may be said that every other writer on the subject has
adopted the same procedure.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4859

 

   I have pointed out that my hypothesis that Moses was not a Jew but

an  Egyptian  created  a  fresh  riddle.  His  course  of  conduct,  which

seemed  easily  intelligible  in  a  Jew,  was  ununderstandable  in  an

Egyptian. If, however, we place Moses in the time of Akhenaten and

suppose him in contact with that Pharaoh, the riddle vanishes and the

possibility is revealed of motives which will answer all our questions.

Let us start from the assumption that Moses was an aristocratic and

prominent man, perhaps in fact a member of the royal house, as the

legend says of him. He was undoubtedly aware of his great capacities,

ambitious and energetic; he may even have played with the notion of

one day being the leader of his people, of becoming the kingdom’s

ruler. Being close to the Pharaoh, he was a convinced adherent of the

new religion, whose basic thoughts he had made his own. When the

king died and the reaction set in, he saw all his hopes and prospects

destroyed; if he was not prepared to abjure all the convictions that

were so dear to him, Egypt had nothing more to offer him - he had losthis  country.  In  this  predicament  he  found  an  unusual  solution.

Akhenaten the dreamer had alienated his people and let his empire

fall to pieces. The more energetic nature of Moses was more at home

with the plan of founding a new kingdom, of finding a new people to

whom he would present for their worship the religion which Egypt had

disdained. It was, we can see, a heroic attempt to combat destiny, to

compensate  in  two  directions  for  the  losses  in  which  Akhenaten’s

catastrophe had involved him. Perhaps he was at that time Governor

of the frontier province (Goshen) in which certain Semitic tribes had

settled (perhaps as early as in the Hyksos period). These he chose to

be his new people - a historic decision.¹ He came to an agreement

with them, put himself at their head and carried the Exodus through

‘by strength of hand’. In complete contrast to the Biblical tradition, we

may presume that this Exodus took place peacefully and unpursued.

The authority of Moses made this possible and at that time there was

no central administration which might have interfered with it.

   According to this construction of ours, the Exodus from Egypt would

have occurred during the period between 1358 and 1350 B.C. - that is,

after Akhenaten’s death and before Haremhab’s re-establishment of

state authority.² The goal of the migration could only have been the

land of Canaan. After the collapse of the Egyptian domination, hordes

of warlike Aramaeans had irrupted into that region, conquering and

plundering, and had shown in that way where a capable people might

win fresh land for themselves. We learn of these warriors from the

letters  found  in  1887  in  the  ruined  city  of  Amarna.  There  they  are

called ‘Habiru’, and the name was transferred (we do not know how)

to the later Jewish invaders - ‘Hebrews’ - who cannot be intended in

the Amarna letters. South of Palestine, too, in Canaan, there lived the

tribes which were the nearest relatives of the Jews who were now

making their way out of Egypt.

 

   ¹ If Moses was a high official, this makes it easier to understand the role of leader which he

assumed with the Jews; if he was a priest, then it was natural for him to emerge as the
founder  of  a  religion.  In  both  these  cases  he  would  have  been  continuing  his  former
profession. A prince of the royal house might easily have been both - a provincial governor
and  a  priest.  In  the  account  given  by  Flavius  Josephus  (in  his Jewish  Antiquities),  who
accepts the exposure legend but seems to be in touch with traditions other than the Biblical
one, Moses, as an Egyptian general, fought a victorious campaign in Ethiopia.

   ² This would make the Exodus about a century earlier than is supposed by most historians,who put it in the Nineteenth Dynasty under Merenptah. Or it may have happened a little later,
for the official histories seem to have included the interregnum in the reign of Haremhab.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4860

 

   The motives which we have discovered for the Exodus as a whole

apply also to the introduction of circumcision. We are familiar with the

attitude  adopted  by  people  (both  nations  and  individuals)  to  this

primaeval usage, which is scarcely understood any longer. Those who

do not practise it look on it as very strange and are a little horrified by

it, but those who have adopted circumcision are proud of it. They feel

exalted by it, ennobled, as it were, and look down with contempt on

the others, whom they regard as unclean. Even to this day a Turk will

abuse a Christian as an ‘uncircumcised dog’. It may be supposed that

Moses, who, being an Egyptian, was himself circumcised, shared this

attitude. The Jews with whom he departed from his country were to

serve  him  as  a  superior  substitute  for  the  Egyptians  he  had  left

behind. On no account must the Jews be inferior to them. He wished

to make them into a ‘holy nation’, as is expressly stated in the Biblical

text, and as a mark of this consecration he introduced among them

too the custom which made them at least the equals of the Egyptians.

And he could only welcome it if they were to be isolated by such a

sign  and  kept  apart  from  the  foreign  peoples  among  whom  their

wanderings would lead them, just as the Egyptians themselves had

kept apart from all foreigners.¹

   Later on, however, Jewish tradition behaved as though it were put at

a disadvantage by the inference we have been drawing. If it were to

be admitted that circumcision was an Egyptian custom introduced by

Moses, that would be almost as much as to recognize that the religion

delivered to them by Moses was an Egyptian one too. There were

good reasons for denying that fact, so the truth about circumcision

must also be contradicted.

 

   ¹ Herodotus, who visited Egypt about 450 B.C., enumerates in his account of his journey

characteristics of the Egyptian people which exhibit an astonishing similarity to traits familiar
to  us  in  later  Jewry:  ‘They  are  altogether  more  religious  in  every  respect  than  any  other
people,  and  differ  from  them  too  in  a  number  of  their  customs.  Thus  they  practisecircumcision, which they were the first to introduce, and on grounds of cleanliness. Further
they have a horror of pigs, which is no doubt related to the fact that Seth in the form of a black
pig wounded Horus. And lastly and most markedly, they hold cows in the greatest honour, and
would never eat or sacrifice them, because this would offend Isis with her cows horns. For
that reason no Egyptian man or woman would ever kiss a Greek or use his knife or his spit or
his cauldron or eat the flesh of an otherwise clean ox if it had been cut with a Greek knife . . .
They look down in narrow-minded pride on other people, who are unclean and are not so
close  to  the  gods  as  they  are.’  (Erman,  1905,  181.)  -  We  must  not,  of  course,  overlook
parallels to this in the life of the Indian people. - And, incidentally, who suggested to the
Jewish poet Heine in the nineteenth century A.D. that he should complain of his religion as
‘the plague dragged along from the Nile valley, the unhealthy beliefs of Ancient Egypt’?
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4861

 

                                          (4)

 

   At this point I expect to be met by an objection to my hypothesis.

This placed Moses, an Egyptian, in the Akhenaten period. It derived

his  decision  to  take  over  the  Jewish  people  from  the  political

circumstances  in  the  country  at  that  time,  and  it  recognized  the

religion that he presented to or imposed on his protégés as the Aten

religion, which had actually collapsed in Egypt itself. I expect to be told

that I have brought forward this structure of conjectures with too much

positiveness, for which there is no basis in the material. This objection

is, I think, unjustified. I have already laid stress on the factor of doubt

in  my  introductory  remarks;  I  have,  as  it  were,  placed  that  factor

outside the brackets and I may be allowed to save myself the trouble

of repeating it in connection with each item inside them.

   I may continue the discussion with a few critical remarks of my own.

The kernel of my hypothesis - the dependence of Jewish monotheism

on the monotheist episode in Egyptian history - has been suspected

and mentioned by various writers. I spare myself the trouble of quoting

these opinions here, since none of them is able to indicate how this

influence can have come into operation. Even though in our view that

influence  remains  linked  to  the  figure  of  Moses,  we  ought  also  to

mention some other possibilities in addition to the one we prefer. It

must not be supposed that the fall of the official Aten religion brought

the monotheist current in Egypt to a complete stop. The priesthood atOn,  from  which  it  started,  survived  the  catastrophe  and  may  have

continued to bring under the sway of its trend of ideas generations

after Akhenaten’s. Thus the action taken by Moses is still conceivable

even if he did not live at the time of Akhenaten and did not fall under

his  personal  influence,  if  he  was  only  an  adherent  or  perhaps  a

member of the priesthood of On. This possibility would postpone the

date of the Exodus and bring it closer to the date which is usually

adopted  (in  the  thirteenth  century);  but  it  has  nothing  else  to

recommend it. Our insight into the motives of Moses would be lost and

the facilitation of the Exodus by the prevailing anarchy in the country

would  no  longer  apply.  The  succeeding  kings  of  the  Nineteenth

Dynasty established a strong régime. It was only during the period

immediately  after  the  heretic  king’s  death  that  there  was  a

convergence of all the conditions, external and internal alike, that were

favourable to the Exodus.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4862

 

   The Jews possess a copious literature apart from the Bible, in which

the legends and myths are to be found which grew up in the course of

centuries round the imposing figure of their first leader and the founder

of  their  religion,  and  which  have  both  illuminated  and  obscured  it.

Scattered  in  this  material  there  may  be  fragments  of  trustworthy

tradition for which no room was found in the Pentateuch. A legend of

this sort gives an engaging account of how the ambition of the man

Moses found expression even in his childhood. Once when Pharaoh

had taken him in his arms and playfully lifted him high in the air, the

little three-year-old boy snatched the crown from the king’s head and

put it on his own. This portent alarmed the king, who did not fail to

consult  his  wise  men  about  it.¹  There  are  stories  elsewhere  of  his

victorious military actions as an Egyptian general in Ethiopia, and, in

this connection, how he fled from Egypt because he had reason to be

afraid  of  the  envy  of  a  party  at  Court  or  of  Pharaoh  himself.  The

Biblical  account  itself  attributes  some  features  to  Moses  to  which

credence may well be given. It describes him as being of an irasciblenature, flaring up easily, as when, in indignation, he slew the brutal

overseer who was ill-treating a Jewish workman, or when in his anger

at the people’s apostasy he broke the Tables of the Law which he had

brought down from the Mount of God; indeed God himself punished

him in the end for an impatient deed, but we are not told what it was.

Since a trait of this kind is not one that would serve for his glorification,

it may perhaps correspond to a historical truth. Nor can the possibility

be excluded that some of the character traits which the Jews included

in their early picture of their God - describing him as jealous, severe

and ruthless - may have been at bottom derived from a recollection of

Moses; for in fact it was not an invisible God but the man Moses who

brought them out of Egypt.

 

   ¹ This anecdote, in a slightly different form, also appears in Josephus.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4863

 

   Another trait attributed to Moses has a special claim to our interest.

Moses is said to have been ‘slow of speech’: he must have suffered

from  an  inhibition  or  disorder  of  speech.  Consequently,  in  his

supposed  dealings  with  Pharaoh,  he  needed  the  support  of  Aaron,

who  is  called  his  brother.  This  again  may  be  a  historical  truth  and

would make a welcome contribution to presenting a lively picture of

the  great  man.  But  it  may  also  have  another  and  more  important

significance. It may recall, slightly distorted, the fact that Moses spoke

another language and could not communicate with his Semitic neo-

Egyptians without an interpreter, at all events at the beginning of their

relations - a fresh confirmation, then, of the thesis that Moses was an

Egyptian.

   Now, however, or so it seems, our work has reached a provisional

end. For the moment we can draw no further conclusions from our

hypothesis that Moses was an Egyptian, whether it has been proved

or not. No historian can regard the Biblical account of Moses and the

Exodus as anything other than a pious piece of imaginative fiction,

which  has  recast  a  remote  tradition  for  the  benefit  of  its  own

tendentious purposes. The original form of that tradition is unknown tous; we should be glad to discover what the distorting purposes were,

but we are kept in the dark by our ignorance of the historical events.

The fact that our reconstruction leaves no room for a number of show-

pieces in the Bible story, such as the ten plagues, the passage of the

Red Sea and the solemn law-giving on Mount Sinai - this does not

disconcert us. But we cannot treat it as a matter of indifference if we

find ourselves in contradiction to the findings of the sober historical

researches of the present day.

      These  modern  historians,  of  whom  we  may  take  Eduard  Meyer

(1906) as a representative, agree with the Bible story on one decisive

point.  They  too  are  of  opinion  that  the  Jewish  tribes,  which  later

developed into the people of Israel, took on a new religion at a certain

point of time. But in their view this did not take place in Egypt or at the

foot  of  a  mountain  in  the  Sinai  Peninsula,  but  in  a  certain  locality

known  as  Meribah  Kadesh,  an  oasis  distinguished  by  its  wealth  of

springs and wells in the stretch of country south of Palestine, between

the eastern exit from the Sinai Peninsula and the western border of

Arabia. There they took over the worship of a god Yahweh, probably

from the neighbouring Arabian tribe of Midianites. It seems likely that

other tribes in the vicinity were also followers of this god.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4864

 

   Yahweh was unquestionably a volcano god. Now, as is well known,

Egypt is without volcanoes and the mountains of the Sinai Peninsula

have  never  been  volcanic;  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  volcanoes

which may have been active till recent times along the western border

of Arabia. So one of these mountains must have been the Sinai-Horeb

which  was  regarded  as  the  home  of  Yahweh.¹  In  spite  of  all  the

revisions to which the Biblical story was subjected, the original picture

of  the  god’s  character  can,  according  to  Eduard  Meyer,  be

reconstructed:  he  was  an  uncanny,  bloodthirsty  demon  who  went

about by night and shunned the light of day.²

   The mediator between God and the people in the founding of this

religion was named Moses. He was the son-in-law of the Midianitepriest  Jethro,  and  was  keeping  his  flocks  when  he  received  the

summons from God. He was also visited by Jethro at Kadesh and

given some advice by him.

   Though Eduard Meyer says, it is true, that he never doubted that

there was some historical core in the story of the sojourn in Egypt and

the catastrophe to the Egyptians,³ he evidently does not know how to

place and what use to make of this fact which he recognizes. The only

thing  he  is  prepared  to  derive  from  Egypt  is  the  custom  of

circumcision. He adds two important indications which go to confirm

our previous arguments: first, that Joshua ordered the people to be

circumcised in order to ‘roll away the reproach of Egypt from off you’,

and secondly a quotation from Herodotus saying that ‘the Phoenicians

(no doubt the Jews) and the Syrians of Palestine themselves admit

                                                          4
that they learnt the custom of the Egyptians’. But he has little to say

in favour of an Egyptian Moses: ‘The Moses we know is the ancestor

of the priests of Kadesh - that is, a figure from a genealogical legend,

standing in relation to a cult, and not a historical personality. Thus

(apart from those who accept tradition root and branch as historical

truth) no one who treats him as a historical figure has been able to

give any content to him, to represent him as a concrete individual or to

point out what he may have done and what his historical work may

              5
have been.’

 

   ¹ At a few places in the Biblical text it is still stated that Yahweh came down from Sinai to

Meribah-Kadesh.

   ² Meyer, 1906, 38 and 58.

   ³ Meyer, 1906, 49.

4
    Meyer, 1906, 449.

5
    Meyer, 1906, 451.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4865

 

   On the other hand, Meyer is never tired of insisting on the relation of

Moses to Kadesh and Midian: ‘The figure of Moses, which is intimately

bound up with Midian and the cult-centres in the desert . . .’¹ and: ‘Thisfigure of Moses, then, is inseparably linked with Kadesh (Massah and

Meribah) and this is supplemented by his being the son-in-law of the

Midianite  priest.  His  link  with  the  Exodus,  on  the  contrary,  and  the

whole  story  of  his  youth  are  entirely  secondary  and  simply  the

consequence  of  the  interpolation  of  Moses  into  a  connected  and

continuous legendary story.’² Meyer also points out that the themes

included in the story of the youth of Moses were one and all dropped

later:  ‘Moses  in  Midian  is  no  longer  an  Egyptian  and  grandson  of

Pharaoh, but a shepherd to whom Yahweh revealed himself. In telling

of the plagues there is no longer any talk of his former connections,

though effective use might easily have been made of them, and the

command to kill the sons of the Israelites is completely forgotten. In

the Exodus and the destruction of the Egyptians Moses plays no part

whatever: he is not even mentioned. The heroic character which the

legend of his childhood presupposes is totally absent from the later

Moses;  he  is  only  the  man  of  God,  a  miracle-worker  equipped  by

Yahweh with supernatural powers.’³

 

   ¹ Meyer, 1906, 49.

   ² Meyer, 1906, 72.

   ³ Meyer, 1906, 47.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4866

 

   We cannot dispute the impression that this Moses of Kadesh and

Midian,  to  whom  tradition  could  actually  attribute  the  erection  of  a

brazen serpent as a god of healing, is someone quite other than the

aristocratic Egyptian inferred by us, who presented the people with a

religion in which all magic and spells were proscribed in the strictest

terms.  Our  Egyptian  Moses  is  no  less  different,  perhaps,  from  the

Midianite  Moses  than  is  the  universal  god  Aten  from  the  demon

Yahweh in his home on the Mount of God. And if we have any faith at

all in the pronouncements of the recent historians, we shall have to

admit that the thread which we have tried to spin from our hypothesis

that Moses was an Egyptian has broken for the second time. And this

time, as it seems, with no hope of mending. 

                                          (5)

 

      Unexpectedly,  here  once  more  a  way  of  escape  presents  itself.

Efforts to see in Moses a figure that goes beyond the priest of Kadesh,

and to confirm the grandeur with which tradition glorifies him, have not

ceased even since Eduard Meyer. (Cf. Gressmann and others.) Then,

in 1922, Ernst Sellin made a discovery which affected our problem

decisively. He found in the Prophet Hosea (in the second half of the

eighth century B.C.) unmistakable signs of a tradition to the effect that

Moses, the founder of their religion, met with a violent end in a rising

of his refractory and stiff-necked people, and that at the same time the

religion  he  had  introduced  was  thrown  off.  This  tradition  is  not,

however,  restricted  to  Hosea;  it  reappears  in  most  of  the  later

Prophets, and indeed, according to Sellin, became the basis of all the

later Messianic expectations. At the end of the Babylonian captivity a

hope grew up among the Jewish people that the man who had been

so shamefully murdered would return from the dead and would lead

his remorseful people, and perhaps not them alone, into the kingdom

of lasting bliss. The obvious connection of this with the destiny of the

founder of a later religion does not concern us here.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4867

 

   Once again I am not, of course, in a position to judge whether Sellin

has interpreted the passages from the Prophets correctly. But if he is

right  we  may  attribute  historical  credibility  to  the  tradition  he  has

recognized,  for  such  things  are  not  readily  invented.  There  is  no

tangible motive for doing so; but if they have really happened, it is

easy to understand that people will be anxious to forget them. We

need  not  accept  all  the  details  of  the  tradition.  In  Sellin’s  opinion

Shittim, in the country east of the Jordan, is to be regarded as the

scene of the attack on Moses. But we shall soon see that that region

is not acceptable for our notions.

   We will borrow from Sellin his hypothesis that the Egyptian Moseswas  murdered  by  the  Jews  and  the  religion  he  had  introduced

abandoned.  This  allows  us  to  spin  our  threads  further  without

contradicting  the  authentic  findings  of  historical  research.  But  apart

from this we shall venture to maintain independence of the authorities

and to ‘proceed along our own track’. The Exodus from Egypt remains

our starting-point. A considerable number of people must have left the

country with Moses; a small collection would not have seemed worth

while  to  this  ambitious  man  with  his  large  aims  in  view.  The

immigrants had probably been living in Egypt long enough to have

grown into quite a large population. But we shall certainly not be going

wrong if we assume, with the majority of the authorities, that only a

fraction of what was later to be the Jewish people had experienced the

events  in  Egypt.  In  other  words,  the  tribe  that  returned  from  Egypt

joined up later, in the stretch of country between Egypt and Canaan,

with  other  kindred  tribes,  which  had  been  settled  there  for  a

considerable time. This union, from which sprang the people of Israel,

found expression in the adoption of a new religion, common to all the

tribes, the religion of Yahweh - an event which, according to Eduard

Meyer, took place under Midianite influence at Kadesh. Thereafter, the

people felt strong enough to undertake their invasion of the land of

Canaan. It would not tally with this course of events to suppose that

the catastrophe to Moses and his religion occurred in the country east

of the Jordan; it must have happened long before the union of the

tribes.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4868

 

   There can be no doubt that very different elements came together in

the construction of the Jewish people; but what must have made the

greatest  difference  among  these  tribes  was  whether  they  had

experienced or not the sojourn in Egypt and what followed it. Having

regard to this point, we may say that the nation arose out of a union of

two component parts; and it fits in with this that, after a short period of

political unity, it split into two pieces - the kingdom of Israel and the

kingdom of Judah. History is fond of reinstatements like this, where alater fusion is undone and an earlier separation re-emerges. The most

impressive  example  of  this  was  afforded,  as  is  well  known,  by  the

Reformation,  which,  after  an  interval  of  over  a  thousand  years,

brought to light once more the frontier between the Germany which

had at one time been Roman and the Germany which had remained

independent. In the instance of the Jewish people it is not possible to

point  to  such  a  faithful  reproduction  of  the  old  state  of  things;  our

knowledge of those times is too uncertain to allow us to assert that the

settled tribes were once more to be found together in the Northern

Kingdom  and  those  who  had  returned  from  Egypt  in  the  Southern

Kingdom; but here too the later split cannot have been unrelated to

the earlier joining up. The former Egyptians were probably fewer in

numbers  than  the  others,  but  showed  themselves  culturally  the

stronger.  They  exercised  a  more  powerful  influence  on  the  further

evolution  of  the  people,  because  they  brought  along  with  them  a

tradition which the others lacked.

   Perhaps they brought something else with them more tangible than

a tradition. One of the greatest enigmas of Jewish prehistory is that of

the origin of the Levites. They are traced back to one of the twelve

tribes of Israel - that of Levi - but no tradition has ventured to say

where  that  tribe  was  originally  located  or  what  portion  of  the

conquered  land  of  Canaan  was  allotted  to  it.  They  filled  the  most

important  priestly  offices,  but  they  were  distinct  from  the  priests.  A

Levite is not necessarily a priest; nor is it the name of a caste. Our

hypothesis about the figure of Moses suggests an explanation. It is

incredible  that  a  great  lord,  like  Moses  the  Egyptian,  should  have

joined  this  alien  people  unaccompanied.  He  certainly  must  have

brought  a  retinue  with  him  -  his  closest  followers,  his  scribes,  his

domestic  servants.  This  is  who  the  Levites  originally  were.  The

tradition which alleges that Moses was a Levite seems to be a clear

distortion of the fact: the Levites were the followers of Moses. This

solution is supported by the fact which I have already mentioned in my

earlier essay that it is only among the Levites that Egyptian names

occur later.¹ It is to be presumed that a fair number of these followers

of Moses escaped the catastrophe which descended on him himself

and the religion he founded. They multiplied in the course of the next

generations,  became  fused  with  the  people  they  lived  among,  butremained loyal to their master, preserved his memory and carried out

the tradition of his doctrines. At the time of the union with the disciples

of Yahweh they formed an influential minority, culturally superior to the

rest.

 

   ¹ My hypothesis fits in well with Yahuda’s statements on the Egyptian influence on early

Jewish literature. See Yahuda, 1929.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4869

 

   I put it forward as a provisional hypothesis that between the fall of

Moses  and  the  establishment  of  the  new  religion  at  Kadesh  two

generations, or perhaps even a century, elapsed. I see no means of

deciding  whether  the  Neo-Egyptians  (as  I  should  like  to  call  them

here)  -  that  is,  those  who  returned  from  Egypt  -  met  their  tribal

kinsmen after the latter had already adopted the Yahweh religion or

earlier.  The  second  possibility  might  seem  the  more  probable.  But

there  would  be  no  difference  in  the  outcome.  What  happened  at

Kadesh was a compromise, in which the share taken by the tribes of

Moses is unmistakable.

      Here  we  may  once  again  call  on  the  evidence  afforded  by

circumcision, which has repeatedly been of help to us, like, as it were,

a key-fossil. This custom became obligatory in the Yahweh religion as

well and, since it was indissolubly linked with Egypt, its adoption can

only have been a concession to the followers of Moses, who - or the

Levites among them - would not renounce this mark of their holiness.

So much of their old religion they wished to rescue, and in return for it

they were prepared to accept the new deity and what the priests of

Midian told them about it. They may possibly have gained yet other

concessions. We have already mentioned that Jewish ritual prescribed

certain restrictions on the use of God’s name. Instead of ‘Yahweh’ the

word ‘Adonai’ must be spoken. It is tempting to bring this prescription

into our context, but that is only a conjecture without any other basis.

The prohibition upon a god’s name is, as is well known, a taboo of

primaeval age. We do not understand why it was revived precisely in

the  Jewish  Law;  it  is  not  impossible  that  this  happened  under  theinfluence  of  a  fresh  motive.  There  is  no  need  to  suppose  that  the

prohibition  was  carried  through  consistently;  in  the  construction  of

theophorous personal names - that is, in compounds - the name of the

God  Yahweh  might  be  freely  used  (e.g.  Jochanan,  Jehu,  Joshua).

There  were,  however,  special  circumstances  connected  with  this

name.  As  we  know,  critical  Biblical  research  supposes  that  the

Hexateuch has two documentary sources. These are distinguished as

J and E, because one of them uses ‘Jahve’ as the name of God and

the other ‘Elohim’: ‘Elohim’, to be sure, not ‘Adonai’. But we may bear

in mind a remark by one of our authorities: ‘The different names are a

clear indication of two originally different gods.’¹

 

   ¹ Gressmann, 1913, 54.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4870

 

   We brought up the retention of circumcision as evidence for the fact

that the founding of the religion at Kadesh involved a compromise. We

can see its nature from the concordant accounts given by J and E,

which thus go back on this point to a common source (a documentary

or  oral  tradition).  Its  leading  purpose  was  to  demonstrate  the

greatness and power of the new god Yahweh. Since the followers of

Moses attached so much value to their experience of the Exodus from

Egypt, this act of liberation had to be represented as due to Yahweh,

and the event was provided with embellishments which gave proof of

the terrifying grandeur of the volcano god - such as the pillar of smoke

which changed at night into a pillar of fire and the storm which laid

bare the bed of the sea for a while, so that the pursuers were drowned

by  the  returning  waters.  This  account  brought  the  Exodus  and  the

founding  of  the  religion  close  together,  and  disavowed  the  long

interval  between  them.  So,  too,  the  law-giving  was  represented  as

occurring not at Kadesh but at the foot of the Mount of God, marked

by a volcanic eruption. This account, however, did grave injustice to

the memory of the man Moses; it was he and not the volcano god who

had liberated the people from Egypt. So a compensation was owing to

him, and it consisted in the man Moses being transferred to Kadesh orto Sinai-Horeb and put in the place of the Midianite priests. We shall

find  later  that  this  solution  satisfied  another  imperatively  pressing

purpose. In this manner a mutual agreement, as it were, was arrived

at: Yahweh, who lived on a mountain in Midian, was allowed to extend

over into Egypt, and, in exchange for this, the existence and activity of

Moses were extended to Kadesh and as far as the country east of the

Jordan.  Thus  he  was  fused  with  the  figure  of  the  later  religious

founder, the son-in-law of the Midianite Jethro, and lent him his name

of Moses. Of this second Moses, however, we can give no personal

account  -  so  completely  was  he  eclipsed  by  the  first,  the  Egyptian

Moses  -  unless  we  pick  out  the  contradictions  in  the  Biblical

description  of  the  character  of  Moses.  He  is  often  pictured  as

domineering, hot-tempered and even violent, yet he is also described

as the mildest and most patient of men. These last qualities would

evidently have fitted in badly with the Egyptian Moses, who had to

deal with his people in such great and difficult matters; they may have

belonged to the character of the other Moses, the Midianite. We are, I

think, justified in separating the two figures and in assuming that the

Egyptian Moses was never at Kadesh and had never heard the name

of Yahweh, and that the Midianite Moses had never been in Egypt and

knew  nothing  of  Aten.  In  order  to  solder  the  two  figures  together,

tradition  or  legend  had  the  task  of  bringing  the  Egyptian  Moses  to

Midian, and we have seen that more than one explanation of this was

current.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4871

 

                                          (6)

 

      Once  again  I  am  prepared  to  find  myself  blamed  for  having

presented my reconstruction of the early history of the people of Israel

with too great and unjustified certainty. I shall not feel very severely hit

by this criticism, since it finds an echo in my own judgement. I know

myself that my structure has its weak spots, but it has its strong points

too. On the whole my predominant impression is that it is worth whileto pursue the work in the direction it has taken.

   The Bible narrative that we have before us contains precious and,

indeed,  invaluable  historical  data,  which,  however,  have  been

distorted  by  the  influence  of  powerful  tendentious  purposes  and

embellished by the products of poetic invention. In the course of our

efforts  so  far,  we  have  been  able  to  detect  one  of  these  distorting

purposes. That discovery points our further path. We must uncover

other similar tendentious purposes. If we find means of recognizing

the  distortions  produced  by  those  purposes,  we  shall  bring  to  light

fresh fragments of the true state of things lying behind them.

   And we will begin by listening to what critical Biblical research is

able to tell us about the history of the origin of the Hexateuch, the five

books  of  Moses  and  the  book  of  Joshua,  which  alone  concern  us

here.¹  The  earliest  documentary  source  is  accepted  as  J  (the

Yahwistic writer), who in the most recent times has been identified as

the priest Ebyatar, a contemporary of King David.² Somewhat - it is

not known how much - later we come to the so-called Elohistic writer,

who  belonged  to  the  Northern  Kingdom.³  After  the  collapse  of  the

Northern Kingdom in 722 B.C., a Jewish priest combined portions of J

and  E  and  made  some  additions  of  his  own.  His  compilation  is

designated as JE. In the seventh century Deuteronomy, the fifth book,

was added to this. It is supposed to have been found complete in the

Temple. In the period after the destruction of the Temple (586 B.C.),

during and after the Exile, the revision known as the ‘Priestly Code’

was  compiled;  and  in  the  fifth  century  the  work  was  given  its  final

                                                                                4
revision and since then has not been changed in its essentials.

 

   ¹ Encyclopaedia Britannica, Eleventh Edition, Vol. III, 1910. Article ‘Bible’.

   ² See Auerbach (1932).

   ³ The Yahwistic and Elohistic writings were first distinguished by Astruc in 1753.

4
    It is historically certain that the Jewish type was finally fixed as a result of the reforms of

Ezra  and  Nehemiah  in  the  fifth  century  before  Christ  -  that  is,  after  the  Exile,  under  the
Persian domination which was friendly to the Jews. On our reckoning, some nine hundred
years  had  passed  since  the  emergence  of  Moses.  These  reforms  took  seriously  the
regulations that aimed at making the entire people holy; their separation from their neighbours
was made effective by the prohibition of mixed marriages; the Pentateuch, the true book of
the laws, was given its final form and the revision known as the Priestly Code brought to
completion. It seems certain, however, that these reforms introduced no fresh tendentious
purposes, but took up and strengthened earlier trends. 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4872

 

   The history of King David and of his period is most probably the

work of a contemporary. It is genuine historical writing, five hundred

years before Herodotus, the ‘father of History’. It becomes easier to

understand  this  achievement  if,  on  the  lines  of  our  hypothesis,  we

think of Egyptian influence.¹ A suspicion even arises that the Israelites

of that earliest period - that is to say, the scribes of Moses - may have

had some share in the invention of the first alphabet.² It is, of course,

beyond our knowledge to discover how far reports about former times

go back to early records or to oral tradition and how long an interval of

time  there  was  in  individual  instances  between  an  event  and  its

recording.  The  text,  however,  as  we  possess  it  to-day,  will  tell  us

enough about its own vicissitudes. Two mutually opposed treatments

have left their traces on it. On the one hand it has been subjected to

revisions which have falsified it in the sense of their secret aims, have

mutilated and amplified it and have even changed it into its reverse;

on  the  other  hand  a  solicitous  piety  has  presided  over  it  and  has

sought  to  preserve  everything  as  it  was,  no  matter  whether  it  was

consistent or contradicted itself. Thus almost everywhere noticeable

gaps,  disturbing  repetitions  and  obvious  contradictions  have  come

about - indications which reveal things to us which it was not intended

to communicate. In its implications the distortion of a text resembles a

murder: the difficulty is not in perpetrating the deed, but in getting rid

of  its  traces.  We  might  well  lend  the  word  ‘Entstellung’  the  double

meaning to which it has a claim but of which to-day it makes no use. It

should mean not only ‘to change the appearance of something’ but

also ‘to put something in another place, to displace’. Accordingly, in

many instances of textual distortion, we may nevertheless count upon

finding  what  has  been  suppressed  and  disavowed  hidden  away

somewhere else, though changed and torn from its context. Only it will

not always be easy to recognize it.

 

   ¹ Cf. Yahuda, 1929.

   ² If they were subject to the prohibition against pictures they would even have had a motivefor  abandoning  the  hieroglyphic  picture  writing  while  adapting  its  written  characters  to
expressing a new language. (Cf. Auerbach, 1932.)
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4873

 

   The distorting purposes which we are anxious to lay hold of must

have been at work already on the traditions before any of them were

committed  to  writing.  We  have  already  discovered  one  of  them,

perhaps the most powerful of all. As we have said, with the setting-up

of  the  new  god,  Yahweh,  at  Kadesh,  it  became  necessary  to  do

something to glorify him. It would be more correct to say: it became

necessary to fit him in, to make room for him, to wipe out the traces of

earlier  religions.  This  seems  to  have  been  achieved  with  complete

success as regards the religion of the resident tribes: we hear nothing

more of it. With those returning from Egypt it was not such an easy

matter; they would not let themselves be deprived of the Exodus, the

man Moses or circumcision. It is true that they had been in Egypt, but

they had left it, and thenceforward every trace of Egyptian influence

was to be disavowed. The man Moses was dealt with by shifting him

to Midian and Kadesh, and by fusing him with the priest of Yahweh

who founded the religion. Circumcision, the most suspicious indication

of dependence on Egypt, had to be retained but no attempts were

spared to detach the custom from Egypt - all evidence to the contrary.

It  is  only  as  a  deliberate  denial  of  the  betraying  fact  that  we  can

explain  the  puzzling  and  incomprehensibly  worded  passage  in

Exodus, according to which on one occasion Yahweh was angry with

Moses because he had neglected circumcision, and his Midianite wife

saved his life by quickly carrying out the operation. We shall presently

come across another invention for making the uncomfortable piece of

evidence harmless.

   The fact that we find signs of efforts being made to deny explicitly

that  Yahweh  was  a  new  god,  alien  to  the  Jews,  can  scarcely  be

described  as  the  appearance  of  a  fresh  tendentious  purpose:  it  is

rather  a  continuation  of  the  former  one.  With  this  end  in  view  the

legends of the patriarchs of the people - Abraham, Isaac and Jacob -

were  introduced.  Yahweh  asserted  that  he  was  already  the  god  ofthese forefathers; though it is true that he himself had to admit that

they  had  not  worshipped  him  under  that  name.¹  He  does  not  add,

however, what the other name was.

 

   ¹ This does not make the restrictions upon the use of this new name more intelligible,

though it does make them more suspect.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4874

 

      And  here  was  the  opportunity  for  a  decisive  blow  against  the

Egyptian origin of the custom of circumcision: Yahweh, it was said,

had already insisted on it with Abraham and had introduced it as the

token  of  the  covenant  between  him  and  Abraham.  But  this  was  a

particularly  clumsy  invention.  As  a  mark  that  is  to  distinguish  one

person  from  others  and  prefer  him  to  them,  one  would  choose

something  that  is  not  to  be  found  in  other  people;  one  would not

choose something that can be exhibited in the same way by millions of

other people. An Israelite who was transplanted to Egypt would have

had to acknowledge every Egyptian as a brother in the covenant, a

brother in Yahweh. It is impossible that the Israelites who created the

text of the Bible can have been ignorant of the fact that circumcision

was indigenous in Egypt. The passage in Joshua quoted by Eduard

Meyer admits this without question but for that very reason it had to be

disavowed at any price.

   We must not expect the mythical structures of religion to pay too

much attention to logical coherence. Otherwise popular feeling might

have taken justified offence against a deity who made a covenant with

their  forefathers  with  mutual  obligations  and  then,  for  centuries  on

end, paid no attention to his human partners, till it suddenly occurred

to  him  to  manifest  himself  anew  to  their  descendants.  Even  more

puzzling  is  the  notion  of  a  god’s  all  at  once  ‘choosing’  a  people,

declaring them to be his people and himself to be their god. I believe

this is the only instance of its sort in the history of human religions.

Ordinarily god and people are indissolubly linked, they are one from

the very beginning of things. No doubt we sometimes hear of a people

taking  on  a  different  god,  but  never  of  a  god  seeking  a  differentpeople. We may perhaps understand this unique event better if we

recall the relations between Moses and the Jewish people. Moses had

stooped  to  the  Jews,  had  made  them  his  people:  they  were  his

‘chosen people’.¹

 

   ¹ Yahweh was undoubtedly a volcano god. There was no occasion for the inhabitants of

Egypt to worship him. I am certainly not the first person to be struck by the resemblance of the

sound of the name ‘Yahweh’ to the root of the other divine name ‘Jupiter (Jove)’. The name

‘Jochanan’ is compounded with an abbreviation of the Hebrew Yahweh - in the same kind of
way as ‘Gotthold’ and the Carthaginian equivalent ‘Hannibal’. This name (Jochanan), in the
forms  ‘Johann’,  ‘John’,  ‘Jean’,  ‘Juan’,  has  become  the  favourite  first  name  in  European
Christendom. The Italians, in rendering it ‘Giovanni’ and moreover calling a day of the week
‘Giovedi’, are bringing to light a resemblance which may possibly mean nothing or possibly a
very great deal. At this point, extensive but very uncertain prospects open up before us. It
seems that, in those obscure centuries which are scarcely accessible to historical research,
the countries round the eastern basin of the Mediterranean were the scene of frequent and
violent  volcanic  eruptions,  which  must  have  made  the  strongest  impression  on  their
inhabitants. Evans assumes that the final destruction of the palace of Minos at Knossos too
was the consequence of an earthquake. In Crete at that period (as probably in the Aegean
world in general) the great mother-goddess was worshipped. The realization that she was not
able to protect her house against the assaults of a stronger power may have contributed to
her having to give place to a male deity, and, if so, the volcano god had the first claim to take
her place. After all, Zeus always remains the ‘earth-shaker’. There is little doubt that it was
during those obscure ages that the mother-goddesses were replaced by male gods (who may
originally perhaps have been sons). The destiny of Pallas Athene, who was no doubt the local
form of the mother-goddess, is particularly impressive. She was reduced to being a daughter
by  the  religious  revolution,  she  was  robbed  of  her  own  mother  and,  by  having  virginity
imposed on her, was permanently excluded from motherhood.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4875

 

   The bringing-in of the patriarchs served yet another purpose. They

had  lived  in  Canaan,  and  their  memory  was  linked  with  particular

localities  in  that  country.  It  is  possible  that  they  were  themselves

originally Canaanite heroes or local divinities, and were then seized on

by  the  immigrant  Israelites  for  their  prehistory.  By  appealing  to  the

patriarchs they were as it were asserting their indigenous character

and  defending  themselves  from  the  odium  attaching  to  an  alien

conqueror. It was a clever twist to declare that the god Yahweh was

only giving them back what their forefathers had once possessed.

   In the later contributions to the text of the Bible the intention was putinto effect of avoiding the mention of Kadesh. The place at which the

religion was founded was fixed once and for all as the Mount of God,

Sinai-Horeb. It is not easy to see the motive for this; perhaps people

were unwilling to be reminded of the influence of Midian. But all later

distortions, especially of the period of the Priestly Code, had another

aim in view. There was no longer any need to alter accounts of events

in a desired sense - for this had been done long before. But care was

taken to shift back commands and institutions of the present day into

early times - to base them, as a rule, on the Mosaic law-giving - so as

to  derive  from  this  their  claim  to  being  holy  and  binding.  However

much  the  picture  of  the  past  might  in  this  way  be  falsified,  the

procedure  was  not  without  a  certain  psychological  justification.  It

reflected the fact that in the course of long ages - between the Exodus

from  Egypt  and  the  fixing  of  the  text  of  the  Bible  under  Ezra  and

Nehemiah some eight hundred years elapsed - the Yahweh religion

had had its form changed back into conformity, or even perhaps into

identity, with the original religion of Moses.

   And this is the essential outcome, the momentous substance, of the

history of the Jewish religion.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4876

 

                                          (7)

 

      Of  all  the  events  of  early  times  which  later  poets,  priests  and

historians undertook to work over, one stood out, the suppression of

which was enjoined by the most immediate and best human motives.

This was the murder of Moses, the great leader and liberator, which

Sellin discovered from hints in the writings of the Prophets. Sellin’s

hypothesis cannot be called fantastic - it is probable enough. Moses,

deriving from the school of Akhenaten, employed no methods other

than  did  the  king;  he  commanded,  he  forced  his  faith  upon  the

people.¹ The doctrine of Moses may have been even harsher than that

of his master. He had no need to retain the sun-god as a support: the

school  of  On  had  no  significance  for  his  alien  people.  Moses,  likeAkhenaten,  met  with  the  same  fate  that  awaits  all  enlightened

despots. The Jewish people under Moses were just as little able to

tolerate such a highly spiritualized religion and find satisfaction of their

needs  in  what  it  had  to  offer  as  had  been  the  Egyptians  of  the

Eighteenth Dynasty. The same thing happened in both cases: those

who  had  been  dominated  and  kept  in  want  rose  and  threw  off  the

burden of the religion that had been imposed on them. But while the

tame Egyptians waited till fate had removed the sacred figure of their

Pharaoh, the savage Semites took fate into their own hands and rid

themselves of their tyrant.²

 

   ¹ At that period any other method of influencing them was scarcely possible.

   ² It is really remarkable how little we hear in the thousands of years of Egyptian history of

the violent removal or murder of a Pharaoh. A comparison with Assyrian history, for instance,
must  increase  our  surprise  at  this.  It  may,  of  course,  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that
Egyptian history was entirely written to serve official ends.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4877

 

   Nor can it be maintained that the surviving text of the Bible gives us

no warning of such an end to Moses. The account of the ‘wandering in

the wilderness’, which may stand for the period during which Moses

ruled, describes a succession of serious revolts against his authority

which  were  also,  by  Yahweh’s  command,  suppressed  with  bloody

punishment. It is easy to imagine that one such rebellion ended in a

way different from what the text suggests. The people’s defection from

the new religion is also described in the text - only as an episode, it is

true: namely in the story of the golden calf. In this, by an ingenious

turn, the breaking of the tables of the law (which is to be understood

symbolically:  ‘he  has  broken  the  law’)  is  transposed  on  to  Moses

himself, and his furious indignation is assigned as its motive.

   There came a time when people began to regret the murder of

Moses and to seek to forget it. This was certainly so at the time of the

union  of  the  two  portions  of  the  people  at  Kadesh.  But  when  the

Exodus and the foundation of the religion at the oasis were brought

closer together, and Moses was represented as being concerned inthe latter instead of the other man, not only were the demands of the

followers of Moses satisfied but the distressing fact of his violent end

was  successfully  disavowed.  In  actual  fact  it  is  most  unlikely  that

Moses could have taken part in the proceedings at Kadesh even if his

life had not been cut short.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4878

 

      We  must  now  make  an  attempt  at  elucidating  the  chronological

relations of these events. We have put the Exodus in the period after

the end of the Eighteenth Dynasty (1350 B.C.). It may have occurred

then or a little later, since the Egyptian chroniclers have included the

succeeding years of anarchy in the reign of Haremhab, which brought

them to an end and lasted till 1315 B.C. The next (but also the only)

fixed point for the chronology is afforded by the stela of Merenptah

(1225-15 B.C.), which boasts of his victory over Isiraal (Israel) and the

laying  waste  of  her  seed  (?).  The  sense  to  be  attached  to  this

inscription is unfortunately doubtful, it is supposed to prove that the

Israelite tribes were already at that time settled in Canaan.¹ Eduard

Meyer rightly concludes from this stela that Merenptah cannot have

been  the  Pharaoh  of  the  Exodus,  as  had  been  lightly  assumed

previously.  The  date  of  the  Exodus  must  have  been  earlier.  The

question  of  who  was  the  Pharaoh  of  the  Exodus  seems  to  me

altogether an idle one. There was no Pharaoh of the Exodus, for it

occurred during an interregnum. Nor does the discovery of the stela of

Merenptah  throw  any  light  on  the  possible  date  of  the  union  and

founding of the religion at Kadesh. All that we can say with certainty is

that it was some time between 1350 and 1215 B.C. We suspect that

the  Exodus  comes  somewhere  very  near  the  beginning  of  this

hundred years and the events at Kadesh not too far away from its end.

We should like to claim the greater part of this period for the interval

between the two occurrences. For we need a comparatively long time

for the passions of the returning tribes to have cooled down after the

murder of Moses and for the influence of his followers, the Levites, to

have become as great as is implied by the compromise at Kadesh.Two generations, sixty years, might about suffice for this, but it is a

tight fit. What is inferred from the stela of Merenptah comes too early

for  us,  and  since  we  recognize  that  in  this  hypothesis  of  ours  one

supposition  is  only  based  on  another,  we  must  admit  that  this

discussion reveals a weak side of our construction. It is unlucky that

everything relating to the settlement of the Jewish people in Canaan is

so obscure and confused. Our only resort, perhaps, is to suppose that

the  name  on  the  ‘Israel’  stela  does  not  relate  to  the  tribes  whose

fortunes we are trying to follow and which combined to form the later

people  of  Israel.  After  all,  the  name  of  ‘Habiru’  (Hebrews)  was

transferred to these same people in the Amarna period.

 

   ¹ Eduard Meyer, 1906, 222 ff.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4879

 

      The  union  of  the  tribes  into  a  nation  through  the  adoption  of  a

common  religion,  whenever  it  may  have  taken  place,  might  easily

have turned out quite an unimportant happening in world history. The

new religion would have been carried away by the current of events,

Yahweh  would  have  had  to  take  his  place  in  the  procession  of

departed gods in Flaubert’s vision, and all twelve of his tribes would

have been ‘lost’ and not only the ten of them which the Anglo-Saxons

have been in search of for so long. The god Yahweh, to whom the

Midianite Moses then presented a new people, was probably in no

respect  a  prominent  being.  A  coarse,  narrow-minded,  local  god,

violent and bloodthirsty, he had promised his followers to give them ‘a

land flowing with milk and honey’ and urged them to exterminate its

present inhabitants ‘with the edge of the sword’. It is astonishing how

much remains, in spite of all the revisions of the Biblical narratives,

that allows us to recognize his original nature. It is not even certain

that his religion was a genuine monotheism, that it denied the divinity

of the deities of other peoples. It was enough probably that his people

regarded their own god as more powerful than any foreign god. If,

nevertheless,  in  the  sequel  everything  took  a  different  course  from

what such beginnings would have led one to expect, the cause can befound in only one fact. The Egyptian Moses had given to one portion

of the people a more highly spiritualized notion of god, the idea of a

single deity embracing the whole world, who was not less all-loving

than all-powerful, who was averse to all ceremonial and magic and set

before men as their highest aim a life in truth and justice. For, however

incomplete may be the accounts we have of the ethical side of the

Aten religion, it can be no unimportant fact that Akhenaten regularly

referred to himself in his inscriptions as ‘living in Ma’at’ (truth, justice).¹

In  the  long  run  it  made  no  difference  that  the  people  rejected  the

teaching of Moses (probably after a short time) and killed him himself.

The tradition of it remained and its influence achieved (only gradually,

it  is  true,  in  the  course  of  centuries)  what  was  denied  to  Moses

himself. The god Yahweh had arrived at undeserved honour when,

from the time of Kadesh onwards, he was credited with the deed of

liberation which had been performed by Moses; but he had to pay

heavily for this usurpation. The shadow of the god whose place he

had taken became stronger than himself; by the end of the process of

evolution, the nature of the forgotten god of Moses had come to light

behind his own. No one can doubt that it was only the idea of this

other god that enabled the people of Israel to survive all the blows of

fate and that kept them alive to our own days.

 

   ¹ His hymns lay stress not only on the god’s universality and oneness, but also on his loving

care  for  all  creatures;  and  they  encourage  joy  in  nature  and  enjoyment  of  its  beauty.
(Breasted, 1934.)
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4880

 

   It is no longer possible to estimate the share taken by the Levites in

the final victory of the Mosaic god over Yahweh. They had taken the

side  of  Moses  in  the  past,  when  the  compromise  was  reached  at

Kadesh,  in  a  still  live  memory  of  the  master  whose  retinue  and

compatriots they had been. During the centuries since then they had

become merged with the people or with the priesthood, and it had

become the main function of the priests to develop and supervise the

ritual,  and  besides  this  to  preserve  the  holy  writ  and  revise  it  inaccordance  with  their  aims.  But  was  not  all  sacrifice  and  all

ceremonial  at  bottom  only  magic  and  sorcery,  such  as  had  been

unconditionally rejected by the old Mosaic teaching? Thereupon there

arose from among the midst of the people an unending succession of

men who were not linked to Moses in their origin but were enthralled

by the great and mighty tradition which had grown up little by little in

obscurity:  and  it  was  these  men,  the  Prophets,  who  tirelessly

preached the old Mosaic doctrine that the deity disdained sacrifice and

ceremonial  and  asked  only  for  faith  and  a  life  in  truth  and  justice

(Ma’at).  The  efforts  of  the  Prophets  had  a  lasting  success;  the

doctrines  with  which  they  re-established  the  old  faith  became  the

permanent content of the Jewish religion. It is honour enough to the

Jewish people that they could preserve such a tradition and produce

men who gave it a voice - even though the initiative to it came from

outside, from a great foreigner.

   I should not feel secure in giving this account, if I could not appeal to

the judgement of other enquirers with a specialist knowledge who see

the significance of Moses for the Jewish religion in the same light as I

do, even though they do not recognize his Egyptian origin. Thus, for

instance, Sellin (1922, 52) writes: ‘Consequently we must picture the

true  religion  of  Moses  -  his  belief  in  the  one  moral  God  whom  he

preaches - as thenceforward necessarily the property of a small circle

of the people. We must necessarily not expect to meet with it in the

official cult, in the religion of the priests or in the beliefs of the people.

We can necessarily only reckon to find an occasional spark emerging,

now  here  and  now  there,  from  the  spiritual  torch  which  he  once

kindled, to find that his ideas have not entirely perished but have been

silently at work here and there upon beliefs and customs, till sooner or

later, through the effect of special experiences or of persons specially

moved by his spirit, it has broken out more strongly once more and

gained  influence  on  wider  masses  of  the  population.  It  is  from  this

point  of  view  that  the  history  of  the  ancient  religion  of  Israel  is

necessarily  to  be  regarded.  Anyone  who  sought  to  construct  the

Mosaic religion on the lines of the religion we meet with, according to

the chronicles, in the life of the people during their first five hundred

years  in  Canaan,  would  be  committing  the  gravest  methodological

error.’ Volz (1907, 64) speaks even more clearly: it is his belief that‘the exalted work of Moses was understood and carried through to

begin with only feebly and scantily, till, in the course of centuries, it

penetrated more and more, and at length in the great Prophets it met

with like spirits who continued the lonely man’s work.’

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4881

 

 

   And here, it seems, I have reached the conclusion of my study,

which was directed to the single aim of introducing the figure of an

Egyptian Moses into the nexus of Jewish history. Our findings may be

thus expressed in the most concise formula. Jewish history is familiar

to us for its dualities: two groups of people who came together to form

the nation, two kingdoms into which this nation fell apart, two gods’

names in the documentary sources of the Bible. To these we add two

fresh ones: the foundation of two religions - the first repressed by the

second but nevertheless later emerging victoriously behind it, and two

religious founders, who are both called by the same name of Moses

and whose personalities we have to distinguish from each other. All of

these dualities are the necessary consequences of the first one: the

fact that one portion of the people had an experience which must be

regarded as traumatic and which the other portion escaped. Beyond

this there would be a very great deal to discuss, to explain and to

assert. Only thus would an interest in our purely historical study find its

true justification. What the real nature of a tradition resides in, and

what its special power rests on, how impossible it is to dispute the

personal  influence  upon  world-history  of  individual  great  men,  what

sacrilege one commits against the splendid diversity of human life if

one recognizes only those motives which arise from material needs,

from what sources some ideas (and particularly religious ones) derive

their power to subject both men and peoples to their yoke - to study all

this in the special case of Jewish history would be an alluring task. To

continue my work on such lines as these would be to find a link with

the  statements  I  put  forward  twenty-five  years  ago  in Totem  and

Taboo. But I no longer feel that I have the strength to do so. 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4882

 

                                              III

 

            MOSES, HIS PEOPLE AND MONOTHEIST RELIGION

 

                                        PART I

 

                                    PREFATORY NOTE I

 

                                (before March, 1938)

 

With the audacity of one who has little or nothing to lose, I propose for

a second time to break a well-grounded intention and to add to my two

essays on Moses in Imago the final portion which I have held back. I

ended the last essay with an assertion that I knew my strength would

not be enough for this. By that I meant, of course, the weakening of

creative powers which goes along with old age;¹ but I was thinking of

another obstacle as well.

      We  are  living  in  a  specially  remarkable  period.  We  find  to  our

astonishment that progress has allied itself with barbarism. In Soviet

Russia they have set about improving the living conditions of some

hundred millions of people who were held firmly in subjection. They

have been rash enough to withdraw the ‘opium’ of religion from them

and have been wise enough to give them a reasonable amount of

sexual liberty; but at the same time they have submitted them to the

most cruel coercion and robbed them of any possibility of freedom of

thought. With similar violence, the Italian people are being trained up

to  orderliness  and  a  sense  of  duty.  We  feel  it  as  a  relief  from  an

oppressive  apprehension  when  we  see  in  the  case  of  the  German

people that a relapse into almost prehistoric barbarism can occur as

well  without  being  attached  to  any  progressive  ideas.  In  any  case,

things have so turned out that to-day the conservative democracies

have become the guardians of cultural advance and that, strange to

say, it is precisely the institution of the Catholic Church which puts upa powerful defence against the spread of this danger to civilization -

the Church which has hitherto been the relentless foe to freedom of

thought and to advances towards the discovery of the truth!

 

   ¹ I do not share the opinion of my contemporary Bernard Shaw, that human beings would

only achieve anything good if they could live to be three hundred years old. A prolongation of
life would achieve nothing unless many other fundamental changes were to be made in the
conditions of life.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4883

 

   We are living here in a Catholic country under the protection of that

Church, uncertain how long that protection will hold out. But so long as

it lasts, we naturally hesitate to do anything that would be bound to

arouse the Church’s hostility. This is not cowardice, but prudence. The

new  enemy,  to  whom  we  want  to  avoid  being  of  service,  is  more

dangerous  than  the  old  one  with  whom  we  have  already  learnt  to

come to terms. The psycho-analytic researches which we carry on are

in any case viewed with suspicious attention by Catholicism. I will not

maintain that this is unjustly so. If our work leads us to a conclusion

which  reduces  religion  to  a  neurosis  of  humanity  and  explains  its

enormous power in the same way as a neurotic compulsion in our

individual patients, we may be sure of drawing the resentment of our

ruling powers down upon us. Not that I should have anything to say

that would be new or that I did not say clearly a quarter of a century

ago: but it has been forgotten in the meantime and it could not be

without effect if I repeated it to-day and illustrated it from an example

which offers a standard for all religious foundations. It would probably

lead  to  our  being  prohibited  from  practising  psycho-analysis.  Such

violent methods of suppression are, indeed, by no means alien to the

Church; the fact is rather that it feels it as an invasion of its privileges if

someone  else  makes  use  of  those  methods.  But  psycho-analysis,

which  in  the  course  of  my  long  life  has  gone  everywhere,  still

possesses no home that could be more valuable for it than the city in

which it was born and grew up.

    I do not only think but I know that I shall let myself be deterred by

this second obstacle, by the external danger, from publishing the last

portion of my study on Moses. I have made yet another attempt to get

the difficulty out of the way, by telling myself that my fears are based

on  an  over-estimation  of  my  own  personal  importance:  that  it  will

probably be a matter of complete indifference to the authorities what I

choose to write about Moses and the origin of monotheist religions.

But I feel uncertain in my judgement of this. It seems to me much

more possible that malice and sensationalism will counter-balance any

lack of recognition of me in the contemporary world’s judgement. So I

shall not give this work to the public. But that need not prevent my

writing it. Especially as I have written it down already once, two years

ago, so that I have only to revise it and attach it to the two essays that

have preceded it. It may then be preserved in concealment till some

day the time arrives when it may venture without danger into the light,

or till someone who has reached the same conclusions and opinions

can  be  told:  ‘there  was  someone  in  darker  times  who  thought  the

same as you!’

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4884

 

                                  PREFATORY NOTE II

 

                                    (June, 1938)

 

   The quite special difficulties which have weighed on me during my

composition  of  this  study  relating  to  the  figure  of  Moses  -  internal

doubts as well as external obstacles - have resulted in this third and

concluding essay being introduced by two different prefaces, which

contradict each other and indeed cancel each other out. For in the

short space of time between the two there has been a fundamental

change in the author’s circumstances. At the earlier date I was living

under the protection of the Catholic Church, and was afraid that the

publication of my work would result in the loss of that protection and

would conjure up a prohibition upon the work of the adherents and

students  of  psycho-analysis  in  Austria.  Then,  suddenly,  came  theGerman  invasion  and  Catholicism  proved,  to  use  the  words  of  the

Bible, ‘a broken reed’. In the certainty that I should now be persecuted

not only for my line of thought but also for my ‘race’ - accompanied by

many of my friends, I left the city which, from my early childhood, had

been my home for seventy-eight years.

      I  met  with  the  friendliest  reception  in  lovely,  free,  magnanimous

England. Here I now live, a welcome guest; I can breathe a sigh of

relief now that the weight has been taken off me and that I am once

more able to speak and write - I had almost said ‘and think’ - as I wish

or as I must. I venture to bring the last portion of my work before the

public.

 

   There are no external obstacles remaining, or at least none to be

frightened  of.  In  the  few  weeks  of  my  stay  here  I  have  received

countless greetings from friends who were pleased at my arrival, and

from unknown and indeed uninvolved strangers who only wanted to

give expression to their satisfaction at my having found freedom and

safety here. And in addition there arrived, with a frequency surprising

to a foreigner, communications of another sort, which were concerned

with the state of my soul, which pointed out to me the way of Christ

and sought to enlighten me on the future of Israel. The good people

who  wrote  in  this  way  cannot  have  known  much  about  me;  but  I

expect  that  when  this  work  about  Moses  becomes  known,  in  a

translation, among my new compatriots, I shall forfeit enough of the

sympathy which a number of other people as well now feel for me.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4885

 

   As regards internal difficulties, a political revolution and a change of

domicile could alter nothing. No less than before, I feel uncertain in the

face  of  my  own  work;  I  lack  the  consciousness  of  unity  and  of

belonging  together  which  should  exist  between  an  author  and  his

work. It is not as though there were an absence of conviction in the

correctness of my conclusion. I acquired that a quarter of a century

ago when in 1912 I wrote my book about Totem and Taboo, and it hasonly  grown  firmer  since.  From  that  time  I  have  never  doubted  that

religious phenomena are only to be understood on the pattern of the

individual neurotic symptoms familiar to us - as the return of long since

forgotten,  important  events  in  the  primaeval  history  of  the  human

family  -  and  that  they  have  to  thank  precisely  this  origin  for  their

compulsive  character  and  that,  accordingly,  they  are  effective  on

human  beings  by  force  of  the  historical  truth  of  their  content.  My

uncertainty sets in only when I ask myself whether I have succeeded

in proving these theses in the example which I have chosen here of

Jewish monotheism. To my critical sense this book, which takes its

start from the man Moses, appears like a dancer balancing on the tip

of one toe. If I could not find support in an analytic interpretation of the

exposure  myth  and  could  not  pass  from  there  to  Sellin’s  suspicion

about the end of Moses, the whole thing would have had to remain

unwritten. In any case, let us now take the plunge.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4886

 

                                            A

 

                              THE HISTORICAL PREMISS¹

 

   Here, then, is the historical background of the events which have

absorbed our interest. As a result of the conquests of the Eighteenth

Dynasty,  Egypt  became  a  world-empire.  The  new  imperialism  was

reflected in the development of the religious ideas, if not of the whole

people,  at  least  of  its  ruling  and  intellectually  active  upper  stratum.

Under the influence of the priests of the sun-god at On (Heliopolis),

strengthened  perhaps  by  impulses  from  Asia,  the  idea  arose  of  a

universal god Aten to whom restriction to a single country and a single

people no longer applied. In the young Amenophis IV a Pharaoh came

to the throne who had no higher interest than the development of this

idea of a god. He promoted the religion of Aten into the state religion,

and through him the universal god became the only god: everything

that  was  told  of  other  gods  was  deceit  and  lies.  With  magnificentinflexibility he resisted every temptation to magical thought, and he

rejected the illusion, so dear to Egyptians in particular, of a life after

death. In an astonishing presentiment of later scientific discovery he

recognized in the energy of solar radiation the source of all life on

earth and worshipped it as the symbol of the power of his god. He

boasted of his joy in the creation and of his life in Ma’at (truth and

justice).

      This  is  the  first  and  perhaps  the  clearest  case  of  a  monotheist

religion  in  human  history;  a  deeper  insight  into  the  historical  and

psychological  determinants  of  its  origin  would  be  of  immeasurable

value. Care has however been taken that none too much information

about the Aten religion should reach us. Already under Akhenaten’s

feeble successors all that he had created collapsed. The vengeance

of the priesthood which he had suppressed raged against his memory;

the Aten religion was abolished, the capital city of the Pharaoh, who

was branded as a criminal, was destroyed and plundered. In about

1350 B.C. the Eighteenth Dynasty came to an end; after a period of

anarchy, order was restored by general Haremhab, who reigned till

1315 B.C. Akhenaten’s reform seemed to be an episode doomed to

be forgotten.

 

   ¹ I begin with a résumé of the findings of my second study on Moses, the purely historical

one. Those findings will not be submitted here to any fresh criticism, since they form the
premiss to the psychological discussions which start out from them and constantly go back to
them.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4887

 

 

   Thus far what is established historically; and now our hypothetical

sequel begins. Among those in Akhenaten’s entourage there was a

man who was perhaps called Tuthmosis, like many other people at

that time¹ - the name is not of great importance except that its second

component must have been ‘-mose’. He was in a high position and a

convinced  adherent  of  the  Aten  religion,  but,  in  contrast  to  the

meditative king, he was energetic and passionate. For him the deathof Akhenaten and the abolition of his religion meant the end of all his

expectations.  He  could  remain  in  Egypt  only  as  an  outlaw  or  as  a

renegade. Perhaps as governor of the frontier province he had come

in  contact  with  a  Semitic  tribe  which  had  immigrated  into  it  a  few

generations  earlier.  Under  the  necessity  of  his  disappointment  and

loneliness  he  turned  to  these  foreigners  and  with  them  sought

compensation for his losses. He chose them as his people and tried to

realize  his  ideals  in  them.  After  he  had  left  Egypt  with  them,

accompanied  by  his  followers,  he  made  them  holy  by  the  mark  of

circumcision, gave them laws and introduced them into the doctrines

of  the  Aten  religion,  which  the  Egyptians  had  just  thrown  off.  The

precepts which this man Moses gave to his Jews may have been even

harsher than those of his master and teacher Akhenaten, and he may,

too,  have  given  up  dependence  on  the  sun-god  of  On,  to  which

Akhenaten had continued to adhere.

   We must take the period of the interregnum after 1350 B.C. as the

date of the Exodus from Egypt. The interval of time which followed, up

to  the  completion  of  the  occupation  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  is

particularly inscrutable. Modern historical research has been able to

extract two facts from the obscurity which the biblical narrative has

left, or rather created, at this point. The first of these facts, discovered

by  Ernst  Sellin,  is  that  the  Jews,  who,  even  by  the  account  in  the

Bible, were headstrong and unruly towards their law-giver and leader,

rose against him one day, killed him and threw off the religion of the

Aten which had been imposed on them, just as the Egyptians had

thrown it off earlier. The second fact, demonstrated by Eduard Meyer,

is that those Jews who had returned from Egypt united later on with

closely  related  tribes  in  the  region  between  Palestine,  the  Sinai

Peninsula and Arabia, and that there, in a well-watered locality named

Kadesh, under the influence of the Arabian Midianites, they took on a

new religion, the worship of the volcano god Yahweh. Soon after this

they were ready to invade Canaan as conquerors.

 

   ¹ Such as, for instance, the sculptor whose studio was found at Tell el-’Amarna.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4888 

   The chronological relations of these two events to each other and to

the Exodus from Egypt are very uncertain. The closest historical point

of reference is provided by a stela of the Pharaoh Merenptah (who

reigned till 1215 B.C.) which in the course of a report on campaigns in

Syria and Palestine names ‘Israel’ among the defeated enemy. If we

take the date of this stela as a terminus ad quem, we are left with

about a century (from after 1350 to before 1215 B.C.) for the whole

course of events, starting from the Exodus. It is possible, however,

that the name ‘Israel’ did not yet relate to the tribes whose fortunes we

are following and that in fact we have a longer interval at our disposal.

The settlement in Canaan of what was later the Jewish people was

certainly no rapidly completed conquest but took place in waves and

over  considerable  periods  of  time.  If  we  free  ourselves  from  the

limitation imposed by the Merenptah stela, we can all the more easily

assign one generation (thirty years) to the period of Moses,¹ and allow

at least two generations, but probably more, to elapse up to the time

of  the  union  at  Kadesh.²  The  interval  between  Kadesh  and  the

irruption into Canaan need only be short. The Jewish tradition, as was

shown in the preceding essay, had good grounds for shortening the

interval  between  the  Exodus  and  the  founding  of  the  religion  at

Kadesh, while the reverse is in the interest of our account.

 

   ¹ This would correspond to the forty years of wandering in the wilderness of the Bible text.

   ² Thus we should have about 1350 (or 1340)-1320 (or 1310) B.C. for the Moses period;

1260 B.C., or preferably later, for Kadesh; the Merenptah stela before 1215 B.C.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4889

 

   All this, however, is still history, an attempt to fill up the gaps in our

historical knowledge and in part a repetition of my second essay in

Imago. Our interest follows the fortunes of Moses and of his doctrines,

to which the rising of the Jews had only apparently put an end. From

the account given by the Yahwist, which was written down in about

1000  B.C.  but  was  certainly  based  on  earlier  records,  we  have

discovered that the union and the founding of the religion at Kadeshwere accompanied by a compromise in which the two sides are still

easily  distinguishable.  The  one  partner  was  only  concerned  to

disavow the novelty and foreign character of the god Yahweh and to

increase  his  claim  to  the  people’s  devotion;  the  other  partner  was

anxious  not  to  sacrifice  to  him  precious  memories  of  the  liberation

from Egypt and of the grand figure of the leader, Moses. The second

side succeeded, too, in introducing both the fact and the man into the

new account of prehistory, in retaining at least the external mark of the

religion of Moses - circumcision - and possibly in establishing certain

restrictions in the use of the name of the new god. As we have said,

the  representatives  of  these  claims  were  the  descendants  of  the

followers  of  Moses,  the  Levites,  who  were  separated  from  his

contemporaries and compatriots by only a few generations and were

still  attached  to  his  memory  by  a  living  recollection.  The  poetically

embellished narrative which we attribute to the Yahwist, and to his

later  rival  the  Elohist,  were  like  mausoleums  beneath  which,

withdrawn from the knowledge of later generations, the true account of

those early things - of the nature of the Mosaic religion and of the

violent end of the great man - was, as it were, to find its eternal rest.

And if we have guessed what happened correctly, there is nothing left

about it that is puzzling; but it might very well have signified the final

end of the Moses episode in the history of the Jewish people.

   The remarkable thing, however, is that that was not the case - that

the most powerful effects of the people’s experience were to come to

light only later and to force their way into reality in the course of many

centuries. It is unlikely that Yahweh differed much in character from

the  gods  of  the  surrounding  peoples  and  tribes.  It  is  true  that  he

struggled with them, just as the peoples themselves fought with one

another,  but  we  cannot  suppose  that  it  came  into  the  head  of  a

Yahweh-worshipper of those days to deny the existence of the gods of

Canaan or Moab or Amalek, and so on, any more than to deny the

existence of the peoples who believed in them.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4890

       The  monotheist  idea,  which  had  flared  up  with  Akhenaten,  had

grown dark once more and was to remain in darkness for a long time

to  come.  Finds  in  the  island  of  Elephantine,  just  below  the  First

Cataract of the Nile, have given us the surprising information that a

Jewish military colony had been settled there for centuries, in whose

temple,  alongside  of  the  chief  god  Yahu,  two  female  deities  were

worshipped, one of them named Anat-Yahu. These Jews, it is true,

were cut off from their mother-country and had not taken part in the

religious development there; the Persian government of Egypt (of the

fifth century B.C.) conveyed information to them of the new rules of

worship issued from Jerusalem.¹ Going back to earlier times, we may

say that the god Yahweh certainly bore no resemblance to the Mosaic

god. Aten had been a pacifist like his representative on earth - or more

properly,  his  prototype  -  the  Pharaoh  Akhenaten,  who  looked  on

passively while the world-empire conquered by his ancestors fell to

pieces. No doubt Yahweh was better suited to a people who were

starting out to occupy new homelands by force. And everything in the

Mosaic  god  that  deserved  admiration  was  quite  beyond  the

comprehension of the primitive masses.

   I have already said - and on that point I have been glad to be able to

claim  agreement  with  other  writers  -  that  the  central  fact  of  the

development of the Jewish religion was that in the course of time the

god Yahweh lost his own characteristics and grew more and more to

resemble the old god of Moses, the Aten. It is true that differences

remained to which one would be inclined at a first glance to attribute

great importance; but these can easily be explained.

   In Egypt Aten had begun to dominate during a fortunate period of

established possession, and even when the empire began to totter,

his worshippers had been able to turn away from the disturbance and

continued  to  praise  and  to  enjoy  his  creations.  The  Jewish  people

were fated to experience a series of grave trials and painful events;

their  god  became  harsh  and  severe  and,  as  it  were,  wrapped  in

gloom.  He  retained  the  characteristic  of  being  a  universal  god,

reigning over all countries and peoples, but the fact that his worship

had passed over from the Egyptians to the Jews found expression in

the  additional  belief  that  the  Jews  were  his  chosen  people  whose

special  obligations  would  eventually  meet  with  a  special  reward  aswell. It may not have been easy for the people to reconcile a belief in

being preferred by their omnipotent god with the sad experiences of

their  unfortunate  destiny.  But  they  did  not  allow  themselves  to  be

shaken in their convictions; they increased their own sense of guilt in

order to stifle their doubts of God, and it may be that they pointed at

last to the ‘inscrutable decrees of Providence’, as pious people do to

this  day.  If  they  felt  inclined  to  wonder  at  his  allowing  one  violent

aggressor after another to arise and overthrow and maltreat them -

Assyrians, Babylonians, Persians - they could yet recognize his power

in the fact that all these evil foes were themselves conquered in turn

and that their empires vanished.

   In three important respects the later god of the Jews became in the

end like the old Mosaic god. The first and decisive point is that he was

truly acknowledged as the only god, beside whom any other god was

unthinkable.  Akhenaten’s  monotheism  was  taken  seriously  by  an

entire people; indeed, that people clung so much to this idea that it

became  the  main  content  of  their  intellectual  life  and  left  them  no

interest for other things. On this the people and the priesthood who

had  become  dominant  among  them  were  at  one.  But  whereas  the

priests  exhausted  their  efforts  in  erecting  the  ceremonial  for  his

worship,  they  came  in  opposition  to  intense  currents  among  the

people which sought to revive two others of the doctrines of Moses

about his god. The voices of the Prophets never tired of declaring that

God despised ceremonial and sacrifice and required only that people

should believe in him and lead a life in truth and justice. And when

they praised the simplicity and holiness of life in the wilderness they

were certainly under the influence of the Mosaic ideals.

 

   ¹ Auerbach, 2, 1936.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4891

 

 

   It is time to raise the question of whether there is any need whatever

to call in the influence of Moses as a cause of the final form taken by

the Jewish idea of God, or whether it would not be enough to assumea spontaneous development to higher intellectuality during a cultural

life extending over hundreds of years. There are two things to be said

about  this  possible  explanation  which  would  put  an  end  to  all  our

puzzling conjectures. First, that it explains nothing. In the case of the

Greeks  -  unquestionably  a  most  highly  gifted  people  -  the  same

conditions did not lead to monotheism but to a disintegration of their

polytheist  religion  and  to  the  beginning  of  philosophical  thought.  In

Egypt, so far as we can understand, monotheism grew up as a by-

product of imperialism: God was a reflection of the Pharaoh who was

the  absolute  ruler  of  a  great  world  empire.  With  the  Jews,  political

conditions were highly unfavourable for the development from the idea

of an exclusive national god to that of a universal ruler of the world.

And where did this tiny and powerless nation find the arrogance to

declare itself the favourite child of the great Lord? The problem of the

origin of monotheism among the Jews would thus remain unsolved, or

we should have to be content with the common answer that it is the

expression of the peculiar religious genius of that people. Genius is

well known to be incomprehensible and irresponsible, and we ought

therefore not to bring it up as an explanation till every other solution

has failed us.¹

   In addition to this, we come upon the fact that Jewish records and

historical  writings  themselves  point  us  the  way,  by  asserting  most

definitely - this time without contradicting themselves - that the idea of

a  single  god  was  brought  to  the  people  by  Moses.  If  there  is  an

objection to the trustworthiness of this assurance, it is that the priestly

revision of the text we have before us obviously traces far too much

back to Moses. Institutions such as the ritual ordinances, which date

unmistakably  from  later  times,  are  given  out  as  Mosaic

commandments with the plain intention of lending them authority. This

certainly gives us ground for suspicion, but not enough for a rejection.

For the deeper motive for an exaggeration of this kind is obvious. The

priestly  narrative  seeks  to  establish  continuity  between  its

contemporary period and the remote Mosaic past; it seeks to disavow

precisely  what  we  have  described  as  the  most  striking  fact  about

Jewish religious history, namely that there is a yawning gap between

the law-giving of Moses and the later Jewish religion - a gap which

was  at  first  filled  by  the  worship  of  Yahweh,  and  was  only  slowlypatched  up  afterwards.  It  disputes  this  course  of  events  by  every

possible  means,  though  its  historical  correctness  is  established

beyond  any  doubt,  since,  in  the  particular  treatment  given  to  the

Biblical text, superabundant evidence has been left to prove it. Here

the  priestly  revision  has  attempted  something  similar  to  the

tendentious distortion which made the new god Yahweh into the god

of  the  Patriarchs.  If  we  take  this  motive  of  the  Priestly  Code  into

account, we shall find it hard to withhold our belief from the assertion

that Moses really did himself give the monotheist idea to the Jews. We

should be all the readier to give our assent since we can say where

Moses derived this idea from, which the Jewish priests certainly knew

no longer.

 

   ¹ This same consideration applies, too, to the remarkable case of William Shakespeare of

Stratford.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4892

 

   And here someone might ask what we gain by tracing Jewish to

Egyptian monotheism. It merely pushes the problem a little way further

back: it tells us nothing more of the genesis of the monotheist idea.

The answer is that the question is not one of gain but of investigation.

Perhaps we may learn something from it if we discover the real course

of events.

 

                                            B

 

                        THE LATENCY PERIOD AND TRADITION

 

   We confess the belief, therefore, that the idea of a single god, as

well as the rejection of magically effective ceremonial and the stress

upon  ethical  demands  made  in  his  name,  were  in  fact  Mosaic

doctrines,  to  which  no  attention  was  paid  to  begin  with,  but  which,

after a long interval had elapsed, came into operation and eventually

became permanently established. How are we to explain a delayed

effect of this kind and where do we meet with a similar phenomenon?It occurs to us at once that such things are not infrequently to be found

in the most various spheres and that they probably come about in a

number of ways which are understandable with greater or less ease.

Let us take, for instance, the history of a new scientific theory, such as

Darwin’s theory of evolution. At first it met with embittered rejection

and was violently disputed for decades; but it took no longer than a

generation  for  it  to  be  recognized  as  a  great  step  forward  towards

truth. Darwin himself achieved the honour of a grave or cenotaph in

Westminster Abbey. A case such as that leaves us little to unravel.

The new truth awoke emotional resistances; these found expression in

arguments by which the evidence in favour of the unpopular theory

could be disputed; the struggle of opinions took up a certain length of

time; from the first there were adherents and opponents; the number

as well as the weight of the former kept on increasing till at last they

gained  the  upper  hand;  during  the  whole  time  of  the  struggle  the

subject  with  which  it  was  concerned  was  never  forgotten.  We  are

scarcely surprised that the whole course of events took a considerable

length of time; and we probably do not sufficiently appreciate that what

we are concerned with is a process in group psychology.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4893

 

   There is no difficulty in finding an analogy in the mental life of an

individual corresponding precisely to this process. Such would be the

case if a person learnt something new to him which, on the ground of

certain evidence, he ought to recognize as true, but which contradicts

some of his wishes and shocks a few convictions that are precious to

him. Thereupon he will hesitate, seek for reasons to enable him to

throw  doubts  on  this  new  thing,  and  for  a  while  will  struggle  with

himself, till finally he admits to himself: ‘All the same it is so, though it’s

not easy for me to accept it, though it’s distressing to me to have to

believe it.’ What we learn from this is merely that it takes time for the

reasoning  activity  of  the  ego  to  overcome  the  objections  that  are

maintained by strong affective cathexes. The similarity between this

case  and  the  one  we  are  endeavouring  to  understand  is  not  verygreat.

   The next example we turn to appears to have even less in common

with our problem. It may happen that a man who has experienced

some frightful accident - a railway collision, for instance - leaves the

scene of the event apparently uninjured. In the course of the next few

weeks, however, he develops a number of severe psychical and motor

symptoms which can only be traced to his shock, the concussion or

whatever else it was. He now has a ‘traumatic neurosis’. It is a quite

unintelligible - that is to say, a new - fact. The time that has passed

between  the  accident  and  the  first  appearance  of  the  symptoms  is

described  as  the  ‘incubation  period’,  in  a  clear  allusion  to  the

pathology of infectious diseases. On reflection, it must strike us that, in

spite  of  the  fundamental  difference  between  the  two  cases  -  the

problem of traumatic neurosis and that of Jewish monotheism - there

is nevertheless one point of agreement: namely, in the characteristic

that  might  be  described  as  ‘latency’.  According  to  our  assured

hypothesis,  in  the  history  of  the  Jewish  religion  there  was  a  long

period after the defection from the religion of Moses during which no

sign was to be detected of the monotheist idea, of the contempt for

ceremonial or of the great emphasis on ethics. We are thus prepared

for the possibility that the solution of our problem is to be looked for in

a particular psychological situation.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4894

 

 

   We have already repeatedly described what happened at Kadesh

when the two portions of what was later to be the Jewish people came

together to receive a new religion. In those, on the one hand, who had

been in Egypt, memories of the Exodus and of the figure of Moses

were still so strong and vivid that they demanded their inclusion in an

account of early times. They were grandchildren, perhaps, of people

who had known Moses himself, and some of them still felt themselves

Egyptians and bore Egyptian names. But they had good motives for

repressing the memory of the fate with which their leader and lawgiverhad met. The determining purpose of the other portion of the people

was  to  glorify  the  new  god  and  to  dispute  his  being  foreign.  Both

portions had the same interest in disavowing the fact of their having

had an earlier religion and the nature of its content. So it was that the

first compromise came about, and it was probably soon recorded in

writing. The people who had come from Egypt had brought writing and

the desire to write history along with them; but it was to be a long time

before  historical  writing  realized  that  it  was  pledged  to  unswerving

truthfulness.  To  begin  with  it  had  no  scruples  about  shaping  its

narratives according to the needs and purposes of the moment, as

though  it  had  not  yet  recognized  the  concept  of  falsification.  As  a

result  of  these  circumstances  a  discrepancy  was  able  to  grow  up

between  the  written  record  and  the  oral  transmission  of  the  same

material - tradition. What had been omitted or changed in the written

record  might  very  well  have  been  preserved  intact  in  tradition.

Tradition was a supplement but at the same time a contradiction to

historical writing. It was less subjected to the influence of distorting

purposes and perhaps at some points quite exempt from them, and it

might  therefore  be  more  truthful  than  the  account  that  had  been

recorded in writing. Its trustworthiness, however, suffered from the fact

that  it  was  less  stable  and  definite  than  the  written  account  and

exposed to numerous changes and alterations when it was handed on

from one generation to another by oral communication. A tradition of

such a kind might meet with various sorts of fate. What we should

most expect would be that it would be crushed by the written account,

would be unable to stand up against it, would become more and more

shadowy and would finally pass into oblivion. But it might meet with

other fates: one of these would be that the tradition itself would end in

a  written  record,  and  we  shall  have  to  deal  with  yet  others  as  we

proceed.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4895

 

   The phenomenon of latency in the history of the Jewish religion, with

which we are dealing, may be explained, then, by the circumstancethat the facts and ideas which were intentionally disavowed by what

may be called the official historians were in fact never lost. Information

about them persisted in traditions which survived among the people.

As we are assured by Sellin, indeed, there was actually a tradition

about the end of Moses which flatly contradicted the official account

and was far nearer the truth. The same, we may assume, also applied

to other things which apparently ceased to exist at the same time as

Moses - to some of the contents of the Mosaic religion, which had

been unacceptable to the majority of his contemporaries.

 

   The remarkable fact with which we are here confronted is, however,

that these traditions, instead of becoming weaker with time, became

more and more powerful in the course of centuries, forced their way

into  the  later  revisions  of  the  official  accounts  and  finally  showed

themselves  strong  enough  to  have  a  decisive  influence  on  the

thoughts and actions of the people. The determinants which made this

outcome  possible  are  for  the  moment,  it  is  true,  outside  our

knowledge.

   This fact is so remarkable that we feel justified in looking at it once

again.  Our  problem  is  comprised  in  it.  The  Jewish  people  had

abandoned  the  Aten  religion  brought  to  them  by  Moses  and  had

turned to the worship of another god who differed little from the Baalim

of the neighbouring peoples. All the tendentious efforts of later times

failed to disguise this shameful fact. But the Mosaic religion had not

vanished without leaving a trace; some sort of memory of it had kept

alive  -  a  possibly  obscured  and  distorted  tradition.  And  it  was  this

tradition  of  a  great  past  which  continued  to  operate  (from  the

background,  as  it  were),  which  gradually  acquired  more  and  more

power  over  people’s  minds  and  which  in  the  end  succeeded  in

changing the god Yahweh into the Mosaic god and in re-awakening

into  life  the  religion  of  Moses  that  had  been  introduced  and  then

abandoned long centuries before. That a tradition thus sunk in oblivion

should exercise such a powerful effect on the mental life of a people is

an unfamiliar idea to us. We find ourselves here in the field of group

psychology, where we do not feel at home. We shall look about for

analogies, for facts that are at least of a similar nature, even though in

different fields. And facts of that sort are, I believe, to be found. 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4896

 

      During  the  period  at  which,  among  the  Jews,  the  return  of  the

religion  of  Moses  was  in  preparation,  the  Greek  people  found

themselves in possession of an exceedingly rich store of tribal legends

and hero-myths. It is believed that the ninth or eighth century B.C. saw

the origin of the two Homeric epics, which drew their material from this

circle  of  legends.  With  our  present  psychological  insight  we  could,

long before Schliemann and Evans, have raised the question of where

it was that the Greeks obtained all the legendary material which was

worked  over  by  Homer  and  the  great  Attic  dramatists  in  their

masterpieces. The answer would have had to be that this people had

probably experienced in their prehistory a period of external brilliance

and  cultural  efflorescence  which  had  perished  in  a  historical

catastrophe  and  of  which  an  obscure  tradition  survived  in  these

legends.  The  archaeological  researches  of  our  days  have  now

confirmed this suspicion, which in the past would certainly have been

pronounced  too  daring.  These  researches  have  uncovered  the

evidences  of  the  impressive  Minoan-Mycenaean  civilization,  which

had  probably  already  come  to  an  end  on  the  mainland  of  Greece

before 1250 B.C. There is scarcely a hint at it to be found in the Greek

historians of a later age: at most a remark that there was a time when

the Cretans exercised command of the sea, and the name of King

Minos  and  of  his  palace,  the  Labyrinth.  That  is  all,  and  beyond  it

nothing has remained but the traditions which were seized on by the

poets.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4897

 

   National epics of other peoples - Germans, Indians, Finns - have

come to light as well. It is the business of historians of literature to

investigate whether we may assume the same determinants for their

origin as with the Greeks. Such an investigation would, I believe, yielda positive result. Here is the determinant which we recognize: a piece

of prehistory which, immediately after it, would have been bound to

appear  rich  in  content,  important,  splendid,  and  always,  perhaps,

heroic, but which lies so far back, in such remote times, that only an

obscure  and  incomplete  tradition  informs  later  generations  of  it.

Surprise has been felt that the epic as an art-form has become extinct

in later times. The explanation may be that its determining cause no

longer exists. The old material was used up and for all later events

historical writing took the place of tradition. The greatest heroic deeds

of our days have not been able to inspire an epic, and even Alexander

the Great had a right to complain that he would find no Homer.

   Long-past ages have a great and often puzzling attraction for men’s

imagination.  Whenever  they  are  dissatisfied  with  their  present

surroundings - and this happens often enough - they turn back to the

past and hope that they will now be able to prove the truth of the

unextinguishable  dream  of  a  golden  age.¹  They  are  probably  still

under the spell of their childhood, which is presented to them by their

not impartial memory as a time of uninterrupted bliss.

   If all that is left of the past are the incomplete and blurred memories

which we call tradition, this offers an artist a peculiar attraction, for in

that  case  he  is  free  to  fill  in  the  gaps  in  memory  according  to  the

desires of his imagination and to picture the period which he wishes to

reproduce according to his intentions. One might almost say that the

vaguer a tradition has become the more serviceable it becomes for a

poet. We need not therefore be surprised at the importance of tradition

for  imaginative  writing,  and  the  analogy  with  the  manner  in  which

epics are determined will make us more inclined to accept the strange

hypothesis  that  it  was  the  tradition  of  Moses  which,  for  the  Jews,

altered  the  worship  of  Yahweh  in  the  direction  of  the  old  Mosaic

religion. But in other respects the two cases are still too different. On

the one hand the outcome is a poem and on the other a religion; and

in  the  latter  instance  we  have  assumed  that,  under  the  spur  of

tradition, it was reproduced with a faithfulness for which the instance

of the epic can of course offer no counterpart. Accordingly enough of

our problem is left over to justify a need for more apposite analogies.

 

   ¹ This was the situation on which Macaulay based his Lays of Ancient Rome. He puthimself in the place of a minstrel who, depressed by the confused party strife of his own day,
presented his hearers with the self-sacrifice, the unity and the patriotism of their ancestors.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4898

 

                                            C

 

                                    THE ANALOGY

 

   The only satisfying analogy to the remarkable course of events that

we  have  found  in  the  history  of  the  Jewish  religion  lies  in  an

apparently  remote  field;  but  it  is  very  complete,  and  approaches

identity. In it we once more come upon the phenomenon of latency,

the  emergence  of  unintelligible  manifestations  calling  for  an

explanation and an early, and later forgotten, event as a necessary

determinant.  We  also  find  the  characteristic  of  compulsion,  which

forces itself on the mind along with an overpowering of logical thought

-  a  feature  which  did  not  come  into  account,  for  instance,  in  the

genesis of the epic.

      This  analogy  is  met  with  in  psychopathology,  in  the  genesis  of

human neuroses - in a field, that is to say, belonging to the psychology

of  individuals,  while  religious  phenomena  have  of  course  to  be

reckoned as part of group psychology. We shall see that this analogy

is not so surprising as might at first be thought - indeed that it is more

like a postulate.

   We give the name of traumas to those impressions, experienced

early and later forgotten, to which we attach such great importance in

the aetiology of the neuroses. We may leave on one side the question

of whether the aetiology of the neuroses in general may be regarded

as traumatic. The obvious objection to this is that it is not possible in

every  case  to  discover  a  manifest  trauma  in  the  neurotic  subject’s

earliest history. We must often resign ourselves to saying that all we

have before us is an unusual, abnormal reaction to experiences and

demands which affect everyone, but are worked over and dealt with

by other people in another manner which may be called normal. When

we  have  nothing  else  at  our  disposal  for  explaining  a  neurosis  buthereditary and constitutional dispositions, we are naturally tempted to

say that it was not acquired but developed.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4899

 

      But  in  this  connection  two  points  must  be  stressed.  Firstly,  the

genesis of a neurosis invariably goes back to very early impressions in

childhood.¹  Secondly,  it  is  true  that  there  are  cases  which  are

distinguished  as  being  ‘traumatic’  because  their  effects  go  back

unmistakably to one or more powerful impressions in these early times

- impressions which have escaped being dealt with normally, so that

one  is  inclined  to  judge  that  if  they  had  not  occurred  the  neurosis

would  not  have  come  about  either.  It  would  be  enough  for  our

purposes if we were obliged to restrict the analogy we are in search of

to  these  traumatic  cases.  But  the  gap  between  the  two  groups

appears not to be unbridgeable. It is quite possible to unite the two

aetiological  determinants  under  a  single  conception;  it  is  merely  a

question of how one defines ‘traumatic’. If we may assume that the

experience  acquires  its  traumatic  character  only  as  a  result  of  a

quantitative factor - that is to say, that in every case it is an excess in

demand  that  is  responsible  for  an  experience  evoking  unusual

pathological reactions - then we can easily arrive at the expedient of

saying that something acts as a trauma in the case of one constitution

but in the case of another would have no such effect. In this way we

reach the concept of a sliding ‘complemental series’ as it is called, in

which two factors converge in fulfilling an aetiological requirement. A

less of one factor is balanced by a more of the other; as a rule both

factors operate together and it is only at the two ends of the series that

there  can  be  any  question  of  a  simple  motive  being  at  work.  After

mentioning this, we can disregard the distinction between traumatic

and non-traumatic aetiologies as irrelevant to the analogy we are in

search of.

   In spite of a risk of repetition, it will perhaps be as well to bring

together here the facts which comprise the analogy that is significant

for us. They are as follows. Our researches have shown that what wecall the phenomena (symptoms) of a neurosis are the result of certain

experiences and impressions which for that very reason we regard as

aetiological traumas. We now have two tasks before us: to discover

(1) the common characteristics of these experiences and (2) those of

neurotic  symptoms,  and  in  doing  so  we  need  not  avoid  drawing  a

somewhat schematic picture.

 

   ¹ This therefore makes it nonsensical to say that one is practising psycho-analysis if one

excludes from examination and consideration precisely these earliest periods - as happens in
some quarters.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4900

 

 

   (1) (a) All these traumas occur in early childhood up to about the fifth

year. Impressions from the time at which a child is beginning to talk

stand out as being of particular interest; the periods between the ages

of  two  and  four  seem  to  be  the  most  important;  it  cannot  be

determined with certainty how long after birth this period of receptivity

begins. (b) The experiences in question are as a rule totally forgotten,

they are not accessible to memory and fall within the period of infantile

amnesia,  which  is  usually  broken  into  by  a  few  separate  mnemic

residues, what are known as ‘screen memories’. (c)  They  relate  to

impressions of a sexual and aggressive nature, and no doubt also to

early injuries to the ego (narcissistic mortifications). In this connection

it  should  be  remarked  that  such  young  children  make  no  sharp

distinction between sexual and aggressive acts, as they do later. (Cf.

the  misunderstanding  of  the  sexual  act  in  a  sadistic  sense.)  The

predominance of the sexual factor is, of course, most striking and calls

for theoretical consideration.

   These three points - the very early appearance of these experiences

(during the first five years of life), the fact of their being forgotten and

their  sexual-aggressive  content  -  are  closely  interconnected.  The

traumas are either experiences on the subject’s own body or sense

perceptions,  mostly  of  something  seen  and  heard  -  that  is,

experiences or impressions. The interconnection of these three pointsis established by a theory, a product of the work of analysis which

alone can bring about a knowledge of the forgotten experiences, or, to

put  it  more  vividly  but  also  more  incorrectly,  bring  them  back  to

memory. The theory is that, in contrast to popular opinion, the sexual

life of human beings (or what corresponds to it later on) exhibits an

early efflorescence which comes to an end at about the fifth year and

is followed by what is known as the period of latency (till puberty) in

which there is no further development of sexuality and indeed what

has been attained undergoes a retrogression. This theory is confirmed

by the anatomical investigation of the growth of the internal genitalia; it

leads us to suppose that the human race is descended from a species

of animal which reached sexual maturity in five years and rouses a

suspicion that the postponement of sexual life and its diphasic onset

are  intimately  connected  with  the  history  of  hominization.  Human

beings appear to be the only animal organisms with a latency period

and  sexual  retardation  of  this  kind.  Investigations  on  the  primates

(which, so far as I know, are not available) would be indispensable for

testing this theory. It cannot be a matter of indifference psychologically

that the period of infantile amnesia coincides with this early period of

sexuality.  It  may  be  that  this  state  of  things  provides  the  true

determinant  for  the  possibility  of  neurosis,  which  is  in  a  sense  a

human prerogative and from this point of view appears as a vestige - a

‘survival’  -  of  primaeval  times  like  certain  portions  of  our  bodily

anatomy.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4901

 

 

      (2)  Two  points  must  be  stressed  in  regard  to  the  common

characteristics or peculiarities of neurotic phenomena: (a) The effects

of traumas are of two kinds, positive and negative. The former are

attempts to bring the trauma into operation once again - that is, to

remember the forgotten experience or, better still, to make it real, to

experience  a  repetition  of  it  anew,  or,  even  if  it  was  only  an  early

emotional relationship, to revive it in an analogous relationship withsomeone  else.  We  summarize  these  efforts  under  the  name  of

‘fixations’ to the trauma and as a ‘compulsion to repeat’. They may be

taken up into what passes as a normal ego and, as permanent trends

in  it,  may  lend  it  unalterable  character-traits,  although,  or  rather

precisely because, their true basis and historical origin are forgotten.

Thus a man who has spent his childhood in an excessive and to-day

forgotten attachment to his mother, may spend his whole life looking

for a wife on whom he can make himself dependent and by whom he

can arrange to be nourished and supported. A girl who was made the

object of a sexual seduction in her early childhood may direct her later

sexual life so as constantly to provoke similar attacks. It may easily be

guessed that from such discoveries about the problem of neurosis we

can  penetrate  to  an  understanding  of  the  formation  of  character  in

general.

   The negative reactions follow the opposite aim: that nothing of the

forgotten traumas shall be remembered and nothing repeated. We can

summarize them as ‘defensive reactions’. Their principal expression

are  what  are  called  ‘avoidances’,  which  may  be  intensified  into

‘inhibitions’  and  ‘phobias’.  These  negative  reactions  too  make  the

most  powerful  contributions  to  the  stamping  of  character.

Fundamentally they are just as much fixations to the trauma as their

opposites, except that they are fixations with a contrary purpose. The

symptoms  of  neurosis  in  the  narrower  sense  are  compromises  in

which both the trends proceeding from traumas come together, so that

the  share,  now  of  one  and  now  of  the  other  tendency,  finds

preponderant  expression  in  them.  This  opposition  between  the

reactions sets up conflicts which in the ordinary course of events can

reach no conclusion.

   (b) All these phenomena, the symptoms as well as the restrictions

on  the  ego  and  the  stable  character-changes,  have  a compulsive

quality: that is to say that they have great psychical intensity and at

the same time exhibit a far-reaching independence of the organization

of the other mental processes, which are adjusted to the demands of

the real external world and obey the laws of logical thinking. They are

insufficiently  or  not  at  all  influenced  by  external  reality,  pay  no

attention  to  it  or  to  its  psychical  representatives,  so  that  they  may

easily  come  into  active  opposition  to  both  of  them.  They  are,  onemight say, a State within a State, an inaccessible party, with which co-

operation is impossible, but which may succeed in overcoming what is

known  as  the  normal  party  and  forcing  it  into  its  service.  If  this

happens, it implies a domination by an internal psychical reality over

the reality of the external world and the path to a psychosis lies open.

Even  if  things  do  not  go  so  far,  the  practical  importance  of  this

situation can scarcely be overestimated. The inhibition upon the life of

those who are dominated by a neurosis and their incapacity for living

constitute a most important factor in a human society and we may

recognize in their condition a direct expression of their fixation to an

early portion of their past.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4902

 

 

   And now let us enquire about latency, which, in view of the analogy,

is  bound  to  interest  us  especially.  A  trauma  in  childhood  may  be

followed  immediately  by  a  neurotic  outbreak,  an  infantile  neurosis,

with  an  abundance  of  efforts  at  defence,  and  accompanied  by  the

formation of symptoms. This neurosis may last a considerable time

and cause marked disturbances, but it may also run a latent course

and be overlooked. As a rule defence retains the upper hand in it; in

any case alterations of the ego, comparable to scars, are left behind. It

is only rarely that an infantile neurosis continues without interruption

into  an  adult  one.  Far  more  often  it  is  succeeded  by  a  period  of

apparently  undisturbed  development  -  a  course  of  things  which  is

supported or made possible by the intervention of the physiological

period of latency. Not until later does the change take place with which

the definitive neurosis becomes manifest as a belated effect of the

trauma. This occurs either at the irruption of puberty or some while

later. In the former case it happens because the instincts, intensified

by physical maturation, are able now to take up the struggle again in

which they were at first defeated by the defence. In the latter case it

happens  because  the  reactions  and  alterations  of  the  ego  brought

about by the defence now prove a hindrance in dealing with the newtasks  of  life,  so  that  severe  conflicts  come  about  between  the

demands  of  the  real  external  world  and  the  ego,  which  seeks  to

maintain  the  organization  which  it  has  painstakingly  achieved  in  its

defensive  struggle.  The  phenomenon  of  a  latency  of  the  neurosis

between the first reactions to the trauma and the later outbreak of the

illness must be regarded as typical. This latter illness may also be

looked  upon  as  an  attempt  at  cure  -  as  an  effort  once  more  to

reconcile with the rest those portions of the ego that have been split

off by the influence of the trauma and to unite them into a powerful

whole vis-à-vis  the  external  world.  An  attempt  of  this  kind  seldom

succeeds, however, unless the work of analysis comes to its help, and

even then not always; it ends often enough in a complete devastation

or fragmentation of the ego or in its being overwhelmed by the portion

which was early split off and which is dominated by the trauma.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4903

 

      In  order  to  convince  the  reader,  it  would  be  necessary  to  give

detailed reports of the life histories of numerous neurotics. But in view

of  the  diffuseness  and  difficulty  of  the  topic,  this  would  completely

destroy  the  character  of  the  present  work.  It  would  turn  into  a

monograph on the theory of the neuroses and even so would probably

only have an effect on that minority of readers who have chosen the

study and practice of psycho-analysis as their life-work. Since I am

addressing myself here to a wider audience, I can only beg the reader

to grant a certain provisional credence to the abridged account I have

given above; and this must be accompanied by an admission on my

part that the implications to which I am now leading him need only be

accepted  if  the  theories  on  which  they  are  based  turn  out  to  be

correct.

   Nevertheless, I can attempt to tell the story of a single case which

exhibits with special clarity some of the characteristics of a neurosis

which I have mentioned. We must not expect, of course, that a single

case  will  show  everything  and  we  need  not  feel  disappointed  if  its

subject-matter is far removed from the topic for which we are seekingan analogy.

 

   A little boy, who, as is so often the case in middle-class families,

shared  his  parents’  bedroom  during  the  first  years  of  his  life,  had

repeated, and indeed regular, opportunities of observing sexual acts

between his parents - of seeing some things and hearing still more - at

an age when he had scarcely learnt to speak. In his later neurosis,

which broke out immediately after his first spontaneous emission, the

earliest and most troublesome symptom was a disturbance of sleep.

He was extraordinarily sensitive to noises at night and, once he was

woken up, was unable to go to sleep again. This disturbance of sleep

was  a  true  compromise-symptom.  On  the  one  hand  it  was  an

expression of his defence against the things he had experienced at

night, and on the other an attempt to re-establish the waking state in

which he was able to listen to those impressions.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4904

 

   The child was aroused prematurely by observations of this kind to

an aggressive masculinity and began to excite his little penis with his

hand  and  to  attempt  various  sexual  attacks  on  his  mother,  thus

identifying  himself  with  his  father,  in  whose  place  he  was  putting

himself. This went on until at last his mother forbade him to touch his

penis and further threatened that she would tell his father, who would

punish him by taking his sinful organ away. This threat of castration

had an extraordinarily powerful traumatic effect on the boy. He gave

up his sexual activity and altered his character. Instead of identifying

himself  with  his  father,  he  was  afraid  of  him,  adopted  a  passive

attitude to him and, by occasional naughtinesses, provoked him into

administering corporal punishment; this had a sexual meaning for him,

so that he was thus able to identify himself with his ill-treated mother.

He clung to his mother herself more and more anxiously, as though he

could not do without her love for a single moment, since he saw in it a

protection against the danger of castration which threatened him from

his father. In this modification of the Oedipus complex he passed hislatency  period,  which  was  free  from  any  marked  disturbances.  He

became an exemplary boy and was quite successful at school.

   So far we have followed the immediate effect of the trauma and

have confirmed the fact of latency.

      The  arrival  of  puberty  brought  with  it  the  manifest  neurosis  and

disclosed  its  second  main  symptom  -  sexual  impotence.  He  had

forfeited the sensitivity of his penis, did not attempt to touch it, did not

venture to approach a woman for sexual purposes. His sexual activity

remained limited to psychical masturbation accompanied by sadistic-

masochistic  phantasies  in  which  it  was  not  hard  to  recognize  off-

shoots of his early observations of intercourse between his parents.

The wave of intensified masculinity which puberty brought along with it

was employed in furious hatred of his father and insubordination to

him. This extreme relation to his father, reckless to the pitch of self-

destruction,  was  responsible  as  well  for  his  failure  in  life  and  his

conflicts with the external world. He must be a failure in his profession

because his father had forced him into it. Nor did he make any friends

and he was never on good terms with his superiors.

   When, burdened by these symptoms and incapacities, he at last,

after his father’s death, had found a wife, there emerged in him, as

though they were the core of his being, character-traits which made

contact with him a hard task for those about him. He developed a

completely egoistic, despotic, and brutal personality, which clearly felt

a need to suppress and insult other people. It was a faithful copy of his

father as he had formed a picture of him in his memory: that is to say,

a revival of the identification with his father which in the past he had

taken on as a little boy from sexual motives. In this part of the story we

recognize the return of the repressed, which (along with the immediate

effects  of  the  trauma  and  the  phenomenon  of  latency)  we  have

described as among the essential features of a neurosis.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4905

 

                                            D

 

                                      APPLICATION 

   Early trauma - defence - latency - outbreak of neurotic illness -

partial return of the repressed. Such is the formula which we have laid

down for the development of a neurosis. The reader is now invited to

take the step of supposing that something occurred in the life of the

human  species  similar  to  what  occurs  in  the  life  of  individuals:  of

supposing,  that  is,  that  here  too  events  occurred  of  a  sexually

aggressive nature, which left behind them permanent consequences

but were for the most part fended off and forgotten, and which after a

long  latency  came  into  effect  and  created  phenomena  similar  to

symptoms in their structure and purpose.

   We believe that we can guess these events and we propose to show

that their symptom-like consequences are the phenomena of religion.

Since the emergence of the idea of evolution no longer leaves room

for  doubt  that  the  human  race  has  a  prehistory,  and  since  this  is

unknown - that is, forgotten - a conclusion of this kind almost carries

the  weight  of  a  postulate.  When  we  learn  that  in  both  cases  the

operative and forgotten traumas relate to life in the human family, we

can greet this as a highly welcome, unforeseen bonus which has not

been called for by our discussions up to this point.

   I put forward these assertions as much as a quarter of a century ago

in my Totem and Taboo (1912-13) and I need only repeat them here.

My construction starts out from a statement of Darwin’s and takes in a

hypothesis of Atkinson’s. It asserts that in primaeval times primitive

man lived in small hordes, each under the domination of a powerful

male. No date can be assigned to this, nor has it been synchronized

with  the  geological  epochs  known  to  us:  it  is  probable  that  these

human creatures had not advanced far in the development of speech.

An essential part of the construction is the hypothesis that the events I

am about to describe occurred to all primitive men - that is, to all our

ancestors.  The  story  is  told  in  an  enormously  condensed  form,  as

though it had happened on a single occasion, while in fact it covered

thousands of years and was repeated countless times during that long

period. The strong male was lord and father of the entire horde and

unrestricted in his power, which he exercised with violence. All the

females were his property - wives and daughters of his own horde and

some, perhaps, robbed from other hordes. The lot of his sons was ahard  one:  if  they  roused  their  father’s  jealousy  they  were  killed  or

castrated or driven out. Their only resource was to collect together in

small communities, to get themselves wives by robbery, and, when

one or other of them could succeed in it, to raise themselves into a

position  similar  to  their  father’s  in  the  primal  horde.  For  natural

reasons, youngest sons occupied an exceptional position. They were

protected by their mother’s love, and were able to take advantage of

their father’s increasing age and succeed him on his death. We seem

to detect echoes in legends and fairy tales both of the expulsion of

elder sons and of the favouring of youngest sons.

      The  first  decisive  step  towards  a  change  in  this  sort  of  ‘social’

organization seems to have been that the expelled brothers, living in a

community, united to overpower their father and, as was the custom in

those  days,  devoured  him  raw.  There  is  no  need  to  balk  at  this

cannibalism;  it  continued  far  into  later  times.  The  essential  point,

however, is that we attribute the same emotional attitudes to these

primitive men that we are able to establish by analytic investigation in

the primitives of the present day - in our children. We suppose, that is,

that they not only hated and feared their father but also honoured him

as a model, and that each of them wished to take his place in reality.

We can, if so, understand the cannibalistic act as an attempt to ensure

identification with him by incorporating a piece of him.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4906

 

   It must be supposed that after the parricide a considerable time

elapsed during which the brothers disputed with one another for their

father’s  heritage,  which  each  of  them  wanted  for  himself  alone.  A

realization  of  the  dangers  and  uselessness  of  these  struggles,  a

recollection  of  the  act  of  liberation  which  they  had  accomplished

together, and the emotional ties with one another which had arisen

during the period of their expulsion, led at last to an agreement among

them, a sort of social contract. The first form of a social organization

came  about  with  a renunciation  of  instinct,  a  recognition  of  mutual

obligations,  the  introduction  of  definite institutions,  pronouncedinviolable (holy) - that is to say, the beginnings of morality and justice.

Each individual renounced his ideal of acquiring his father’s position

for himself and of possessing his mother and sisters. Thus the taboo

on incest and the injunction to exogamy came about. A fair amount of

the absolute power liberated by the removal of the father passed over

to the women; there came a period of matriarchy. Recollection of their

father  persisted  at  this  period  of  the  ‘fraternal  alliance’.  A  powerful

animal - at first, perhaps, always one that was feared as well - was

chosen as a substitute for the father. A choice of this kind may seem

strange, but the gulf which men established later between themselves

and animals did not exist for primitive peoples; nor does it exist for our

children, whose animal phobias we have been able to understand as

fear  of  their  father.  In  relation  to  the  totem  animal  the  original

dichotomy in the emotional relation to the father (ambivalence) was

wholly  retained.  On  the  one  hand  the  totem  was  regarded  as  the

clan’s blood ancestor and protective spirit, who must be worshipped

and  protected,  and  on  the  other  hand  a  festival  was  appointed  at

which the same fate was prepared for him that the primal father had

met with. He was killed and devoured by all the tribesmen in common.

(The totem meal, according to Robertson Smith.) This great festival

was in fact a triumphant celebration of the combined sons’ victory over

their father.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4907

 

 

      What  is  the  place  of  religion  in  this  connection?  I  think  we  are

completely justified in regarding totemism, with its worship of a father-

substitute, with its ambivalence as shown by the totem meal, with its

institution of memorial festivals and of prohibitions whose infringement

was punished by death - we are justified, I say, in regarding totemism

as the first form in which religion was manifested in human history and

in confirming the fact of its having been linked from the first with social

regulations and moral obligations. Here we can only give the most

summary  survey  of  the  further  developments  of  religion.  They  nodoubt proceeded in parallel with the cultural advances of the human

race and with the changes in the structure of human communities.

   The first step away from totemism was the humanizing of the being

who was worshipped. In place of the animals, human gods appear,

whose  derivation  from  the  totem  is  not  concealed.  The  god  is  still

represented either in the form of an animal or at least with an animal’s

face,  or  the  totem  becomes  the  god’s  favourite  companion,

inseparable from him, or legend tells us that the god slew this precise

animal, which was after all only a preliminary stage of himself. At a

point in this evolution which is not easily determined great mother-

goddesses  appeared,  probably  even  before  the  male  gods,  and

afterwards persisted for a long time beside them. In the meantime a

great  social  revolution  had  occurred.  Matriarchy  was  succeeded  by

the re-establishment of a patriarchal order. The new fathers, it is true,

never achieved the omnipotence of the primal father; there were many

of them, who lived together in associations larger than the horde had

been. They were obliged to be on good terms with one another, and

remained under the limitation of social ordinances. It is likely that the

mother-goddesses  originated  at  the  time  of  the  curtailment  of  the

matriarchy, as a compensation for the slight upon the mothers. The

male deities appear first as sons beside the great mothers and only

later clearly assume the features of father-figures. These male gods of

polytheism reflect the conditions during the patriarchal age. They are

numerous, mutually restrictive, and are occasionally subordinated to a

superior high god. The next step, however, leads us to the theme with

which we are here concerned - to the return of a single father-god of

unlimited dominion.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4908

 

   It must be admitted that this historical survey has gaps in it and is

uncertain at some points. But anyone who is inclined to pronounce our

construction of primaeval history purely imaginary would be gravely

under-estimating  the  wealth  and  evidential  value  of  the  material

contained in it. Large portions of the past, which have been linkedtogether here into a whole, are historically attested: totemism and the

male  confederacies,  for  instance.  Other  portions  have  survived  in

excellent  replicas.  Thus  authorities  have  often  been  struck  by  the

faithful way in which the sense and content of the old totem meal is

repeated in the rite of the Christian Communion, in which the believer

incorporates  the  blood  and  flesh  of  his  god  in  symbolic  form.

Numerous  relics  of  the  forgotten  primaeval  age  have  survived  in

popular legends and fairy tales, and the analytic study of the mental

life of children has provided an unexpected wealth of material for filling

the gaps in our knowledge of the earliest times. As contributions to our

understanding of the son’s relation to the father which is of such great

importance, I need only bring forward animal phobias, the fear, which

strikes  us  as  so  strange,  of  being  eaten  by  the  father,  and  the

enormous intensity of the dread of being castrated. There is nothing

wholly  fabricated  in  our  construction,  nothing  which  could  not  be

supported on solid foundations.

 

   If our account of primaeval history is accepted as on the whole

worthy of belief, two sorts of elements will be recognized in religious

doctrines and rituals: on the one hand fixations to the ancient history

of the family and survivals of it, and on the other hand revivals of the

past and returns, after long intervals, of what has been forgotten. It is

this  last  portion  which,  hitherto  overlooked  and  therefore  not

understood,  is  to  be  demonstrated  here  in  at  least  one  impressive

instance.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4909

 

   It is worth specially stressing the fact that each portion which returns

from  oblivion  asserts  itself  with  peculiar  force,  exercises  an

incomparably powerful influence on people in the mass, and raises an

irresistible  claim  to  truth  against  which  logical  objections  remain

powerless: a kind of ‘credo quia absurdum’. This remarkable feature

can only be understood on the pattern of the delusions of psychotics.

We have long understood that a portion of forgotten truth lies hiddenin  delusional  ideas,  that  when  this  returns  it  has  to  put  up  with

distortions and misunderstandings, and that the compulsive conviction

which  attaches  to  the  delusion  arises  from  this  core  of  truth  and

spreads out on to the errors that wrap it round. We must grant an

ingredient such as this of what may be called historical truth to the

dogmas  of  religion  as  well,  which,  it  is  true,  bear  the  character  of

psychotic  symptoms  but  which,  as  group  phenomena,  escape  the

curse of isolation.

   No other portion of the history of religion has become so clear to us

as the introduction of monotheism into Judaism and its continuation in

Christianity - if we leave on one side the development which we can

trace no less uninterruptedly, from the animal totem to the human god

with his regular companions. (Each of the four Christian evangelists

still has his own favourite animal.) If we provisionally accept the world-

empire of the Pharaohs as the determining cause of the emergence of

the monotheist idea, we see that that idea, released from its native soil

and transferred to another people was, after a long period of latency,

taken hold of by them, preserved by them as a precious possession

and,  in  turn,  itself  kept  them  alive  by  giving  them  pride  in  being  a

chosen people: it was the religion of their primal father to which were

attached  their  hope  of  reward,  of  distinction  and  finally  of  world-

dominion. This last wishful phantasy, long abandoned by the Jewish

people,  still  survives  among  that  people’s  enemies  in  a  belief  in  a

conspiracy by the ‘Elders of Zion’. We reserve for discussion in later

pages  how  the  special  peculiarities  of  the  monotheist  religion

borrowed  from  Egypt  affected  the  Jewish  people  and  how  it  was

bound  to  leave  a  permanent  imprint  on  their  character  through  its

rejection  of  magic  and  mysticism,  its  invitation  to  advances  in

intellectuality and its encouragement of sublimations; how the people,

enraptured  by  the  possession  of  the  truth,  overwhelmed  by  the

consciousness of being chosen, came to have a high opinion of what

is  intellectual  and  to  lay  stress  on  what  is  moral;  and  how  their

melancholy destinies and their disappointments in reality served only

to  intensify  all  these  trends.  For  the  moment  we  will  follow  their

development in another direction.

                                 Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4910

 

 

   The re-establishment of the primal father in his historic rights was a

great step forward but it could not be the end. The other portions of

the prehistoric tragedy insisted on being recognized. It is not easy to

discern  what  set  this  process  in  motion.  It  appears  as  though  a

growing  sense  of  guilt  had  taken  hold  of  the  Jewish  people,  or

perhaps of the whole civilized world of the time, as a precursor to the

return of the repressed material. Till at last one of these Jewish people

found,  in  justifying  a  politico-religious  agitator,  the  occasion  for

detaching  a  new  -  the  Christian  -  religion  from  Judaism.  Paul,  a

Roman Jew from Tarsus, seized upon this sense of guilt and traced it

back correctly to its original source. He called this the ‘original sin’; it

was a crime against God and could only be atoned for by death. With

the original sin death came into the world. In fact this crime deserving

death had been the murder of the primal father who was later deified.

But  the  murder  was  not  remembered:  instead  of  it  there  was  a

phantasy of its atonement, and for that reason this phantasy could be

hailed as a message of redemption (evangelium). A son of God had

allowed himself to be killed without guilt and had thus taken on himself

the guilt of all men. It had to be a son, since it had been the murder of

a  father.  It  is  probable  that  traditions  from  oriental  and  Greek

mysteries had had an influence on the phantasy of redemption. What

was essential in it seems to have been Paul’s own contribution. In the

most proper sense he was a man of an innately religious disposition:

the dark traces of the past lurked in his mind, ready to break through

into its more conscious regions.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4911

 

   That the redeemer had sacrificed himself without guilt was evidently

a  tendentious  distortion,  which  offered  difficulties  to  logical

understanding. For how could someone guiltless of the act of murder

take on himself the guilt of the murderers by allowing himself to bekilled? In the historical reality there was no such contradiction. The

‘redeemer’  could  be  none  other  than  the  most  guilty  person,  the

ringleader  of  the  company  of  brothers  who  had  overpowered  their

father. We must in my judgement leave it undecided whether there

was such a chief rebel and ringleader. That is possible; but we must

also bear in mind that each one of the company of brothers certainly

had a wish to commit the deed by himself alone and so to create an

exceptional  position  for  himself  and  to  find  a  substitute  for  his

identification  with  the  father  which  was  having  to  be  given  up  and

which was becoming merged in the community. If there was no such

ringleader,  then  Christ  was  the  heir  to  a  wishful  phantasy  which

remained unfulfilled; if there was one, then he was his successor and

his  reincarnation.  But  no  matter  whether  what  we  have  here  is  a

phantasy or the return of a forgotten reality, in any case the origin of

the concept of a hero is to be found at this point - the hero who always

rebels against his father and kills him in some shape or other.¹ Here

too is the true basis for the ‘tragic guilt’ of the hero of drama, which is

otherwise hard to explain. It can scarcely be doubted that the hero and

chorus  in  Greek  drama  represent  the  same  rebellious  hero  and

company  of  brothers;  and  it  is  not  without  significance  that  in  the

Middle  Ages  what  the  theatre  started  with  afresh  was  the

representation of the story of the Passion.

      We  have  already  said  that  the  Christian  ceremony  of  Holy

Communion,  in  which  the  believer  incorporates  the  Saviour’s  blood

and flesh, repeats the content of the old totem meal - no doubt only in

its  affectionate  meaning,  expressive  of  veneration,  and  not  in  its

aggressive meaning. The ambivalence that dominates the relation to

the  father  was  clearly  shown,  however,  in  the  final  outcome  of  the

religious  novelty.  Ostensibly  aimed  at  propitiating  the  father  god,  it

ended  in  his  being  dethroned  and  got  rid  of.  Judaism  had  been  a

religion of the father; Christianity became a religion of the son. The old

God the Father fell back behind Christ; Christ, the Son, took his place,

just  as  every  son  had  hoped  to  do  in  primaeval  times.  Paul,  who

carried Judaism on, also destroyed it. No doubt he owed his success

in the first instance to the fact that, through the idea of the redeemer,

he exorcized humanity’s sense of guilt; but he owed it as well to the

circumstance that he abandoned the ‘chosen’ character of his peopleand its visible mark - circumcision - so that the new religion could be a

universal  one,  embracing  all  men.  Though  a  part  may  have  been

played in Paul’s taking this step by his personal desire for revenge for

the rejection of his innovation in Jewish circles, yet it also restored a

feature of the old Aten religion - it removed a restriction which that

religion had acquired when it was handed over to a new vehicle, the

Jewish people.

 

   ¹ Ernest Jones has pointed out that the god Mithras, who kills the bull, might represent this

ringleader boasting of his deed. It is well known for how long the worship of Mithras struggled
with the young Christianity for the final victory.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4912

 

   In some respects the new religion meant a cultural regression as

compared with the older, Jewish one, as regularly happens when a

new mass of people, of a lower level, break their way in or are given

admission.  The  Christian  religion  did  not  maintain  the  high  level  in

things  of  the  mind  to  which  Judaism  had  soared.  It  was  no  longer

strictly  monotheist,  it  took  over  numerous  symbolic  rituals  from

surrounding peoples, it re-established the great mother-goddess and

found room to introduce many of the divine figures of polytheism only

lightly veiled, though in subordinate positions. Above all, it did not, like

the Aten religion and the Mosaic one which followed it, exclude the

entry of superstitious, magical and mystical elements, which were to

prove a severe inhibition upon the intellectual development of the next

two thousand years.

   The triumph of Christianity was a fresh victory for the priests of

Amun over Akhenaten’s god after an interval of fifteen hundred years

and on a wider stage. And yet in the history of religion - that is, as

regards the return of he repressed - Christianity was an advance and

from that time on the Jewish religion was to some extent a fossil.

   It would be worth while to understand how it was that the monotheist

idea made such a deep impression precisely on the Jewish people

and that they were able to maintain it so tenaciously. It is possible, I

think, to find an answer. Fate had brought the great deed and misdeedof primaeval days, the killing of the father, closer to the Jewish people

by causing them to repeat it on the person of Moses, an outstanding

father-figure. It was a case of ‘acting out’ instead of remembering, as

happens so often with neurotics during the work of analysis. To the

suggestion that they should remember, which was made to them by

the  doctrine  of  Moses,  they  reacted,  however,  by  disavowing  their

action; they remained halted at the recognition of the great father and

thus blocked their access to the point from which Paul was later to

start his continuation of the primal history. It is scarcely a matter of

indifference or of chance that the violent killing of another great man

became the starting-point of Paul’s new religious creation as well. This

was a man whom a small number of adherents in Judaea regarded as

the Son of God and as the Messiah who had been announced, and to

whom, too, a part of the childhood story invented for Moses was later

carried over, but of whom in fact we know scarcely more with certainty

than of Moses - whether he was really the great teacher portrayed by

the Gospels or whether, rather, it was not the fact and circumstances

of his death which were decisive for the importance which his figure

acquired. Paul, who became his apostle, had not known him himself.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4913

 

   The killing of Moses by his Jewish people, recognized by Sellin from

traces  of  it  in  tradition  (and  also,  strange  to  say,  accepted  by  the

young Goethe without any evidence¹) thus becomes an indispensable

part of our construction, an important link between the forgotten event

of  primaeval  times  and  its  later  emergence  in  the  form  of  the

monotheist religions.² It is plausible to conjecture that remorse for the

murder of Moses provided the stimulus for the wishful phantasy of the

Messiah, who was to return and lead his people to redemption and the

promised  world-dominion.  If  Moses  was  this  first  Messiah,  Christ

became his substitute and successor, and Paul could exclaim to the

peoples with some historical justification: ‘Look! the Messiah has really

come: he has been murdered before your eyes!’ Then, too, there is a

piece  of  historical  truth  in  Christ’s  resurrection,  for  he  was  theresurrected Moses and behind him the returned primal father of the

primitive horde, transfigured and, as the son, put in the place of the

father.

 

      The  poor  Jewish  people,  who  with  their  habitual  stubbornness

continued to disavow the father’s murder, atoned heavily for it in the

course of time. They were constantly met with the reproach ‘You killed

our God!’ And this reproach is true, if it is correctly translated. If it is

brought into relation with the history of religions, it runs: ‘You will not

admit that you murdered God (the primal picture of God, the primal

father,  and  his  later  reincarnations).’  There  should  be  an  addition

declaring: ‘We did the same thing, to be sure, but we have admitted it

and since then we have been absolved.’ Not all the reproaches with

which anti-semitism persecutes the descendants of the Jewish people

can appeal to a similar justification. A phenomenon of such intensity

and permanence as the people’s hatred of the Jews must of course

have more than one ground. It is possible to find a whole number of

grounds, some of them clearly derived from reality, which call for no

interpretation,  and  others,  lying  deeper  and  derived  from  hidden

sources,  which  might  be  regarded  as  the  specific  reasons.  Of  the

former, the reproach of being aliens is perhaps the weakest, since in

many places dominated by anti-semitism to-day the Jews were among

the oldest portions of the population or had even been there before

the  present  inhabitants.  This  applies,  for  instance,  to  the  city  of

Cologne,  to  which  the  Jews  came  with  the  Romans,  before  it  was

occupied  by  the  Germans.  Other  grounds  for  hating  the  Jews  are

stronger - thus, the circumstances that they live for the most part as

minorities among other peoples, for the communal feeling of groups

requires, in order to complete it, hostility towards some extraneous

minority,  and  the  numerical  weakness  of  this  excluded  minority

encourages  its  suppression.  There  are,  however,  two  other

characteristics of the Jews which are quite unforgivable. First is the

fact that in some respects they are different from their ‘host’ nations.

They  are  not  fundamentally  different,  for  they  are  not  Asiatics  of  a

foreign race, as their enemies maintain, but composed for the most

part  of  remnants  of  the  Mediterranean  peoples  and  heirs  of  the

Mediterranean civilization. But they are none the less different, often inan indefinable way different, especially from the Nordic peoples, and

the intolerance of groups is often, strangely enough, exhibited more

strongly against small differences than against fundamental ones. The

other  point  has  a  still  greater  effect:  namely,  that  they  defy  all

oppression, that the most cruel persecutions have not succeeded in

exterminating  them,  and,  indeed,  that  on  the  contrary  they  show  a

capacity for holding their own in commercial life and, where they are

admitted, for making valuable contributions to every form of cultural

activity.

 

   ¹ ‘Israel in der Wüste’. In the Weimar Edition, 7, 170.

   ² On this subject see Frazer’s well-known discussions in Part III of The Golden Bough (The

Dying God).

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4914

 

      The  deeper  motives  for  hatred  of  the  Jews  are  rooted  in  the

remotest  past  ages;  they  operate  from  the  unconscious  of  the

peoples,  and  I  am  prepared  to  find  that  at  first  they  will  not  seem

credible. I venture to assert that jealousy of the people which declared

itself the first-born, favourite child of God the Father, has not yet been

surmounted among other peoples even to-day: it is as though they

had thought there was truth in the claim. Further, among the customs

by which the Jews made themselves separate, that of circumcision

has  made  a  disagreeable,  uncanny  impression,  which  is  to  be

explained, no doubt, by its recalling the dreaded castration and along

with it a portion of the primaeval past which is gladly forgotten. And

finally, as the latest motive in this series, we must not forget that all

those  peoples  who  excel  to-day  in  their  hatred  of  Jews  became

Christians  only  in  late  historic  times,  often  driven  to  it  by  bloody

coercion. It might be said that they are all ‘mis-baptized’. They have

been  left,  under  a  thin  veneer  of  Christianity,  what  their  ancestors

were,  who  worshipped  a  barbarous  polytheism.  They  have  not  got

over a grudge against the new religion which was imposed on them;

but  they  have  displaced  the  grudge  on  to  the  source  from  which

Christianity reached them. The fact that the Gospels tell a story whichis set among Jews, and in fact deals only with Jews, has made this

displacement  easy  for  them.  Their  hatred  of  Jews  is  at  bottom  a

hatred of Christians, and we need not be surprised that in the German

National-Socialist  revolution  this  intimate  relation  between  the  two

monotheist  religions  finds  such  a  clear  expression  in  the  hostile

treatment of both of them.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4915

 

                                            E

 

                                      DIFFICULTIES

 

   Perhaps by what I have said I have succeeded in establishing the

analogy between neurotic processes and religious events and in thus

indicating the unsuspected origin of the latter. In this transference from

individual to group psychology two difficulties arise, differing in their

nature and importance, to which we must now turn.

      The  first  of  these  is  that  we  have  here  dealt  with  only  a  single

instance  from  the  copious  phenomenology  of  religions  and  have

thrown no light on any others. I must regretfully admit that I am unable

to give more than this one example and that my expert knowledge is

insufficient to complete the enquiry. From my limited information I may

perhaps  add  that  the  case  of  the  founding  of  the  Mahommedan

religion seems to me like an abbreviated repetition of the Jewish one,

of  which  it  emerged  as  an  imitation.  It  appears,  indeed,  that  the

Prophet intended originally to accept Judaism completely for himself

and his people. The recapture of the single great primal father brought

the Arabs an extraordinary exaltation of their self-confidence, which

led  to  great  worldly  successes  but  exhausted  itself  in  them.  Allah

showed himself far more grateful to his chosen people than Yahweh

did to his. But the internal development of the new religion soon came

to  a  stop,  perhaps  because  it  lacked  the  depth  which  had  been

caused  in  the  Jewish  case  by  the  murder  of  the  founder  of  their

religion. The apparently rationalistic religions of the East are in their

core ancestor-worship and so come to a halt, too, at an early stage ofthe reconstruction of the past. If it is true that in primitive peoples of to-

day the recognition of a supreme being is the only content of their

religion,  we  can  only  regard  this  as  an  atrophy  of  religious

development  and  bring  it  into  relation  with  the  countless  cases  of

rudimentary neuroses which are to be observed in the other field. Why

it is that in the one case just as in the other things have gone no

further, our knowledge is in both cases insufficient to tell us. We can

only attribute the responsibility to the individual endowment of these

peoples, the direction taken by their activity and their general social

condition. Moreover, it is a good rule in the work of analysis to be

content  to  explain  what  is  actually  before  one  and  not  to  seek  to

explain what has not happened.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4916

 

   The second difficulty about this transference to group psychology is

far more important, because it poses a fresh problem of a fundamental

nature. It raises the question in what form the operative tradition in the

life  of  peoples  is  present  -  a  question  which  does  not  occur  with

individuals, since there it is solved by the existence in the unconscious

of memory-traces of the past. Let us return to our historical example.

We  have  attributed  the  compromise  at  Kadesh  to  the  survival  of  a

powerful  tradition  among  those  who  had  returned  from  Egypt.  This

case involves no problem. According to our theory, a tradition of this

kind was based on conscious memories of oral communications which

people then living had received from their ancestors only two or three

generations  back  who  had  themselves  been  participants  and  eye-

witnesses  of  the  events  in  question.  But  can  we  believe  the  same

thing of the later centuries - that the tradition still had its basis in a

knowledge normally handed on from grandfather to grandchild? It is

no longer possible to say, as it was in the earlier case, who the people

were  who  preserved  this  knowledge  and  handed  it  on  by  word  of

mouth. According to Sellin the tradition of the murder of Moses was

always  in  the  possession  of  priestly  circles  till  eventually  it  found

expression in writing which alone enabled Sellin to discover it. But itcan only have been known to a few people; it was not public property.

And is that enough to explain its effect? Is it possible to attribute to

knowledge held like this by a few people the power to produce such a

lasting emotion in the masses when it came to their notice? It seems,

rather,  as  though  there  must  have  been  something  present  in  the

ignorant masses, too, which was in some way akin to the knowledge

of the few and went half way to meet it when it was uttered.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4917

 

   A decision is made still more difficult when we turn to the analogous

case  in  primaeval  times.  It  is  quite  certain  that  in  the  course  of

thousands of years the fact was forgotten that there had been a primal

father with the characteristics we know and what his fate had been;

nor can we suppose that there was any oral tradition of it, as we can in

the  case  of  Moses.  In  what  sense,  then,  does  a  tradition  come  in

question at all? In what form can it have been present?

 

   In order to make it easier for readers who do not desire or are not

prepared to plunge into a complicated psychological state of affairs, I

will anticipate the outcome of the investigation that is to follow. In my

opinion there is an almost complete conformity in this respect between

the individual and the group: in the group too an impression of the

past is retained in unconscious memory-traces.

   In the case of the individual we believe we can see clearly. The

memory-trace of his early experience has been preserved in him, but

in  a  special  psychological  condition.  The  individual  may  be  said  to

have known it always, just as one knows about the repressed. Here

we  have  formed  ideas,  which  can  be  confirmed  without  difficulty

through analysis, of how something can be forgotten and how it can

then reappear after a while. What is forgotten is not extinguished but

only ‘repressed’; its memory-traces are present in all their freshness,

but isolated by ‘anticathexes’. They cannot enter into communication

with other intellectual processes; they are unconscious - inaccessible

to  consciousness.  It  may  also  be  that  certain  portions  of  therepressed, having evaded the process, remain accessible to memory

and occasionally emerge into consciousness; but even so they are

isolated, like foreign bodies out of connection with the rest. It may be

so, but it need not be so; repression may also be complete, and it is

with that alternative that we shall deal in what follows.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4918

 

   The repressed retains its upward urge, its effort to force its way to

consciousness. It achieves its aim under three conditions: (1) if the

strength of the anticathexis is diminished by pathological processes

which overtake the other part, what we call the ego, or by a different

distribution of the cathectic energies in that ego, as happens regularly

in the state of sleep; (2) if the instinctual elements attaching to the

repressed receive a special reinforcement (of which the best example

is  the  processes  during  puberty);  and  (3)  if  at  any  time  in  recent

experience  impressions  or  experiences  occur  which  resemble  the

repressed so closely that they are able to awaken it. In the last case

the  recent  experience  is  reinforced  by  the  latent  energy  of  the

repressed, and the repressed comes into operation behind the recent

experience and with its help. In none of these three alternatives does

what has hitherto been repressed enter consciousness smoothly and

unaltered; it must always put up with distortions which testify to the

influence  of  the  resistance  (not  entirely  overcome)  arising  from  the

anticathexis, or to the modifying influence of the recent experience or

to both.

   The difference between whether a psychical process is conscious or

unconscious has served us as a criterion and a means of finding our

bearings. The repressed is unconscious. Now it would simplify things

agreeably  if  this  sentence  admitted  of  reversal  -  if,  that  is,  the

difference between the qualities of conscious (Cs.) and unconscious

(Ucs.) coincided with the distinction between ‘belonging to the ego’

and  ‘repressed’.  The  fact  of  there  being  isolated  and  unconscious

things  like  this  in  our  mental  life  would  be  sufficiently  novel  and

important. But in reality the position is more complicated. It is true thateverything repressed is unconscious, but it is not true that everything

belonging to the ego is conscious. We notice that consciousness is a

transient quality which attaches to a psychical process only in passing.

For our purposes therefore we must replace ‘conscious’ by ‘capable of

being  conscious’  and  we  call  this  quality  ‘preconscious’  (Pcs.). We

then say, more correctly, that the ego is mainly preconscious (virtually

conscious) but that portions of the ego are unconscious.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4919

 

   The establishment of this latter fact shows us that the qualities on

which we have hitherto relied are insufficient to give us our bearings in

the  obscurity  of  mental  life.  We  must  introduce  another  distinction

which is no longer qualitative but topographical and - what gives it

special value - at the same time genetic. We now distinguish in our

mental life (which we regard as an apparatus compounded of several

agencies,  districts  or  provinces)  one  region  which  we  call  the ego

proper and another which we name the id. The id is the older of the

two; the ego has developed out of it, like a cortical layer, through the

influence  of  the  external  world.  It  is  in  the  id  that  all  our  primary

instincts  are  at  work,  all  the  processes  in  the  id  take  place

unconsciously. The ego, as we have already said, coincides with the

region of the preconscious; it includes portions which normally remain

unconscious.  The  course  of  events  in  the  id,  and  their  mutual

interaction, are governed by quite other laws than those prevailing in

the ego. It is in fact the discovery of these differences that has led to

our new view and justifies it.

   The repressed is to be counted as belonging to the id and is subject

to the same mechanisms; it is distinguished from it only in respect to

its genesis. The differentiation is accomplished in the earliest period of

life, while the ego is developing out of the id. At that time a portion of

the  contents  of  the  id  is  taken  into  the  ego  and  raised  to  the

preconscious state; another portion is not affected by this translation

and remains behind in the id as the unconscious proper. In the further

course  of  the  formation  of  the  ego,  however,  certain  psychicalimpressions  and  processes  in  the  ego  are  excluded  from  it  by  a

defensive  process;  the  characteristic  of  being  preconscious  is

withdrawn from them, so that they are once more reduced to being

component portions of the id. Here then is the ‘repressed’ in the id. So

far as intercourse between the two mental provinces is concerned, we

therefore assume that, on the one hand, unconscious processes in the

id are raised to the level of the preconscious and incorporated into the

ego, and that, on the other hand, preconscious material in the ego can

follow the opposite path and be put back into the id. The fact that later

on a special region - that of the ‘super-ego’ - is separated off in the

ego lies outside our present interest.

   All of this may appear to be far from simple. But when one has

grown reconciled to this unusual spatial view of the mental apparatus,

it can present no particular difficulties to the imagination. I will add the

further comment that the psychical topography that I have developed

here has nothing to do with the anatomy of the brain, and actually only

touches it at one point. What is unsatisfactory in this picture - and I am

aware of it as clearly as anyone - is due to our complete ignorance of

the dynamic nature of the mental processes. We tell ourselves that

what distinguishes a conscious idea from a preconscious one, and the

latter from an unconscious one, can only be a modification, or perhaps

a different distribution, of psychical energy. We talk of cathexes and

hypercathexes, but beyond this we are without any knowledge on the

subject  or  even  any  starting-point  for  a  serviceable  working

hypothesis. Of the phenomenon of consciousness we can at least say

that  it  was  originally  attached  to  perception.  All  sensations  which

originate  from  the  perception  of  painful,  tactile,  auditory  or  visual

stimuli are what are most readily conscious. Thought-processes, and

whatever  may  be  analogous  to  them  in  the  id,  are  in  themselves

unconscious and obtain access to consciousness by becoming linked

to the mnemic residues of visual and auditory perceptions along the

path of the function of speech. In animals, which lack speech, these

conditions must be of a simpler kind.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4920 

 

   The impressions of early traumas, from which we started out, are

either not translated into the preconscious or are quickly put back by

repression  into  the  id-condition.  Their  mnemic  residues  are  in  that

case unconscious and operate from the id. We believe we can easily

follow their further vicissitudes so long as it is a question of what has

been  experienced  by  the  subject  himself.  But  a  fresh  complication

arises when we become aware of the probability that what may be

operative in an individual’s psychical life may include not only what he

has experienced himself but also things that were innately present in

him  at  his  birth,  elements  with  a  phylogenetic  origin  -  an archaic

heritage.  The  questions  then  arise  of  what  this  consists  in,  what  it

contains and what is the evidence for it.

   The immediate and most certain answer is that it consists in certain

dispositions such as are characteristic of all living organisms: in the

capacity and tendency, that is, to enter particular lines of development

and to react in a particular manner to certain excitations, impressions

and stimuli. Since experience shows that there are distinctions in this

respect  between  individuals  of  the  human  species,  the  archaic

heritage  must  include  these  distinctions;  they  represent  what  we

recognize as the constitutional factor in the individual. Now, since all

human beings, at all events in their early days, have approximately the

same  experiences,  they  react  to  them,  too,  in  a  similar  manner;  a

doubt was therefore able to arise whether we should not include these

reactions,  along  with  their  individual  distinctions,  in  the  archaic

heritage. This doubt should be put on one side: our knowledge of the

archaic heritage is not enlarged by the fact of this similarity.

   Nevertheless, analytic research has brought us a few results which

give us cause for thought. There is, in the first place, the universality

of symbolism in language. The symbolic representation of one object

by another - the same thing applies to actions - is familiar to all our

children and comes to them, as it were, as a matter of course. We

cannot show in regard to them how they have learnt it and must admit

that  in  many  cases  learning  it  is  impossible.  It  is  a  question  of  an

original knowledge which adults afterwards forget. It is true that an

adult makes use of the same symbols in his dreams, but he does notunderstand them unless an analyst interprets them to him, and even

then he is reluctant to believe the translation. If he makes use of one

of  the  very  common  figures  of  speech  in  which  this  symbolism  is

recorded, he is obliged to admit that its true sense has completely

escaped  him.  Moreover,  symbolism  disregards  differences  of

language; investigations would probably show that it is ubiquitous - the

same  for  all  peoples.  Here,  then,  we  seem  to  have  an  assured

instance  of  an  archaic  heritage  dating  from  the  period  at  which

language developed. But another explanation might still be attempted.

It might be said that we are dealing with thought-connections between

ideas - connections which had been established during the historical

development  of  speech  and  which  have  to  be  repeated  now  every

time  the  development  of  speech  has  to  be  gone  through  in  an

individual. It would thus be a case of the inheritance of an intellectual

disposition  similar  to  the  ordinary  inheritance  of  an  instinctual

disposition  -  and  once  again  it  would  be  no  contribution  to  our

problem.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4921

 

   The work of analysis has, however, brought something else to light

which  exceeds  in  its  importance  what  we  have  so  far  considered.

When  we  study  the  reactions  to  early  traumas,  we  are  quite  often

surprised to find that they are not strictly limited to what the subject

himself has really experienced but diverge from it in a way which fits in

much better with the model of a phylogenetic event and, in general,

can only be explained by such an influence. The behaviour of neurotic

children towards their parents in the Oedipus and castration complex

abounds in such reactions, which seem unjustified in the individual

case  and  only  become  intelligible  phylogenetically  -  by  their

connection with the experience of earlier generations. It would be well

worth while to place this material, which I am able to appeal to here,

before the public in a collected form. Its evidential value seems to me

strong enough for me to venture on a further step and to posit the

assertion  that  the  archaic  heritage  of  human  beings  comprises  notonly  dispositions  but  also  subject-matter  -  memory-traces  of  the

experience of earlier generations. In this way the compass as well as

the importance of the archaic heritage would be significantly extended.

   On further reflection I must admit that I have behaved for a long time

as though the inheritance of memory-traces of the experience of our

ancestors, independently of direct communication and of the influence

of education by the setting of an example, were established beyond

question. When I spoke of the survival of a tradition among a people

or of the formation of a people’s character, I had mostly in mind an

inherited  tradition  of  this  kind  and  not  one  transmitted  by

communication. Or at least I made no distinction between the two and

was  not  clearly  aware  of  my  audacity  in  neglecting  to  do  so.  My

position, no doubt, is made more difficult by the present attitude of

biological science, which refuses to hear of the inheritance of acquired

characters by succeeding generations. I must, however, in all modesty

confess that nevertheless I cannot do without this factor in biological

evolution. The same thing is not in question, indeed, in the two cases:

in  the  one  it  is  a  matter  of  acquired  characters  which  are  hard  to

grasp, in the other of memory-traces of external events - something

tangible,  as  it  were.  But  it  may  well  be  that  at  bottom  we  cannot

imagine one without the other.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4922

 

   If we assume the survival of these memory-traces in the archaic

heritage,  we  have  bridged  the  gulf  between  individual  and  group

psychology:  we  can  deal  with  peoples  as  we  do  with  an  individual

neurotic. Granted that at the time we have no stronger evidence for

the  presence  of  memory-traces  in  the  archaic  heritage  than  the

residual  phenomena  of  the  work  of  analysis  which  call  for  a

phylogenetic derivation, yet this evidence seems to us strong enough

to postulate that such is the fact. If it is not so, we shall not advance a

step  further  along  the  path  we  entered  on,  either  in  analysis  or  in

group psychology. The audacity cannot be avoided.

   And by this assumption we are effecting something else. We arediminishing the gulf which earlier periods of human arrogance had torn

too wide apart between mankind and the animals. If any explanation is

to be found of what are called the instincts of animals, which allow

them to behave from the first in a new situation in life as though it

were an old and familiar one - if any explanation at all is to be found of

this  instinctive  life  of  animals,  it  can  only  be  that  they  bring  the

experiences of their species with them into their own new existence -

that is, that they have preserved memories of what was experienced

by  their  ancestors.  The  position  in  the  human  animal  would  not  at

bottom  be  different.  His  own  archaic  heritage  corresponds  to  the

instincts  of  animals  even  though  it  is  different  in  its  compass  and

contents.

   After this discussion I have no hesitation in declaring that men have

always known (in this special way) that they once possessed a primal

father and killed him.

   Two further questions must now be answered. First, under what

conditions  does  a  memory  of  this  kind  enter  the  archaic  heritage?

And, secondly, in what circumstances can it become active - that is,

can it advance to consciousness from its unconscious state in the id,

even though in an altered and distorted shape? The answer to the first

question is easy to formulate: the memory enters the archaic heritage

if the event was important enough, or repeated often enough, or both.

In the case of parricide both conditions are fulfilled. On the second

question there is this to be said. A whole number of influences may be

concerned,  not  all  of  which  are  necessarily  known.  A  spontaneous

development is also conceivable, on the analogy of what happens in

some neuroses. What is certainly of decisive importance, however, is

the  awakening  of  the  forgotten  memory  trace  by  a  recent  real

repetition of the event. The murder of Moses was a repetition of this

kind and, later, the supposed judicial murder of Christ: so that these

events come into the foreground as causes. It seems as though the

genesis of monotheism could not do without these occurrences. We

are reminded of the poet’s words:

 

                                                                Was unsterblich im Gesang soll leben,
                                                                Muss im Leben untergehn.¹

 

   ¹ [Literally:  ‘What  is  to  live  immortal  in  song  must  perish  in  life.’]  Schiller,  ‘Die  GötterGriechenlands’.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4923

 

 

   And lastly a remark which brings up a psychological argument. A

tradition that was based only on communication could not lead to the

compulsive character that attaches to religious phenomena. It would

be listened to, judged, and perhaps dismissed, like any other piece of

information from outside; it would never attain the privilege of being

liberated  from  the  constraint  of  logical  thought.  It  must  have

undergone the fate of being repressed, the condition of lingering in the

unconscious, before it is able to display such powerful effects on its

return,  to  bring  the  masses  under  its  spell,  as  we  have  seen  with

astonishment  and  hitherto  without  comprehension  in  the  case  of

religious tradition. And this consideration weighs heavily in favour of

our believing that things really happened in the way we have tried to

picture them or at least in some similar way.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4924

 

                                        PART II

 

                          SUMMARY AND RECAPITULATION

 

   The part of this study which follows cannot be given to the public

without extensive explanations and apologies. For it is nothing other

than  a  faithful  (and  often  word-for-word)  repetition  of  the  first  part,

abbreviated  in  some  of  its  critical  enquiries  and  augmented  by

additions relating to the problem of how the special character of the

Jewish people arose. I am aware that a method of exposition such as

this  is  no  less  inexpedient  than  it  is  inartistic.  I  myself  deplore  it

unreservedly. Why have I not avoided it? The answer to that is not

hard for me to find, but it is not easy to confess. I found myself unableto wipe out the traces of the history of the work’s origin, which was in

any case unusual.

   Actually it has been written twice: for the first time a few years ago in

Vienna,  where  I  did  not  think  it  would  be  possible  to  publish  it.  I

determined to give it up; but it tormented me like an unlaid ghost, and I

found  a  way  out  by  making  two  pieces  of  it  independent  and

publishing them in our periodical Imago: the psycho-analytic starting-

point  of  the  whole  thing  ‘Moses  an  Egyptian’,  and  the  historical

construction  erected  on  this  ‘If  Moses  was  an  Egyptian  .  .  .’.  The

remainder,  which  included  what  was  really  open  to  objection  and

dangerous  -  the  application  to  the  genesis  of  monotheism  and  the

view of religion in general - I held back, as I thought, forever. When, in

March 1938, came the unexpected German invasion, which forced me

to  leave  my  home  but  also  freed  me  from  my  anxiety  lest  my

publication  might  conjure  up  a  prohibition  of  psycho-analysis  in  a

place where it was still tolerated. I had scarcely arrived in England

before I found the temptation irresistible to make the knowledge I had

held back accessible to the world, and I began to revise the third part

of  my  study  to  fit  it  on  to  the  two  parts  that  had  already  been

published.  This  naturally  involved  a  partial  re-arrangement  of  the

material. I did not succeed, however, in including the whole of this

material in my second version; on the other hand I could not make up

my mind to give up the earlier versions entirely. And so it has come

about that I have adopted the expedient of attaching a whole piece of

the first presentation to the second unchanged - which has brought

with it the disadvantage of involving extensive repetition.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4925

 

   I might, however, console myself with the reflection that the things I

am treating are in any case so new and so important, apart from how

far my account of them is correct, that it can be no misfortune if the

public is obliged to read the same thing about them twice over. There

are things which should be said more than once and which cannot be

said often enough. But the reader must decide of his own free willwhether to linger over the subject or to come back to it. He must not

be surreptitiously led into having the same thing put before him twice

in one book. It is a piece of clumsiness for which the author must take

the blame. Unluckily an author’s creative power does not always obey

his will: the work proceeds as it can, and often presents itself to the

author as something independent or even alien.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4926

 

                                            A

 

                                THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL

 

   If we are clear in our mind that a procedure like ours of accepting

what seems to us serviceable in the material presented to us and of

rejecting  what  does  not  suit  us  and  of  putting  the  different  pieces

together in accordance with psychological probability - if we are clear

that a technique of this kind can give no certainty that we shall arrive

at the truth, then it may justly be asked why we are undertaking this

work at all. The answer is an appeal to the work’s outcome. If we

greatly  tone  down  the  strictness  of  the  requirements  made  upon  a

  historico-psychological  investigation,  it  will  perhaps  be  possible  to

throw  light  on  problems  which  have  always  seemed  to  deserve

attention and which recent events have forced upon our observation

anew. As we know, of all the peoples who lived round the basin of the

Mediterranean in antiquity, the Jewish people is almost the only one

which  still  exists  in  name  and  also  in  substance.  It  has  met

misfortunes  and  ill-treatment  with  an  unexampled  capacity  for

resistance; it has developed special character-traits and incidentally

has earned the hearty dislike of every other people. We should be

glad to understand more of the source of this viability of the Jews and

of how their characteristics are connected with their history.

   We may start from a character-trait of the Jews which dominates

their relation to others. There is no doubt that they have a particularly

high  opinion  of  themselves,  that  they  regard  themselves  as  more

distinguished, of higher standing, as superior to other peoples - fromwhom they are also distinguished by many of their customs.¹ At the

same time they are inspired by a peculiar confidence in life, such as is

derived  from  the  secret  ownership  of  some  precious  possession,  a

kind of optimism: pious people would call it trust in God.

 

   ¹ The aspersion, so common in antiquity, that the Jews were ‘lepers’ (cf. Manetho) no doubt

has the sense of a projection: ‘they keep as much apart from us as though we were lepers.’
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4927

 

      We  know  the  reason  for  this  behaviour  and  what  their  secret

treasure is. They really regard themselves as God’s chosen people,

they believe that they stand especially close to him; and this makes

them  proud  and  confident.  Trustworthy  reports  tell  us  that  they

behaved  in  Hellenistic  times  just  as  they  do  to-day,  so  that  the

complete Jew was already there; and the Greeks, among whom and

alongside of whom they lived, reacted to the Jewish characteristics in

the same way as their ‘hosts’ do to-day. It might be thought that they

reacted  as  though  they  too  believed  in  the  superiority  which  the

people  of  Israel  claimed  for  themselves.  If  one  is  the  declared

favourite  of  the  dreaded  father,  one  need  not  be  surprised  at  the

jealousy  of  one’s  brothers  and  sisters,  and  the  Jewish  legend  of

Joseph and his brethren shows very well where this jealousy can lead.

The course of world-history seemed to justify the presumption of the

Jews, since, when later on it pleased God to send mankind a Messiah

and redeemer, he once again chose him from the Jewish people. The

other peoples might have had occasion then to say to themselves:

‘Indeed, they were right, they are God’s chosen people.’ But instead of

this,  what  happened  was  that  redemption  by  Jesus  Christ  only

intensified their hatred of the Jews, while the Jews themselves gained

no advantage from this second act of favouritism, since they did not

recognize the redeemer.

   On the basis of our earlier discussions, we may now assert that it

was the man Moses who imprinted this trait - significant for all time -

upon the Jewish people. He raised their self-esteem by assuring them

that they were God’s chosen people, he enjoined them to holiness andpledged them to be apart from others. Not that other peoples were

lacking in self-esteem. Just as to-day, so in those days each nation

thought itself better than any other. But the self-esteem of the Jews

was given a religious anchorage by Moses: it became a part of their

religious faith. Owing to their especially intimate relation to their God

they acquired a share in his grandeur. And since we know that behind

the God who had chosen the Jews and freed them from Egypt stands

the figure of Moses, who had done precisely that, ostensibly at God’s

command, we venture to declare that it was this one man Moses who

created the Jews. It is to him that this people owes its tenacity of life

but also much of the hostility it has experienced and still experiences.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4928

 

                                            B

 

                                    THE GREAT MAN

 

   How is it possible for a single man to evolve such extraordinary

effectiveness that he can form a people out of random individuals and

families, can stamp them with their definitive character and determine

their fate for thousands of years? Is not a hypothesis such as this a

relapse into the mode of thought which led to myths of a creator and

to the worship of heroes, into times in which the writing of history was

nothing  more  than  a  report  of  the  deeds  and  destinies  of  single

individuals, of rulers or conquerors? The modern tendency is rather

towards tracing back the events of human history to more concealed,

general  and  impersonal  factors,  to  the  compelling  influence  of

economic conditions, to alterations in food habits, to advances in the

use of materials and tools, to migrations brought about by increases in

population and climatic changes. Individuals have no other part to play

in this than as exponents or representatives of group trends, which are

bound  to  find  expression  and  do  so  in  these  particular  individuals

largely by chance.

   These are perfectly justifiable lines of approach, but they give us

occasion for drawing attention to an important discrepancy betweenthe attitude taken up by our organ of thought and the arrangement of

things in the world, which are supposed to be grasped by means of

our thought. It is enough for our need to discover causes (which, to be

sure, is imperative) if each event has one demonstrable cause. But in

the reality lying outside us that is scarcely the case; on the contrary,

each event seems to be overdetermined and proves to be the effect of

several convergent causes. Frightened by the immense complication

of events, our investigations take the side of one correlation as against

another and set up contradictions which do not exist but have only

arisen  owing  to  a  rupture  of  more  comprehensive  relations.¹

Accordingly, if the investigation of a particular case demonstrates to

us the transcendent influence of a single personality, our conscience

need not reproach us with having by this hypothesis flown in the face

of  the  doctrine  of  the  importance  of  the  general  and  impersonal

factors. There is room in principle for both. In the case of the genesis

of monotheism, however, we can point to no external factor other than

the one we have already mentioned - that this development was linked

with  the  establishment  of  closer  relations  between  different  nations

and with the building up of a great empire.

 

   ¹ I protest, however, against being misunderstood to say that the world is so complicated

that any assertion one may make is bound to hit upon a piece of truth somewhere. No. Our
thought has upheld its liberty to discover dependent relations and connections to which there
is nothing corresponding in reality; and it clearly sets a very high value on this gift, since it
makes such copious use of it both inside and outside of science.
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4929

 

   Thus we reserve a place for ‘great men’ in the chain, or rather the

network,  of  causes.  But  it  may  not,  perhaps,  be  quite  useless  to

enquire under what conditions we confer this title of honour. We shall

be surprised to find that it is never quite easy to answer this question.

A first formulation - ‘we do so if a man possesses to a specially high

degree qualities that we value greatly’ - clearly misses the mark in

every respect. Beauty, for instance, and muscular strength, however

enviable  they  may  be,  constitute  no  claim  to  ‘greatness’.  It  would

seem, then, that the qualities have to be mental ones - psychical andintellectual  distinctions.  As  regards  these,  we  are  held  up  by  the

consideration that nevertheless we should not unhesitatingly describe

someone  as  a  great  man  simply  because  he  was  extraordinarily

efficient in some particular sphere. We should certainly not do so in

the case of a chess master or of a virtuoso on a musical instrument;

but  not  very  easily,  either,  in  the  case  of  a  distinguished  artist  or

scientist. In such cases we should naturally speak of him as a great

poet, painter, mathematician or physicist, or as a pioneer in the field of

this or that activity; but we refrain from pronouncing him a great man.

If we unhesitatingly declare that, for instance, Goethe and Leonardo

da  Vinci  and  Beethoven  were  great  men,  we  must  be  led  to  it  by

something  other  than  admiration  for  their  splendid  creations.  If

precisely such examples as these did not stand in the way, the idea

would probably occur to us that the name of a ‘great man’ is preferably

reserved for men of action - conquerors, generals, rulers - and is in

recognition  of  the  greatness  of  their  achievement,  the  force  of  the

effects to which they gave rise. But this too is unsatisfactory and is

entirely  contradicted  by  our  condemnation  of  so  many  worthless

figures  whose  effects  upon  their  contemporary  world  and  upon

posterity can nevertheless not be disputed. Nor shall we be able to

choose  success  as  a  sign  of  greatness,  when  we  reflect  on  the

majority of great men who instead of achieving success have perished

in misfortune.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4930

 

   For the moment, then, we are inclined to decide that it is not worth

while to look for a connotation of the concept of a ‘great man’ that is

unambiguously determined. It seems to be only a loosely used and

somewhat  arbitrarily  conferred  recognition  of  an  over-large

development of certain human qualities, with some approximation to

the original literal sense of ‘greatness’. We must recollect, too, that we

are  not  so  much  interested  in  the  essence  of  great  men  as  in  the

question of the means by which they affect their fellow-men. We will,

however, keep this enquiry as short as possible, since it threatens tolead us far away from our goal.

   Let us, therefore, take it for granted that a great man influences his

fellow-men in two ways: by his personality and by the idea which he

puts forward. That idea may stress some ancient wishful image of the

masses, or it may point out a new wishful aim to them, or it may cast

its  spell  over  them  in  some  other  way.  Occasionally  -  and  this  is

undoubtedly the more primary case - the personality works by itself

and the idea plays a quite trivial part. Not for a moment are we in the

dark as to why a great man ever becomes important. We know that in

the mass of mankind there is a powerful need for an authority who can

be admired, before whom one bows down, by whom one is ruled and

perhaps  even  ill-treated.  We  have  learnt  from  the  psychology  of

individual men what the origin is of this need of the masses. It is a

longing for the father felt by everyone from his childhood onwards, for

the same father whom the hero of legend boasts he has overcome.

And now it may begin to dawn on us that all the characteristics with

which we equipped the great man are paternal characteristics, and

that the essence of great men for which we vainly searched lies in this

conformity.  The  decisiveness  of  thought,  the  strength  of  will,  the

energy of action are part of the picture of a father - but above all the

autonomy and independence of the great man, his divine unconcern

which may grow into ruthlessness. One must admire him, one may

trust him, but one cannot avoid being afraid of him too. We should

have been led to realize this from the word itself: who but the father

can have been the ‘great man’ in childhood?

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4931

 

   There is no doubt that it was a mighty prototype of a father which, in

the person of Moses, stooped to the poor Jewish bondsmen to assure

them that they were his dear children. And no less overwhelming must

have  been  the  effect  upon  them  of  the  idea  of  an  only,  eternal,

almighty God, to whom they were not too mean for him to make a

covenant  with  them  and  who  promised  to  care  for  them  if  they

remained loyal to his worship. It was probably not easy for them todistinguish the image of the man Moses from that of his God; and their

feeling was right in this, for Moses may have introduced traits of his

own personality into the character of his God - such as his wrathful

temper and his relentlessness. And if, this being so, they killed their

great  man  one  day,  they  were  only  repeating  a  misdeed  which  in

ancient times had been committed, as prescribed by law, against the

Divine King and which, as we know, went back to a still more ancient

prototype.¹

   If on the one hand we thus see the figure of the great man grown to

divine proportions, yet on the other hand we must recall that the father

too  was  once  a  child.  The  great  religious  idea  for  which  the  man

Moses stood was, on our view, not his own property: he had taken it

over from King Akhenaten. And he, whose greatness as the founder of

a  religion  is  unequivocally  established,  may  perhaps  have  been

following hints which had reached him - from near or distant parts of

Asia - through the medium of his mother or by other paths.

 

   ¹ Cf. Frazer, loc. cit.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4932

 

   We cannot follow the chain of events further, but if we have rightly

recognized  these  first  steps,  the  monotheist  idea  returned  like  a

boomerang to the land of its origin. Thus it seems unfruitful to try to fix

the credit due to an individual in connection with a new idea. It is clear

that many have shared in its development and made contributions to

it. And, again, it would obviously be unjust to break off the chain of

causes  at  Moses  and  to  neglect  what  was  effected  by  those  who

succeeded him and carried on his ideas, the Jewish Prophets. The

seed of monotheism failed to ripen in Egypt. The same thing might

have  happened  in  Israel  after  the  people  had  thrown  off  the

burdensome and exacting religion. But there constantly arose from the

Jewish people men who revived the fading tradition, who renewed the

admonitions and demands made by Moses, and who did not rest till

what  was  lost  had  been  established  once  again.  In  the  course  of

constant efforts over centuries, and finally owing to two great reforms,one before and one after the Babylonian exile, the transformation was

accomplished of the popular god Yahweh into the God whose worship

had  been  forced  upon  the  Jews  by  Moses.  And  evidence  of  the

presence  of  a  peculiar  psychical  aptitude  in  the  masses  who  had

become the Jewish people is revealed by the fact that they were able

to produce so many individuals prepared to take on the burdens of the

religion of Moses in return for the reward of being the chosen people

and perhaps for some other prizes of a similar degree.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4933

 

                                            C

 

                          THE ADVANCE IN INTELLECTUALITY

 

   In order to bring about lasting psychical results in a people, it is

clearly not enough to assure them that they have been chosen by the

deity. The fact must also be proved to them in some way if they are to

believe it and to draw consequences from the belief. In the religion of

Moses the Exodus from Egypt served as the proof; God, or Moses in

his name, was never tired of appealing to this evidence of favour. The

feast of the Passover was introduced in order to maintain the memory

of that event, or, rather, an old-established feast was injected with the

contents  of  that  memory.  Nevertheless,  it  was  only  a  memory:  the

Exodus belonged to a hazy past. In the present, signs of God’s favour

were  decidedly  scanty;  the  people’s  history  pointed  rather  to  his

disfavour.  Primitive  peoples  used  to  depose  their  gods  or  even  to

castigate them, if they failed to do their duty in securing them victory,

happiness and comfort. In all periods kings have been treated in no

way  differently  from  gods;  an  ancient  identity  is  thus  revealed:  an

origin  from  a  common  root.  Thus,  modern  peoples,  too,  are  in  the

habit  of  expelling  their  kings  if  the  glory  of  their  reign  is  spoilt  by

defeats and the corresponding losses in territory and money. Why the

people of Israel, however, clung more and more submissively to their

God the worse they were treated by him - that is a problem which for

the moment we must leave on one side.      It  may  encourage  us  to  enquire  whether  the  religion  of  Moses

brought the people nothing else besides an enhancement of their self-

esteem  owing  to  their  consciousness  of  having  been  chosen.  And

indeed another factor can easily be found. That religion also brought

the Jews a far grander conception of God, or, as we might put it more

modestly, the conception of a grander God. Anyone who believed in

this God had some kind of share in his greatness, might feel exalted

himself. For an unbeliever this is not entirely self-evident; but we may

perhaps  make  it  easier  to  understand  if  we  point  to  the  sense  of

superiority felt by a Briton in a foreign country which has been made

insecure owing to an insurrection - a feeling that is completely absent

in a citizen of any small continental state. For the Briton counts on the

fact that his Government will send along a warship if a hair of his head

is hurt, and that the rebels understand that very well - whereas the

small state possesses no warship at all. Thus, pride in the greatness

of the British Empire has a root as well in the consciousness of the

greater security - the protection - enjoyed by the individual Briton. This

may resemble the conception of a grand God. And, since one can

scarcely claim to assist God in the administration of the world, the

pride in God’s greatness fuses with the pride in being chosen by him.

   Among the precepts of the Moses religion there is one that is of

greater importance than appears to begin with. This is the prohibition

against making an image of God - the compulsion to worship a God

whom  one  cannot  see.  In  this,  I  suspect,  Moses  was  outdoing  the

strictness  of  the  Aten  religion.  Perhaps  he  merely  wanted  to  be

consistent:  his  God  would  in  that  case  have  neither  a  name  nor  a

countenance.  Perhaps  it  was  a  fresh  measure  against  magical

abuses. But if this prohibition were accepted, it must have a profound

effect. For it meant that a sensory perception was given second place

to what may be called an abstract idea - a triumph of intellectuality

over sensuality or, strictly speaking, an instinctual renunciation, with

all its necessary psychological consequences.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4934

    This may not seem obvious at first sight, and before it can carry

conviction we must recall other processes of the same character in the

development of human civilization. The earliest of these and perhaps

the most important is merged in the obscurity of primaeval ages. Its

astonishing effects compel us to assert its occurrence. In our children,

in adults who are neurotic, as well as in primitive peoples, we meet

with  the  mental  phenomenon  which  we  describe  as  a  belief  in  the

‘omnipotence  of  thoughts’.  In  our  judgement  this  lies  in  an  over-

estimation of the influence which our mental (in this case, intellectual)

acts can exercise in altering the external world. At bottom, all magic,

the precursor of our technology, rests on this premiss. All the magic of

words, too, has its place here, and the conviction of the power which

is  bound  up  with  the  knowledge  and  pronouncing  of  a  name.  The

‘omnipotence  of  thoughts’  was,  we  suppose,  an  expression  of  the

pride of mankind in the development of speech, which resulted in such

an extraordinary advancement of intellectual activities. The new realm

of  intellectuality  was  opened  up,  in  which  ideas,  memories  and

inferences became decisive in contrast to the lower psychical activity

which had direct perceptions by the sense-organs as its content. This

was unquestionably one of the most important stages on the path to

hominization.

   We can far more easily grasp another process of a later date. Under

the influence of external factors into which we need not enter here and

which  are  also  in  part  insufficiently  known,  it  came  about  that  the

matriarchal social order was succeeded by the patriarchal one - which,

of course, involved a revolution in the juridical conditions that had so

far prevailed. An echo of this revolution seems still to be audible in the

Oresteia of Aeschylus. But this turning from the mother to the father

points in addition to a victory of intellectuality over sensuality - that is,

an advance in civilization, since maternity is proved by the evidence of

the senses while paternity is a hypothesis, based on an inference and

a  premiss.  Taking  sides  in  this  way  with  a  thought-process  in

preference to a sense perception has proved to be a momentous step.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4935 

   At some point between the two events that I have mentioned there

was  another  which  shows  the  most  affinity  to  what  we  are

investigating  in  the  history  of  religion.  Human  beings  found

themselves  obliged  in  general  to  recognise  ‘intellectual’  forces  -

forces, that is, which cannot be grasped by the senses (particularly by

the  sight)  but  which  none  the  less  produce  undoubted  and  indeed

extremely  powerful  effects.  If  we  may  rely  upon  the  evidence  of

language, it was movement of the air that provided the prototype of

intellectuality,  for  intellect  derives  its  name  from  a  breath  of  wind  -

‘animus’, ‘spiritus’, and the Hebrew ‘ruach (breath)’. This too led to the

discovery of the mind as that of the intellectual principle in individual

human beings. Observation found the movement of air once again in

men’s breathing, which ceases when they die. To this day a dying

man ‘breathes out his spirit’. Now, however, the world of spirits lay

open to men. They were prepared to attribute the soul which they had

discovered in themselves to everything in Nature. The whole world

was animate; and science, which came so much later, had plenty to

do in divesting part of the world of its soul once more; indeed it has

not completed that task even to-day.

      The  Mosaic  prohibition  elevated  God  to  a  higher  degree  of

intellectuality, and the way was opened to further alterations in the

idea of God which we have still to describe. But we may first consider

another effect of the prohibition. All such advances in intellectuality

have  as  their  consequence  that  the  individual’s  self-esteem  is

increased, that he is made proud - so that he feels superior to other

people who have remained under the spell of sensuality. Moses, as

we know, conveyed to the Jews an exalted sense of being a chosen

people.  The  dematerialization  of  God  brought  a  fresh  and  valuable

contribution to their secret treasure. The Jews retained their inclination

to intellectual interests. The nation’s political misfortune taught it to

value  at  its  true  worth  the  one  possession  that  remained  to  it  -  its

literature.  Immediately  after  the  destruction  of  the  Temple  in

Jerusalem by Titus, the Rabbi Jochanan ben Zakkai asked permission

to open the first Torah school in Jabneh. From that time on, the Holy

Writ  and  intellectual  concern  with  it  were  what  held  the  scattered

people together.   This much is generally known and accepted. All I have wanted to do

is to add that this characteristic development of the Jewish nature was

introduced  by  the  Mosaic  prohibition  against  worshipping  God  in  a

visible form.

   The pre-eminence given to intellectual labours throughout some two

thousand years in the life of the Jewish people has, of course, had its

effect. It has helped to check the brutality and the tendency to violence

which are apt to appear where the development of muscular strength

is  the  popular  ideal.  Harmony  in  the  cultivation  of  intellectual  and

physical  activity,  such  as  was  achieved  by  the  Greek  people,  was

denied to the Jews. In this dichotomy their decision was at least in

favour of the worthier alternative.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4936

 

                                            D

 

                              RENUNCIATION OF INSTINCT

 

      It  is  not  obvious  and  not  immediately  understandable  why  an

advance in intellectuality, a set-back to sensuality, should raise the

self-regard  both  of  an  individual  and  of  a  people.  It  seems  to

presuppose the existence of a definite standard of value and of some

other person or agency which maintains it. For an explanation let us

turn  to  an  analogous  case  in  individual  psychology  which  we  have

come to understand.

   If the id in a human being gives rise to an instinctual demand of an

erotic or aggressive nature, the simplest and most natural thing is that

the  ego,  which  has  the  apparatus  of  thought  and  the  muscular

apparatus at its disposal, should satisfy the demand by an action. This

satisfaction of the instinct is felt by the ego as pleasure, just as its non-

satisfaction would undoubtedly have become a source of unpleasure.

Now a case may arise in which the ego abstains from satisfying the

instinct in view of external obstacles - namely, if it perceives that the

action  in  question  would  provoke  a  serious  danger  to  the  ego.  An

abstention from satisfaction of this kind, the renunciation of an instincton account of an external hindrance - or, as we say, in obedience to

the reality principle - is not pleasurable in any event. The renunciation

of the instinct would lead to a lasting tension owing to unpleasure, if it

were  not  possible  to  reduce  the  strength  of  the  instinct  itself  by

displacements of energy. Instinctual renunciation can, however, also

be imposed for other reasons, which we correctly describe as internal.

In the course of an individual’s development a portion of the inhibiting

forces  in  the  external  world  are  internalized  and  an  agency  is

constructed  in  the  ego  which  confronts  the  rest  of  the  ego  in  an

observing, criticizing and prohibiting sense. We call this new agency

the super-ego.  Thenceforward  the  ego,  before  putting  to  work  the

instinctual satisfactions demanded by the id, has to take into account

not merely the dangers of the external world but also the objections of

the  super-ego,  and  it  will  have  all  the  more  grounds  for  abstaining

from satisfying the instinct. But whereas instinctual renunciation, when

it is for external reasons, is only unpleasurable, when it is for internal

reasons, in obedience to the super-ego, it has a different economic

effect. In addition to the inevitable unpleasurable consequences it also

brings the ego a yield of pleasure - a substitutive satisfaction, as it

were.  The  ego  feels  elevated;  it  is  proud  of  the  instinctual

renunciation, as though it were a valuable achievement. We believe

we  can  understand  the  mechanism  of  this  yield  of  pleasure.  The

super-ego  is  the  successor  and  representative  of  the  individual’s

parents (and educators) who had supervised his actions in the first

period  of  his  life;  it  carries  on  their  functions  almost  unchanged.  It

keeps the ego in a permanent state of dependence and exercises a

constant pressure on it. Just as in childhood, the ego is apprehensive

about risking the love of its supreme master; it feels his approval as

liberation and satisfaction and his reproaches as pangs of conscience.

When the ego has brought the super-ego the sacrifice of an instinctual

renunciation, it expects to be rewarded by receiving more love from it.

The consciousness of deserving this love is felt by it as pride. At the

time when the authority had not yet been internalized as a super-ego,

there could be the same relation between the threat of loss of love and

the claims of instinct: there was a feeling of security and satisfaction

when  one  had  achieved  an  instinctual  renunciation  out  of  love  for

one’s parents. But this happy feeling could only assume the peculiarnarcissistic character of pride after the authority had itself become a

portion of the ego.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4937

 

      What  help  does  this  explanation  of  the  satisfaction  arising  from

instinctual renunciation give us towards understanding the processes

that we want to study - the elevation of self-regard when there are

advances  in  intellectuality?  Very  little,  it  seems.  The  circumstances

are quite different. There is no question of any instinctual renunciation

and there is no second person or agency for whose sake the sacrifice

is made. We shall soon feel doubts about this last assertion. It can be

said that the great man is precisely the authority for whose sake the

achievement is carried out; and, since the great man himself operates

by virtue of his similarity to the father, there is no need to feel surprise

if in group psychology the role of the super-ego falls to him. So that

this  would  apply  too  to  the  man  Moses  in  relation  to  the  Jewish

people. As regards the other point, however, no proper analogy can

be  established.  An  advance  in  intellectuality  consists  in  deciding

against direct sense-perception in favour of what are known as the

higher  intellectual  processes  -  that  is,  memories,  reflections  and

inferences. It consists, for instance, in deciding that paternity is more

important  than  maternity,  although  it  cannot,  like  the  latter,  be

established by the evidence of the senses, and that for that reason the

child should bear his father’s name and be his heir. Or it declares that

our God is the greatest and mightiest, although he is invisible like a

gale of wind or like the soul. The rejection of a sexual or aggressive

instinctual demand seems to be something quite different from this.

Moreover,  in  the  case  of  some  advances  in  intellectuality  -  for

instance, in the case of the victory of patriarchy - we cannot point to

the authority which lays down the standard which is to be regarded as

higher. It cannot in this case be the father, since he is only elevated

into being an authority by the advance itself. Thus we are faced by the

phenomenon  that  in  the  course  of  the  development  of  humanity

sensuality is gradually overpowered by intellectuality and that men feelproud and exalted by every such advance. But we are unable to say

why this should be so. It further happens later on that intellectuality

itself is overpowered by the very puzzling emotional phenomenon of

faith. Here we have the celebrated ‘credo quia absurdum’, and, once

more,  anyone  who  has  succeeded  in  this  regards  it  as  a  supreme

achievement. Perhaps the common element in all these psychological

situations is something else. Perhaps men simply pronounce that what

is more difficult is higher, and their pride is merely their narcissism

augmented by the consciousness of a difficulty overcome.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4938

 

   These are certainly not very fruitful considerations, and it might be

thought that they have nothing at all to do with our enquiry as to what

has determined the character of the Jewish people. That would only

be  to  our  advantage;  but  a  certain  connection  with  our  problem  is

betrayed nevertheless by a fact which will concern us still more later

on. The religion which began with the prohibition against making an

image of God develops more and more in the course of centuries into

a religion of instinctual renunciations. It is not that it would demand

sexual abstinence;  it  is  content  with  a  marked  restriction  of  sexual

freedom. God, however, becomes entirely removed from sexuality and

elevated into the ideal of ethical perfection. But ethics is a limitation of

instinct.  The  Prophets  are  never  tired  of  asseverating  that  God

requires  nothing  other  from  his  people  than  a  just  and  virtuous

conduct of life - that is, abstention from every instinctual satisfaction

which is still condemned as vicious by our morality to-day as well. And

even the demand for belief in him seems to take a second place in

comparison with the seriousness of these ethical requirements. In this

way  instinctual  renunciation  seems  to  play  a  prominent  part  in  the

religion, even if it did not stand out in it from the first.

   This is the place, however, for an interpolation, in order to avoid a

misunderstanding.  Even  though  it  may  seem  that  instinctual

renunciation  and  the  ethics  founded  on  it  do  not  form  part  of  the

essential content of religion, yet genetically they are most intimatelyconnected with it. Totemism, which is the earliest form of a religion

which we recognize, carries with it, as indispensable constituents of its

system, a number of commands and prohibitions which have no other

significance, of course, than as instinctual renunciations: the worship

of the totem, which includes a prohibition against injuring or killing it,

exogamy - that is, renunciation of the passionately desired mothers

and  sisters  in  the  horde  -  the  granting  of  equal  rights  to  all  the

members of the fraternal alliance - that is, restricting the inclination to

violent rivalry among them. In these regulations are to be seen the first

beginnings of a moral and social order. It does not escape us that two

different motives are at work here. The first two prohibitions operate

on the side of the father who has been got rid of: they carry on his will,

as it were. The third command - the granting of equal rights to the

allied brothers - disregards the father’s will; it is justified by an appeal

to  the  necessity  for  permanently  maintaining  the  new  order  which

succeeded the father’s removal. Otherwise a relapse into the earlier

state would have become inevitable. It is here that social commands

diverge from the others which, as we might say, are derived directly

from religious connections.

      The  essential  part  of  this  course  of  events  is  repeated  in  the

abbreviated development of the human individual. Here, too, it is the

authority  of  the  child’s  parents  -  essentially,  that  of  his  autocratic

father, threatening him with his power to punish - which calls on him

for a renunciation of instinct and which decides for him what is to be

allowed and what forbidden. Later on, when Society and the super-

ego have taken the parents’ place, what in the child was called ‘well-

behaved’ or ‘naughty’ is described as ‘good’ and ‘evil’ or ‘virtuous’ and

‘vicious’. But it is still always the same thing - instinctual renunciation

under the pressure of the authority which replaces and prolongs the

father.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4939

 

   A further depth is added to these discoveries when we examine the

remarkable  concept  of  holiness.  What  is  it  really  that  seems  to  us‘holy’ in preference to other things that we value highly and recognize

as  important?  On  the  one  hand,  the  connection  of  holiness  or

sacredness with what is religious is unmistakable. It is insisted upon

emphatically:  everything  religious  is  sacred,  it  is  the  very  core  of

sacredness.  On  the  other  hand,  our  judgement  is  disturbed  by  the

numerous  attempts  to  apply  the  characteristic  of  sacredness  to  so

many other things - people, institutions, functions - which have little to

do with religion. These efforts serve obvious tendentious purposes.

Let us start from the prohibitive character which is so firmly attached

to sacredness. What is sacred is obviously something that may not be

touched. A sacred prohibition has a very strong emotional tone but

has in fact no rational basis. For why, for instance, should incest with

a daughter or sister be such a specially serious crime - so much worse

than any other sexual intercourse? If we ask for a rational basis we

shall certainly be told that all our feelings rebel against it. But that only

means that people regard the prohibition as self-evident and that they

know of no basis for it.

   It is easy enough to show the futility of such an explanation. What is

represented  as  insulting  our  most  sacred  feelings  was  a  universal

custom  -  we  might  call  it  a  usage  made  holy  -  among  the  ruling

families of the Ancient Egyptians and of other early peoples. It was

taken as a matter of course that a Pharaoh should take his sister as

his first and principal wife; and the later successors of the Pharaohs,

the Greek Ptolemies, did not hesitate to follow that model. We are

compelled, rather, to a realization that incest - in this instance between

a  brother  and  sister  -  was  a  privilege  which  was  withheld  from

common mortals and reserved to kings as representatives of the gods,

just as similarly, no objection was taken to incestuous relations of this

kind in the world of Greek and Germanic legend. It may be suspected

that  the  scrupulous  insistence  upon  equality  of  birth  among  our

aristocracy is a relic of this ancient privilege and it can be established

that, as a result of the inbreeding practised over so many generations

in the highest social strata, Europe is ruled to-day by members of a

single family and a second one.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism                                                                                      4940

 

   Evidence of incest among gods, kings and heroes helps us as well

to  deal  with  another  attempt,  which  seeks  to  explain  the  horror  of

incest  biologically  and  to  trace  it  to  an  obscure  knowledge  of  the

damage done by inbreeding. It is not even certain, however, that there

is  any  danger  of  damage  from  inbreeding  let  alone  that  primitive

peoples can have recognized it and reacted against it. The uncertainty

in defining the permitted and forbidden degrees of kinship argues just

as  little  in  favour  of  the  hypothesis  that  a  ‘natural  feeling’  is  the

ultimate basis of the horror of incest.

   Our construction of prehistory forces us to another explanation. The

command in favour of exogamy, of which the horror of incest is the

negative expression, was a product of the will of the father and carried

this will on after he had been removed. Hence come the strength of its

emotional tone and the impossibility of finding a rational basis for it -

that is, its sacredness. We confidently expect that an investigation of

all the other cases of a sacred prohibition would lead to the same

conclusion as in that of the horror of incest: that what is sacred was

originally nothing other than the prolongation of the will of the primal

father. This would also throw light on the hitherto incomprehensible

ambivalence of the words which express the concept of sacredness. It

is  the  ambivalence  which  in  general  dominates  the  relation  to  the

father. [The Latin] ‘sacer’ means not only ‘sacred’, ‘consecrated’, but

also something that we can only translate as ‘infamous’, ‘detestable’

(e.g. ‘auri sacra fames’). But the father’s will was not only something

which one might not touch, which one had to hold in high respect, but

also something one trembled before, because it demanded a painful

instinctual renunciation. When we hear that Moses made his people

holy by introducing the custom of circumcision we now understand the

deep  meaning  of  that  assertion.  Circumcision  is  the  symbolic

substitute for the castration which the primal father once inflicted upon

his sons in the plenitude of his absolute power, and whoever accepted

that symbol was showing by it that he was prepared to submit to the

father’s will, even if it imposed the most painful sacrifice on him.

   Going back to ethics, we may say in conclusion that a part of its

precepts  are  justified  rationally  by  the  necessity  for  delimiting  therights of society as against the individual, the rights of the individual as

against society and those of individuals as against one another. But

what seems to us so grandiose about ethics, so mysterious and, in a

mystical  fashion,  so  self-evident,  owes  these  characteristics  to  its

connection with religion, its origin from the will of the father.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4941

 

                                            E

 

                              WHAT IS TRUE IN RELIGION

 

      How  enviable,  to  those  of  us  who  are  poor  in  faith,  do  those

enquirers  seem  who  are  convinced  of  the  existence  of  a  Supreme

Being! To that great Spirit the world offers no problems, for he himself

created all its institutions. How comprehensive, how exhaustive and

how  definitive  are  the  doctrines  of  believers  compared  with  the

laborious, paltry and fragmentary attempts at explanation which are

the most we are able to achieve! The divine Spirit, which is itself the

ideal of ethical perfection, has planted in men the knowledge of that

ideal and, at the same time, the urge to assimilate their own nature to

it. They perceive directly what is higher and nobler and what is lower

and  more  base.  Their  affective  life  is  regulated  in  accordance  with

their distance from the ideal at any moment. When they approach to it

- at their perihelion, as it were - they are brought high satisfaction;

when,  at  their  aphelion,  they  have  become  remote  from  it,  the

punishment is severe unpleasure. All of this is laid down so simply and

so unshakeably. We can only regret that certain experiences in life

and observations in the world make it impossible for us to accept the

premiss of the existence of such a Supreme Being. As though the

world  had  not  riddles  enough,  we  are  set  the  new  problem  of

understanding how these other people have been able to acquire their

belief in the Divine Being and whence that belief obtained its immense

power, which overwhelms ‘reason and science’.

   Let us return to the more modest problem which has occupied us

hitherto. We wanted to explain the origin of the special character ofthe Jewish people, a character which is probably what has made their

survival to the present day possible. We found that the man Moses

impressed  this  character  on  them  by  giving  them  a  religion  which

increased  their  self-esteem  so  much  that  they  thought  themselves

superior  to  all  other  peoples.  Thereafter  they  survived  by  keeping

apart  from  others.  Mixtures  of  blood  interfered  little  with  this,  since

what  held  them  together  was  an  ideal  factor,  the  possession  in

common of certain intellectual and emotional wealth. The religion of

Moses led to this result because (1) it allowed the people to take a

share in the grandeur of a new idea of God, (2) it asserted that this

people  had  been  chosen  by  this  great  God  and  were  destined  to

receive  evidences  of  his  special  favour  and  (3)  it  forced  upon  the

people an advance in intellectuality which, important enough in itself,

opened the way, in addition, to the appreciation of intellectual work

and to further renunciations of instinct.

   This is what we have arrived at. And, though we do not wish to take

back any of it, we cannot hide from ourselves that it is somehow or

other unsatisfying. The cause does not, so to speak, match the effect;

the fact that we want to explain seems to be of a different order of

magnitude from everything by which we explain it. May it be that all

the investigations we have so far made have not uncovered the whole

of the motivation but only a certain superficial layer, and that behind it

another  very  important  factor  awaits  discovery?  In  view  of  the

extraordinary complexity of all causation in life and history, something

of the sort was to be expected.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4942

 

      Access  to  this  deeper  motivation  would  seem  to  be  given  at  a

particular point in the previous discussions. The religion of Moses did

not  produce  its  effects  immediately  but  in  a  remarkably  indirect

manner. This does not mean to say simply that it did not work at once,

that it took long periods of time, hundreds of years, to deploy its full

effect, for that is self-evident when it is a question of the imprinting of a

people’s character. But the restriction relates to a fact which we havederived  from  the  history  of  the  Jewish  religion  or,  if  you  like,  have

introduced into it. We have said that after a certain time the Jewish

people rejected the religion of Moses once more - whether they did so

completely or retained some of its precepts we cannot guess. If we

suppose  that  in  the  long  period  of  the  seizure  of  Canaan  and  the

struggle  with  the  peoples  inhabiting  it  the  Yahweh  religion  did  not

differ essentially from the worship of the other Baalim, we shall be on

historical ground in spite of all the later tendentious efforts to throw a

veil over this shaming state of things.

      The  religion  of  Moses,  however,  had  not  disappeared  without

leaving a trace. A kind of memory of it had survived, obscured and

distorted,  supported,  perhaps,  among  individual  members  of  the

priestly caste by ancient records. And it was this tradition of a great

past which continued to work in the background, as it were, which

gradually gained more and more power over men’s minds, and which

finally  succeeded  in  transforming  the  god  Yahweh  into  the  god  of

Moses and in calling back to life the religion of Moses which had been

established and then abandoned long centuries earlier.

      In  a  previous  portion  of  this  study  we  have  considered  what

assumption seems inevitable if we are to find such an achievement of

tradition comprehensible.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4943

 

                                            F

 

                          THE RETURN OF THE REPRESSED

 

   There are a quantity of similar processes among those which the

analytic investigation of mental life has taught us to know. Some of

them are described as pathological, others are counted among the

diversity of normal events. But that matters little, since the boundaries

between the two are not sharply drawn, their mechanisms are to a

large extent the same, and it is of far more importance whether the

alterations  in  question  take  place  in  the  ego  itself  or  whether  they

confront it as alien to it - in which case they are known as symptoms.   From the mass of material I shall first bring forward some cases

which relate to the development of character. Take, for instance, the

girl who has reached a state of the most decided opposition to her

mother.  She  has  cultivated  all  those  characteristics  which  she  has

seen  that  her  mother  lacked,  and  has  avoided  everything  that

reminded her of her mother. We may supplement this by saying that in

her early years, like every female child, she adopted an identification

with  her  mother  and  that  she  is  now  rebelling  against  this

energetically. But when this girl marries and herself becomes a wife

and a mother, we need not be surprised to find that she begins to

grow  more  and  more  like  the  mother  to  whom  she  was  so

antagonistic,  till  finally  the  identification  with  her  which  she

surmounted is unmistakably re-established. The same thing happens

too with boys; and even the great Goethe, who in the period of his

genius certainly looked down upon his unbending and pedantic father,

in  his  old  age  developed  traits  which  formed  a  part  of  his  father’s

character.  The  outcome  can  become  even  more  striking  when  the

contrast  between  the  two  personalities  is  sharper.  A  young  man

whose  fate  it  was  to  grow  up  beside  a  worthless  father,  began  by

developing,  in  defiance  of  him,  into  a  capable,  trustworthy  and

honourable person. In the prime of life his character was reversed,

and  thenceforward  he  behaved  as  though  he  had  taken  this  same

father as a model. In order not to miss the connection with our theme,

we must keep in mind the fact that at the beginning of such a course

of  events  there  is  always  an  identification  with  the  father  in  early

childhood. This is afterwards repudiated, and even overcompensated,

but in the end establishes itself once more.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4944

 

   It has long since become common knowledge that the experiences

of a person’s first five years exercise a determining effect on his life,

which nothing later can withstand. Much that deserves knowing might

be  said  about  the  way  in  which  these  early  impressions  maintain

themselves against any influences in more mature periods of life - butit would not be relevant here. It may, however, be less well known that

the  strongest  compulsive  influence  arises  from  impressions  which

impinge upon a child at a time when we would have to regard his

psychical  apparatus  as  not  yet  completely  receptive.  The  fact  itself

cannot be doubted; but it is so puzzling that we may make it more

comprehensible by comparing it with a photographic exposure which

can be developed after any interval of time and transformed into a

picture. I am nevertheless glad to point out that this uncomfortable

discovery of ours has been anticipated by an imaginative writer, with

the boldness that is permitted to poets. E. T. A. Hoffmann used to

trace back the wealth of figures that put themselves at his disposal for

his creative writings to the changing images and impressions which he

had  experienced  during  a  journey  of  some  weeks  in  a  post-chaise

while he was still an infant at his mother’s breast. What children have

experienced at the age of two and have not understood, need never

be remembered by them except in dreams; they may only come to

know of it through psycho-analytic treatment. But at some later time it

will break into their life with obsessional impulses, it will govern their

actions, it will decide their sympathies and antipathies and will quite

often  determine  their  choice  of  a  love-object,  for  which  it  is  so

frequently impossible to find a rational basis. The two points at which

these facts touch upon our problem cannot be mistaken.

   First, there is the remoteness of the period concerned,¹ which is

recognized here as the truly determining factor - in the special state of

the  memory,  for  instance,  which  in  the  case  of  these  childhood

experiences  we  classify  as  ‘unconscious’.  We  expect  to  find  an

analogy  in  this  with  the  state  which  we  are  seeking  to  attribute  to

tradition in the mental life of the people. It was not easy, to be sure, to

introduce the idea of the unconscious into group psychology.

 

   ¹ Here, too, a poet may speak. In order to explain his attachment, he imagines: ‘Ach, du

warst in abgelebten Zeiten meine Schwester oder meine Frau.’ [Literally: ‘Ah, you were, in a
past life, my sister or my wife.’]
 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4945

    Regular contributions are made to the phenomena we are in search

of by the mechanisms which lead to the formation of neuroses. Here

again the determining events occur in early childhood times, but here

the stress is not upon the time but upon the process by which the

event is met, the reaction to it. We can describe it schematically thus.

As a result of the experience, an instinctual demand arises which calls

for satisfaction. The ego refuses that satisfaction, either because it is

paralysed by the magnitude of the demand or because it recognizes it

as a danger. The former of these grounds is the more primary one;

both of them amount to the avoidance of a situation of danger. The

ego fends off the danger by the process of repression. The instinctual

impulse  is  in  some  way  inhibited,  its  precipitating  cause,  with  its

attendant perceptions and ideas, is forgotten. This, however, is not the

end  of  the  process:  the  instinct  has  either  retained  its  forces,  or

collects them again, or it is reawakened by some new precipitating

cause. Thereupon it renews its demand, and, since the path to normal

satisfaction  remains  closed  to  it  by  what  we  may  call  the  scar  of

repression, somewhere, at a weak spot, it opens another path for itself

to what is known as a substitutive satisfaction, which comes to light as

a symptom, without the acquiescence of the ego, but also without its

understanding. All the phenomena of the formation of symptoms may

justly  be  described  as  the  ‘return  of  the  repressed’.  Their

distinguishing characteristic, however, is the far-reaching distortion to

which the returning material has been subjected as compared with the

original.  It  will  perhaps  be  thought  that  this  last  group  of  facts  has

carried us too far away from the similarity with tradition. But we ought

not  to  regret  it  if  it  has  brought  us  close  to  the  problems  of  the

renunciation of instinct.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4946

 

                                            G

 

                                  HISTORICAL TRUTH

 

   We have undertaken all these psychological diversions in order tomake it more credible to us that the religion of Moses only carried

through its effect on the Jewish people as a tradition. It is likely that we

have not achieved more than a certain degree of probability. Let us

suppose, however, that we have succeeded in completely proving it.

Even so the impression would remain that we have merely satisfied

the qualitative factor of what was demanded, but not the quantitative

one as well. There is an element of grandeur about everything to do

with the origin of a religion, certainly including the Jewish one, and this

is  not  matched  by  the  explanations  we  have  hitherto  given.  Some

other factor must be involved to which there is little that is analogous

and nothing that is of the same kind, something unique and something

of the same order of magnitude as what has come out of it, as religion

itself.

   Let us try to approach the subject from the opposite direction. We

understand how a primitive man is in need of a god as creator of the

universe, as chief of his clan, as personal protector. This god takes his

position  behind  the  dead  fathers,  about  whom  tradition  still  has

something to say. A man of later days, of our own day, behaves in the

same way. He, too, remains childish and in need of protection, even

when he is grown up; he thinks he cannot do without support from his

god. That much is undisputed. But it is less easy to understand why

there  may  only  be  a single  god,  why  precisely  the  advance  from

henotheism  to  monotheism  acquires  an  overwhelming  significance.

No doubt it is true, as we have explained, that the believer has a share

in the greatness of his god; and the greater the god the more reliable

is  the  protection  which  he  can  offer.  But  a  god’s  power  does  not

necessarily  presuppose  that  he  is  the  only  one.  Many  peoples

regarded it only as a glorification of their chief god if he ruled over

other  deities  who  were  inferior  to  him,  and  they  did  not  think  it

diminished his greatness if there were other gods besides him. No

doubt, if this god became a universal one and had all countries and

peoples as his concern, it meant a sacrifice of intimacy, too. It was as

though one were sharing one’s god with the foreigners and one had to

make up for this by the proviso that one was preferred by him. We can

make the further point that the idea of a single god means in itself an

advance  in  intellectuality,  but  it  is  impossible  to  rate  this  point  so

highly. 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4947

 

      Pious  believers,  however,  know  how  to  fill  this  obvious  gap  in

motivation  adequately.  They  say  that  the  idea  of  a  single  god

produced such an overwhelming effect on men because it is a portion

of the eternal truth which, long concealed, came to light at last and

was then bound to carry everyone along with it. We must admit that a

factor of this kind is at last something that matches the magnitude

both of the subject and of its effect.

   We too would like to accept this solution. But we are brought up by a

doubt.  The  pious  argument  rests  on  an  optimistic  and  idealistic

premiss. It has not been possible to demonstrate in other connections

that the human intellect has a particularly fine flair for the truth or that

the  human  mind  shows  any  special  inclination  for  recognizing  the

truth. We have rather found, on the contrary, that our intellect very

easily  goes  astray  without  any  warning,  and  that  nothing  is  more

easily believed by us than what, without reference to the truth, comes

to  meet  our  wishful  illusions.  We  must  for  that  reason  add  a

reservation to our agreement. We too believe that the pious solution

contains the truth - but the historical truth and not the material truth.

And we assume the right to correct a certain distortion to which this

truth  has  been  subjected  on  its  return.  That  is  to  say,  we  do  not

believe that there is a single great god to-day, but that in primaeval

times there was a single person who was bound to appear huge at

that time and who afterwards returned in men’s memory elevated to

divinity.

      We  had  assumed  that  the  religion  of  Moses  was  to  begin  with

rejected  and  half-forgotten  and  afterwards  broke  through  as  a

tradition. We are now assuming that this process was being repeated

then for the second time. When Moses brought the people the idea of

a  single  god,  it  was  not  a  novelty  but  signified  the  revival  of  an

experience in the primaeval ages of the human family which had long

vanished from men’s conscious memory. But it had been so important

and  had  produced  or  paved  the  way  for  such  deeply  penetratingchanges in men’s life that we cannot avoid believing that it had left

behind it in the human mind some permanent traces, which can be

compared to a tradition.

   We have learnt from the psycho-analyses of individuals that their

earliest impressions, received at a time when the child was scarcely

yet capable of speaking, produce at some time or another effects of a

compulsive  character  without  themselves  being  consciously

remembered.  We  believe  we  have  a  right  to  make  the  same

assumption about the earliest experiences of the whole of humanity.

One of these effects would be the emergence of the idea of a single

great god - an idea which must be recognized as a completely justified

memory, though, it is true, one that has been distorted. An idea such

as this has a compulsive character: it must be believed. To the extent

to which it is distorted, it may be described as a delusion; in so far as it

brings  a  return  of  the  past,  it  must  be  called  the truth.  Psychiatric

delusions,  too,  contain  a  small  fragment  of  truth  and  the  patient’s

conviction extends over from this truth on to its delusional wrappings.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4948

 

 

   What follows, from here to the end, is a slightly modified repetition of

the discussions in Part I.

 

   In 1912 I attempted, in my Totem and Taboo, to reconstruct the

ancient situation from which these consequences followed. In doing

so,  I  made  use  of  some  theoretical  ideas  put  forward  by  Darwin,

Atkinson  and  particularly  by  Robertson  Smith,  and  combined  them

with the findings and indications derived from psycho-analysis. From

Darwin I borrowed the hypothesis that human beings originally lived in

small hordes, each of which was under the despotic rule of an older

male who appropriated all the females and castigated or disposed of

the  younger  males,  including  his  sons.  From  Atkinson  I  took,  in

continuation  of  this  account,  the  idea  that  this  patriarchal  system

ended in a rebellion by the sons, who banded together against theirfather, overcame him and devoured him in common. Basing myself on

Robertson  Smith’s  totem  theory,  I  assumed  that  subsequently  the

father-horde gave place to the totemic brother-clan. In order to be able

to live in peace with one another, the victorious brothers renounced

the women on whose account they had, after all, killed their father,

and  instituted  exogamy.  The  power  of  fathers  was  broken  and  the

families were organized as a matriarchy. The ambivalent emotional

attitude of the sons to their father remained in force during the whole

of later development. A particular animal was set up in the father’s

place as a totem. It was regarded as ancestor and protective spirit and

might  not  be  injured  or  killed.  But  once  a  year  the  whole  male

community came together to a ceremonial meal at which the totem

animal  (worshipped  at  all  other  times)  was  torn  to  pieces  and

devoured in common. No one might absent himself from this meal: it

was the ceremonial repetition of the killing of the father, with which

social  order,  moral  laws  and  religion  had  taken  their  start.  The

conformity between Robertson Smith’s totem meal and the Christian

Lord’s Supper had struck a number of writers before me.

   To this day I hold firmly to this construction. I have repeatedly met

with  violent  reproaches  for  not  having  altered  my  opinions  in  later

editions of my book in spite of the fact that more recent ethnologists

have unanimously rejected Robertson Smith’s hypotheses and have in

part  brought  forward  other,  totally  divergent  theories.  I  may  say  in

reply that these ostensible advances are well known to me. But I have

not been convinced either of the correctness of these innovations or of

Robertson Smith’s errors. A denial is not a refutation, an innovation is

not  necessarily  an  advance.  Above  all,  however,  I  am  not  an

ethnologist  but  a  psycho-analyst.  I  had  a  right  to  take  out  of

ethnological literature what I might need for the work of analysis. The

writings  of  Robertson  Smith  -  a  man  of  genius  -  have  given  me

valuable points of contact with the psychological material of analysis

and  indications  for  its  employment.  I  have  never  found  myself  on

common ground with his opponents.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4949 

                                            H

 

                          THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT

 

   I cannot here repeat the contents of Totem and Taboo in greater

detail. But I must undertake to fill up the long stretch between that

hypothetical  primaeval  period  and  the  victory  of  monotheism  in

historical times. After the institution of the combination of brother-clan,

matriarchy, exogamy and totemism, a development began which must

be described as a slow ‘return if the repressed’. Here I am not using

the term ‘the repressed’ in its proper sense. What is in question is

something in a people’s life which is past, lost to view, superseded

and which we venture to compare with what is repressed in the mental

life of an individual. We cannot at first sight say in what form this past

existed during the time of its eclipse. It is not easy for us to carry over

the concepts of individual psychology into group psychology; and I do

not think we gain anything by introducing the concept of a ‘collective’

unconscious. The content of the unconscious, indeed, is in any case a

collective, universal property of mankind. For the moment, then, we

will make shift with the use of analogies. The processes in the life of

peoples which we are studying here are very similar to those familiar

to us in psychopathology, but nevertheless not quite the same. We

must  finally  make  up  our  minds  to  adopt  the  hypothesis  that  the

psychical  precipitates  of  the  primaeval  period  became  inherited

property which, in each fresh generation, called not for acquisition but

only for awakening. In this we have in mind the example of what is

certainly the ‘innate’ symbolism which derives from the period of the

development of speech, which is familiar to all children without their

being instructed, and which is the same among all peoples despite

their different languages. What we may perhaps still lack in certainty

here is made good by other products of psycho-analytic research. We

find that in a number of important relations our children react, not in a

manner corresponding to their own experience, but instinctively, like

the  animals,  in  a  manner  that  is  only  explicable  as  phylogenetic

acquisition.

                                 Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4950

 

      The  return  of  the  repressed  took  place  slowly  and  certainly  not

spontaneously but under the influence of all the changes in conditions

of life which fill the history of human civilization. I cannot give a survey

here of these determinants nor more than a fragmentary enumeration

of the stages of this return. The father once more became the head of

the family, but was not by any means so absolute as the father of the

primal horde had been. The totem animal was replaced by a god in a

series of transitions which are still very plain. To begin with, the god in

human  form  still  bore  an  animal’s  head;  later  he  turned  himself  by

preference  into  that  particular  animal,  and  afterwards  it  became

sacred to him and was his favourite attendant; or he killed the animal

and himself bore its name as an epithet. Between the totem animal

and the god, the hero emerged, often as a preliminary step towards

deification. The idea of a supreme deity seems to have started early,

at first only in a shadowy manner without intruding into men’s daily

interests. As tribes and peoples came together into larger unities, the

gods too organized themselves into families and into hierarchies. One

of them was often elevated into being supreme lord over gods and

men.  After  this,  the  further  step  was  hesitatingly  taken  of  paying

respect to only one god, and finally the decision was taken of giving all

power to a single god and of tolerating no other gods beside him. Only

thus was it that the supremacy of the father of the primal horde was

re-established  and  that  the  emotions  relating  to  him  could  be

repeated.

   The first effect of meeting the being who had so long been missed

and  longed  for  was  overwhelming  and  was  like  the  traditional

description of the law-giving from Mount Sinai. Admiration, awe and

thankfulness for having found grace in his eyes - the religion of Moses

knew  none  but  these  positive  feelings  towards  the  father-god.  The

conviction of his irresistibility, the submission to his will, could not have

been more unquestioning in the helpless and intimidated son of the

father of the horde - indeed those feelings only become fully intelligible

when  they  are  transposed  into  the  primitive  and  infantile  setting.  A

child’s emotional impulses are intensely and inexhaustibly deep to adegree quite other than those of an adult; only religious ecstasy can

bring  them  back.  A  rapture  of  devotion  to  God  was  thus  the  first

reaction to the return of the great father.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4951

 

   The direction to be taken by this father-religion was in this may laid

down for all time. Yet this did not bring its development to an end.

Ambivalence is a part of the essence of the relation to the father: in

the course of time the hostility too could not fail to stir, which had once

driven the sons into killing their admired and dreaded father. There

was no place in the framework of the religion of Moses for a direct

expression of the murderous hatred of the father. All that could come

to light was a mighty reaction against it - a sense of guilt on account of

that hostility, a bad conscience for having sinned against God and for

not ceasing to sin. This sense of guilt, which was uninterruptedly kept

awake by the Prophets, and which soon formed an essential part of

the  religious  system,  had  yet  another  superficial  motivation,  which

neatly  disguised  its  true  origin.  Things  were  going  badly  for  the

people; the hopes resting on the favour of God failed in fulfilment; it

was not easy to maintain the illusion, loved above all else, of being

God’s  chosen  people.  If  they  wished  to  avoid  renouncing  that

happiness, a sense of guilt on account of their own sinfulness offered

a welcome means of exculpating God: they deserved no better than to

be punished by him since they had not obeyed his commandments.

And,  driven  by  the  need  to  satisfy  this  sense  of  guilt,  which  was

insatiable and came from sources so much deeper, they must make

those commandments grow ever stricter, more meticulous and even

more trivial. In a fresh rapture of moral asceticism they imposed more

and more new instinctual renunciations on themselves and in that way

reached - in doctrine and precept, at least - ethical heights which had

remained inaccessible to the other peoples of antiquity. Many Jews

regard  this  attainment  of  ethical  heights  as  the  second  main

characteristic and the second great achievement of their religion. The

way in which it was connected with the first one - the idea of a singlegod - should be plain from our remarks. These ethical ideas cannot,

however, disavow their origin from the sense of guilt felt on account of

a  suppressed  hostility  to  God.  They  possess  the  characteristic  -

uncompleted  and  incapable  of  completion  -  of  obsessional  neurotic

reaction-formations;  we  can  guess,  too,  that  they  serve  the  secret

purposes of punishment.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4952

 

   The further development takes us beyond Judaism. The remainder

of what returned from the tragic drama of the primal father was no

longer reconcilable in any way with the religion of Moses. The sense

of guilt of those days was very far from being any longer restricted to

the Jewish people; it had caught hold of all the Mediterranean peoples

as a dull malaise, a premonition of calamity for which no one could

suggest a reason. Historians of our day speak of an ageing of ancient

civilization, but I suspect that they have only grasped accidental and

contributory  causes  of  this  depressed  mood  of  the  peoples.  The

elucidation  of  this  situation  of  depression  sprang  from  Jewry.

Irrespectively  of  all  the  approximations  and  preparations  in  the

surrounding world, it was after all a Jewish man, Saul of Tarsus (who,

as a Roman citizen, called himself Paul), in whose spirit the realization

first emerged: ‘the reason we are so unhappy is that we have killed

God the father.’ And it is entirely understandable that he could only

grasp this piece of truth in the delusional disguise of the glad tidings:

‘we are freed from all guilt since one of us has sacrificed his life to

absolve  us.’  In  this  formula  the  killing  of  God  was  of  course  not

mentioned, but a crime that had to be atoned by the sacrifice of a

victim  could  only  have  been  a  murder.  And  the  intermediate  step

between  the  delusion  and  the  historical  truth  was  provided  by  the

assurance that the victim of the sacrifice had been God’s son. With

the strength which it derived from the source of historical truth, this

new  faith  overthrew  every  obstacle.  The  blissful  sense  of  being

chosen was replaced by the liberating sense of redemption. But the

fact of the parricide, in returning to the memory of mankind, had toovercome  greater  resistances  than  the  other  fact,  which  had

constituted the subject-matter of monotheism; it was also obliged to

submit  to  a  more  powerful  distortion.  The  unnameable  crime  was

replaced by the hypothesis of what must be described as a shadowy

‘original sin’.

 


                                Moses And Monotheism

                                                                                      4953

 

   Original sin and redemption by the sacrifice of a victim became the

foundation stones of the new religion founded by Paul. It must remain

uncertain whether there was a ringleader and instigator to the murder

among the band of brothers who rebelled against the primal father, or

whether such a figure was created later by the imagination of creative

artists  in  order  to  turn  themselves  into  heroes,  and  was  then

introduced into the tradition. After the Christian doctrine had burst the

framework  of  Judaism,  it  took  up  components  from  many  other

sources, renounced a number of characteristics of pure monotheism

and  adapted  itself  in  many  details  to  the  rituals  of  the  other

Mediterranean peoples. It was as though Egypt was taking vengeance

once more on the heirs of Akhenaten. It is worth noticing how the new

religion dealt with the ancient ambivalence in the relation to the father.

Its  main  content  was,  it  is  true,  reconciliation  with  God  the  Father,

atonement for the crime committed against him; but the other side of

the emotional relation showed itself in the fact that the son, who had

taken the atonement on himself, became a god himself beside the

father and, actually, in place of the father. Christianity, having arisen

out of a father-religion, became a son-religion. It has not escaped the

fate of having to get rid of the father.

   Only a portion of the Jewish people accepted the new doctrine.

Those  who  refused  to  are  still  called  Jews  to-day.  Owing  to  this

cleavage, they have become even more sharply divided from other

peoples  than  before.  They  were  obliged  to  hear  the  new  religious

community  (which,  besides  Jews,  included  Egyptians,  Greeks,

Syrians, Romans and eventually Germans) reproach them with having

murdered God. In full, this reproach would run as follows: ‘They willnot accept it as true that they murdered God, whereas we admit it and

have been cleansed of that guilt.’ It is easy therefore to see how much

truth lies behind this reproach. A special enquiry would be called for to

discover why it has been impossible for the Jews to join in this forward

step which was implied, in spite of all its distortions, by the admission

of having murdered God. In a certain sense they have in that way

taken a tragic load of guilt on themselves; they have been made to

pay heavy penance for it.

 

      Our  investigation  may  perhaps  have  thrown  a  little  light  on  the

question of how the Jewish people have acquired the characteristics

which distinguish them. Less light has been thrown on the problem of

how it is that they have been able to retain their individuality till the

present day. But exhaustive answers to such riddles cannot in fairness

be either demanded or expected. A contribution, to be judged in view

of the limitations which I mentioned at the start, is all that I can offer.

                                                                                       4954

 

                    AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

                                        (1940)

 


                                                                                      4955

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4956

 

 

                    AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

The aim of this brief work is to bring together the tenets of psycho-

analysis  and  to  state  them,  as  it  were,  dogmatically  -  in  the  most

concise  form  and  in  the  most  unequivocal  terms.  Its  intention  is

naturally not to compel belief or to arouse conviction.

      The  teachings  of  psycho-analysis  are  based  on  an  incalculable

number of observations and experiences, and only someone who has

repeated those observations on himself and on others is in a position

to arrive at a judgement of his own upon it.

 

 

                                        PART I

 

                                        CHAPTER I

 

                        THE PSYCHICAL APPARATUS

 

Psycho-analysis makes a basic assumption, the discussion of which is

reserved to philosophical thought but the justification for which lies in

its results. We know two kinds of things about what we call our psyche

(or mental life): firstly, its bodily organ and scene of action, the brain

(or  nervous  system)  and,  on  the  other  hand,  our  acts  ofconsciousness,  which  are  immediate  data  and  cannot  be  further

explained by any sort of description. Everything that lies between is

unknown  to  us,  and  the  data  do  not  include  any  direct  relation

between these two terminal points of our knowledge. If it existed, it

would  at  the  most  afford  an  exact  localization  of  the  processes  of

consciousness  and  would  give  us  no  help  towards  understanding

them.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4957

 

   Our two hypotheses start out from these ends or beginnings of our

knowledge. The first is concerned with localization. We assume that

mental life is the function of an apparatus to which we ascribe the

characteristics of being extended in space and of being made up of

several  portions  -  which  we  imagine,  that  is,  as  resembling  a

telescope  or  microscope  or  something  of  the  kind.  Notwithstanding

some earlier attempts in the same direction, the consistent working-

out of a conception such as this is a scientific novelty.

   We have arrived at our knowledge of this psychical apparatus by

studying the individual development of human beings. To the oldest of

these  psychical  provinces  or  agencies  we  give  the  name  of id.  It

contains everything that is inherited, that is present at birth, that is laid

down  in  the  constitution  -  above  all,  therefore,  the  instincts,  which

originate from the somatic organization and which find a first psychical

expression here in forms unknown to us.¹

   Under the influence of the real external world around us, one portion

of  the  id  has  undergone  a  special  development.  From  what  was

originally  a  cortical  layer,  equipped  with  the  organs  for  receiving

stimuli and with arrangements for acting as a protective shield against

stimuli, a special organization has arisen which henceforward acts as

an intermediary between the id and the external world. To this region

of our mind we have given the name of ego.

   Here are the principal characteristics of the ego. In consequence of

the  pre-established  connection  between  sense  perception  and

muscular action, the ego has voluntary movement at its command. Ithas  the  task  of  self-preservation.  As  regards external  events,  it

performs  that  task  by  becoming  aware  of  stimuli,  by  storing  up

experiences  about  them  (in  the  memory),  by  avoiding  excessively

strong  stimuli  (through  flight),  by  dealing  with  moderate  stimuli

(through adaptation) and finally by learning to bring about expedient

changes in the external world to its own advantage (through activity).

As regards internal events, in relation to the id, it performs that task by

gaining control over the demands of the instincts, by deciding whether

they are to be allowed satisfaction, by postponing that satisfaction to

times  and  circumstances  favourable  in  the  external  world  or  by

suppressing  their  excitations  entirely.  It  is  guided  in  its  activity  by

consideration  of  the  tensions  produced  by  stimuli,  whether  these

tensions are present in it or introduced into it. The raising of these

tensions  is  in  general  felt  as unpleasure  and  their  lowering  as

pleasure.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  what  is  felt  as  pleasure  or

unpleasure is not the absolute height of this tension but something in

the rhythm of the changes in them. The ego strives after pleasure and

seeks to avoid unpleasure. An increase in unpleasure that is expected

and foreseen is met by a signal of anxiety; the occasion of such an

increase, whether it threatens from without or within, is known as a

danger. From time to time the ego gives up its connection with the

external world and withdraws into the state of sleep, in which it makes

far-reaching changes in its organization. It is to be inferred from the

state of sleep that this organization consists in a particular distribution

of mental energy.

 

   ¹ This oldest portion of the psychical apparatus remains the most important throughout life;

moreover, the investigations of psycho-analysis started with it.
 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4958

 

   The long period of childhood, during which the growing human being

lives in dependence on his parents, leaves behind it as a precipitate

the formation in his ego of a special agency in which this parental

influence is prolonged. It has received the name of super-ego. In so

far as this super-ego is differentiated from the ego or is opposed to it,it constitutes a third power which the ego must take into account.

   An action by the ego is as it should be if it satisfies simultaneously

the demands of the id, of the super-ego and of reality - that is to say, if

it is able to reconcile their demands with one another. The details of

the relation between the ego and the super-ego become completely

intelligible  when  they  are  traced  back  to  the  child’s  attitude  to  its

parents. This parental influence of course includes in its operation not

only the personalities of the actual parents but also the family, racial

and  national  traditions  handed  on  through  them,  as  well  as  the

demands of the immediate social milieu which they represent. In the

same  way,  the  super-ego,  in  the  course  of  an  individual’s

development,  receives  contributions  from  later  successors  and

substitutes of his parents, such as teachers and models in public life

of  admired  social  ideals.  It  will  be  observed  that,  for  all  their

fundamental difference, the id and the super-ego have one thing in

common: they both represent the influences of the past - the id the

influence of heredity, the super-ego the influence, essentially, of what

is  taken  over  from  other  people  -  whereas  the  ego  is  principally

determined by the individual’s own experience, that is by accidental

and contemporary events.

   This general schematic picture of a psychical apparatus may be

supposed to apply as well to the higher animals which resemble man

mentally. A super-ego must be presumed to be present wherever, as

is  the  case  with  man,  there  is  a  long  period  of  dependence  in

childhood.  A  distinction  between  ego  and  id  is  an  unavoidable

assumption.  Animal  psychology  has  not  yet  taken  in  hand  the

interesting problem which is here presented.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4959
 
 
                                        CHAPTER II

 

                      THE THEORY OF THE INSTINCTS

 

The  power  of  the  id  expresses  the  true  purpose  of  the  individualorganism’s life. This consists in the satisfaction of its innate needs. No

such purpose as that of keeping itself alive or of protecting itself from

dangers by means of anxiety can be attributed to the id. That is the

task  of  the  ego,  whose  business  it  also  is  to  discover  the  most

favourable and least perilous method of obtaining satisfaction, taking

the external world into account. The super-ego may bring fresh needs

to the fore, but its main function remains the limitation of satisfactions.

   The forces which we assume to exist behind the tensions caused by

the needs of the id are called instincts. They represent the somatic

demands upon the mind. Though they are the ultimate cause of all

activity, they are of a conservative nature; the state, whatever it may

be, which an organism has reached gives rise to a tendency to re-

establish  that  state  so  soon  as  it  has  been  abandoned.  It  is  thus

possible to distinguish an indeterminate number of instincts, and in

common practice this is in fact done. For us, however, the important

question  arises  whether  it  may  not  be  possible  to  trace  all  these

numerous  instincts  back  to  a  few  basic  ones.  We  have  found  that

instincts can change their aim (by displacement) and also that they

can replace one another - the energy of one instinct passing over to

another. This latter process is still insufficiently understood. After long

hesitancies and vacillations we have decided to assume the existence

of  only  two  basic  instincts, Eros  and the  destructive  instinct.  (The

contrast  between  the  instincts  of  self-preservation  and  the

preservation of the species, as well as the contrast between ego-love

and object-love, fall within Eros.) The aim of the first of these basic

instincts is to establish ever greater unities and to preserve them thus

- in short, to bind together; the aim of the second is, on the contrary, to

undo  connections  and  so  to  destroy  things.  In  the  case  of  the

destructive instinct we may suppose that its final aim is to lead what is

living into an inorganic state. For this reason we also call it the death

instinct.  If  we  assume  that  living  things  came  later  than  inanimate

ones  and  arose  from  them,  then  the  death  instinct  fits  in  with  the

formula we have proposed to the effect that instincts tend towards a

return to an earlier state. In the case of Eros (or the love instinct) we

cannot  apply  this  formula.  To  do  so  would  presuppose  that  living

substance was once a unity which had later been torn apart and was

now striving towards re-union.¹ 

   ¹ Creative writers have imagined something of the sort, but nothing like it is known to us

from the actual history of living substance.
 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4960

 

   In biological functions the two basic instincts operate against each

other  or  combine  with  each  other.  Thus,  the  act  of  eating  is  a

destruction of the object with the final aim of incorporating it, and the

sexual  act  is  an  act  of  aggression  with  the  purpose  of  the  most

intimate union. This concurrent and mutually opposing action of the

two  basic  instincts  gives  rise  to  the  whole  variegation  of  the

phenomena  of  life.  The  analogy  of  our  two  basic  instincts  extends

from  the  sphere  of  living  things  to  the  pair  of  opposing  forces  -

attraction and repulsion - which rule in the inorganic world.¹

   Modifications in the proportions of the fusion between the instincts

have the most tangible results. A surplus of sexual aggressiveness will

turn  a  lover  into  a  sex-murderer,  while  a  sharp  diminution  in  the

aggressive factor will make him bashful or impotent.

   There can be no question of restricting one or the other of the basic

instincts to one of the provinces of the mind. They must necessarily be

met with everywhere. We may picture an initial state as one in which

the total available energy of Eros, which henceforward we shall speak

of as ‘libido’, is present in the still undifferentiated ego-id and serves to

neutralize  the  destructive  tendencies  which  are  simultaneously

present. (We are without a term analogous to ‘libido’ for describing the

energy  of  the  destructive  instinct.)  At  a  later  stage  it  becomes

relatively easy for us to follow the vicissitudes of the libido, but this is

more difficult with the destructive instinct.

 

   ¹ This picture of the basic forces or instincts, which still arouses much opposition among

analysts, was already familiar to the philosopher Empedocles of Acragas.
 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4961

    So long as that instinct operates internally, as a death instinct, it

remains silent; it only comes to our notice when it is diverted outwards

as  an  instinct  of  destruction.  It  seems  to  be  essential  for  the

preservation  of  the  individual  that  this  diversion  should  occur;  the

muscular  apparatus  serves  this  purpose.  When  the  super-ego  is

established,  considerable  amounts  of  the  aggressive  instinct  are

fixated in the interior of the ego and operate there self-destructively.

This is one of the dangers to health by which human beings are faced

on their path to cultural development. Holding back aggressiveness is

in general unhealthy and leads to illness (to mortification). A person in

a  fit  of  rage  will  often  demonstrate  how  the  transition  from

aggressiveness  that  has  been  prevented  to  self-destructiveness  is

brought  about  by  diverting  the  aggressiveness  against  himself:  he

tears his hair or beats his face with his fists, though he would evidently

have preferred to apply this treatment to someone else. Some portion

of self-destructiveness remains within, whatever the circumstances; till

at last it succeeds in killing the individual, not, perhaps, until his libido

has been used up or fixated in a disadvantageous way. Thus it may in

general be suspected that the individual dies of his internal conflicts

but  that  the species  dies  of  its  unsuccessful  struggle  against  the

external  world  if  the  latter  changes  in  a  fashion  which  cannot  be

adequately  dealt  with  by  the  adaptations  which  the  species  has

acquired.

   It is hard to say anything of the behaviour of the libido in the id and

in the super-ego. All that we know about it relates to the ego, in which

at first the whole available quota of libido is stored up. We call this

state  absolute,  primary narcissism.  It  lasts  till  the  ego  begins  to

cathect the ideas of objects with libido, to transform narcissistic libido

into object-libido. Throughout the whole of life the ego remains the

great reservoir from which libidinal cathexes are sent out to objects

and into which they are also once more withdrawn, just as an amoeba

behaves with its pseudopodia. It is only when a person is completely

in love that the main quota of libido is transferred on to the object and

the object to some extent takes the place of the ego. A characteristic

of the libido which is important in life is its mobility, the facility with

which it passes from one object to another. This must be contrasted

with the fixation of the libido to particular objects, which often persiststhroughout life.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4962

 

   There can be no question but that the libido has somatic sources,

that it streams to the ego from various organs and parts of the body.

This is most clearly seen in the case of that portion of the libido which,

from its instinctual aim, is described as sexual excitation. The most

prominent of the parts of the body from which this libido arises are

known by the name of ‘erotogenic zones’, though in fact the whole

body is an erotogenic zone of this kind. The greater part of what we

know about Eros - that is to say, about its exponent, the libido - has

been gained from a study of the sexual function, which, indeed, on the

prevailing  view,  even  if  not  according  to  our  theory,  coincides  with

Eros. We have been able to form a picture of the way in which the

sexual urge, which is destined to exercise a decisive influence on our

life, gradually develops out of successive contributions from a number

of component instincts, which represent particular erotogenic zones.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4963
 
 
                                        CHAPTER III

 

          THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SEXUAL FUNCTION

 

According to the prevailing view human sexual life consists essentially

in an endeavour to bring one’s own genitals into contact with those of

someone of the opposite sex. With this are associated, as accessory

phenomena  and  introductory  acts,  kissing  this  extraneous  body,

looking at it and touching it. This endeavour is supposed to make its

appearance at puberty - that is, at the age of sexual maturity - and to

serve the purposes of reproduction. Nevertheless, certain facts have

always been known which do not fit into the narrow framework of thisview. (1) It is a remarkable fact that there are people who are only

attracted by individuals of their own sex and by their genitals. (2) It is

equally  remarkable  that  there  are  people  whose  desires  behave

exactly like sexual ones but who at the same time entirely disregard

the sexual organs or their normal use; people of this kind are known

as ‘perverts’. (3) And lastly it is a striking thing that some children (who

are on that account regarded as degenerate) take a very early interest

in their genitals and show signs of excitation in them.

   It may well be believed that psycho-analysis provoked astonishment

and denials when, partly on the basis of these three neglected facts, it

contradicted all the popular opinions on sexuality. Its principal findings

are as follows:

   (a) Sexual life does not begin only at puberty, but starts with plain

manifestations soon after birth.

   (b) It is necessary to distinguish sharply between the concepts of

‘sexual’ and ‘genital’. The former is the wider concept and includes

many activities that have nothing to do with the genitals.

   (c) Sexual life includes the function of obtaining pleasure from zones

of the body - a function which is subsequently brought into the service

of reproduction. The two functions often fail to coincide completely.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4964

 

      The  chief  interest  is  naturally  focused  on  the  first  of  these

assertions, the most unexpected of all. It has been found that in early

childhood there are signs of bodily activity to which only an ancient

prejudice  could  deny  the  name  of  sexual  and  which  are  linked  to

psychical phenomena that we come across later in adult erotic life -

such as fixation to particular objects, jealousy, and so on. It is further

found,  however,  that  these  phenomena  which  emerge  in  early

childhood form part of an ordered course of development, that they

pass through a regular process of increase, reaching a climax towards

the end of the fifth year, after which there follows a lull. During this lull

progress is at a standstill and much is unlearnt and there is much

recession. After the end of this period of latency, as it is called, sexuallife  advances  once  more  with  puberty;  we  might  say  that  it  has  a

second efflorescence. And here we come upon the fact that the onset

of sexual life is diphasic, that it occurs in two waves - something that is

unknown except in man and evidently has an important bearing on

hominization.¹ It is not a matter of indifference that the events of this

early  period,  except  for  a  few  residues,  fall  a  victim  to infantile

amnesia.  Our  views  on  the  aetiology  of  the  neuroses  and  our

technique of analytic therapy are derived from these conceptions; and

our tracing of the developmental processes in this early period has

also provided evidence for yet other conclusions.

 

   ¹ Cf. the suggestion that man is descended from a mammal which reached sexual maturity

at the age of five, but that some major external influence was brought to bear on the species
and  at  that  point  interrupted  the  straight  course  of  development  of  sexuality.  Other
transformations in the sexual life of man as compared with that of animals might be connected
with this - such as the abolition of the periodicity of the libido and the exploitation of the part
played by menstruation in the relation between the sexes.
 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4965

 

      The  first  organ  to  emerge  as  an  erotogenic  zone  and  to  make

libidinal demands on the mind is, from the time of birth onwards, the

mouth.  To  begin  with,  all  psychical  activity  is  concentrated  on

providing satisfaction for the needs of that zone. Primarily, of course,

this satisfaction serves the purpose of self-preservation by means of

nourishment; but physiology should not be confused with psychology.

The baby’s obstinate persistence in sucking gives evidence at an early

stage of a need for satisfaction which, though it originates from and is

instigated by the taking of nourishment, nevertheless strives to obtain

pleasure independently of nourishment and for that reason may and

should be termed sexual

   During this oral phase sadistic impulses already occur sporadically

along with the appearance of the teeth. Their extent is far greater in

the  second  phase,  which  we  describe  as  the  sadistic-anal  one,

because satisfaction is then sought in aggression and in the excretory

function.  Our  justification  for  including  aggressive  urges  under  the

libido  is  based  on  the  view  that  sadism  is  an  instinctual  fusion  ofpurely  libidinal  and  purely  destructive  urges,  a  fusion  which

thenceforward persists uninterruptedly.¹

   The third phase is that known as the phallic one, which is, as it were,

a forerunner of the final form taken by sexual life and already much

resembles it. It is to be noted that it is not the genitals of both sexes

that play a part at this stage, but only the male ones (the phallus). The

female  genitals  long  remain  unknown:  in  children’s  attempts  to

understand the sexual processes they pay homage to the venerable

cloacal theory - a theory which has a genetic justification.²

   With the phallic phase and in the course of it the sexuality of early

childhood  reaches  its  height  and  approaches  its  dissolution.

Thereafter boys and girls have different histories. Both have begun to

put their intellectual activity at the service of sexual researches; both

start off from the premiss of the universal presence of the penis. But

now  the  paths  of  the  sexes  diverge.  The  boy  enters  the  Oedipus

phase;  he  begins  to  manipulate  his  penis  and  simultaneously  has

phantasies of carrying out some sort of activity with it in relation to his

mother, till, owing to the combined effect of a threat of castration and

the sight of the absence of a penis in females, he experiences the

greatest trauma of his life and this introduces the period of latency

with all its consequences. The girl, after vainly attempting to do the

same as the boy, comes to recognize her lack of a penis or rather the

inferiority of her clitoris, with permanent effects on the development of

her character; as a result of this first disappointment in rivalry, she

often begins by turning away altogether from sexual life.

 

   ¹ The question arises whether the satisfaction of purely destructive instinctual impulses can

be  felt  as  pleasure,  whether  pure  destructiveness  without  any  libidinal  admixture  occurs.
Satisfaction  of  the  death  instinct  remaining  in  the  ego  seems  not  to  produce  feelings  of
pleasure, though masochism represents a fusion which is entirely analogous to sadism.

   ² The occurrence of early vaginal excitations is often asserted. But it is most probable that

what is in question are excitations in the clitoris - that is, in an organ analogous to the penis.
This does not invalidate our right to describe the phase as phallic.
 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4966

 

   It would be a mistake to suppose that these three phases succeedone  another  in  a  clear-cut  fashion.  One  may  appear  in  addition  to

another; they may overlap one another, may be present alongside of

one another. In the early phases the different component instincts set

about their pursuit of pleasure independently of one another; in the

phallic  phase  there  are  the  beginnings  of  an  organization  which

subordinates  the  other  urges  to  the  primacy  of  the  genitals  and

signifies  the  start  of  a  co-ordination  of  the  general  urge  towards

pleasure into the sexual function. The complete organization is only

achieved at puberty, in a fourth, genital phase. A state of things is then

established in which (1) some earlier libidinal cathexes are retained,

(2) others are taken into the sexual function as preparatory, auxiliary

acts,  the  satisfaction  of  which  produces  what  is  known  as  fore-

pleasure, and (3) other urges are excluded from the organization, and

are either suppressed altogether (repressed) or are employed in the

ego in another way, forming character-traits or undergoing sublimation

with a displacement of their aims.

   This process is not always performed faultlessly. Inhibitions in its

development manifest themselves as the many sorts of disturbance in

sexual life. When this is so, we find fixations of the libido to conditions

in  earlier  phases,  whose  urge,  which  is  independent  of  the  normal

sexual  aim,  is  described  as perversion.  One  such  developmental

inhibition, for instance, is homosexuality when it is manifest. Analysis

shows that in every case a homosexual object-tie was present and in

most cases persisted in a latent condition. The situation is complicated

by the fact that as a rule the processes necessary for bringing about a

normal  outcome  are  not  completely  present  or  absent,  but partially

present,  so  that  the  final  result  remains  dependent  on  these

quantitative relations. In these circumstances the genital organization

is, it is true, attained, but it lacks those portions of the libido which

have  not  advanced  with  the  rest  and  have  remained  fixated  to

pregenital  objects  and  aims.  This  weakening  shows  itself  in  a

tendency, if there is an absence of genital satisfaction or if there are

difficulties in the real external world, for the libido to hark back to its

earlier pregenital cathexes (regression).

   During the study of the sexual functions we have been able to gain a

first, preliminary conviction, or rather a suspicion, of two discoveries

which will later be found to be important over the whole of our field.Firstly, the normal and abnormal manifestations observed by us (that

is, the phenomenology of the subject) need to be described from the

point of view of their dynamics and economics (in our case, from the

point  of  view  of  the  quantitative  distribution  of  the  libido).  And

secondly, the aetiology of the disorders which we study is to be looked

for in the individual’s developmental history - that is to say, in his early

life.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4967

 

 
                                      CHAPTER IV

 

                              PSYCHICAL QUALITIES

 

I  have  described  the  structure  of  the  psychical  apparatus  and  the

energies  or  forces  which  are  active  in  it,  and  I  have  traced  in  a

prominent example the way in which those energies (in the main, the

libido) organize themselves into a physiological function which serves

the purpose of the preservation of the species. There was nothing in

all  this  to  demonstrate  the  quite  peculiar  characteristic  of  what  is

psychical, apart, of course, from the empirical fact that this apparatus

and these energies are the basis of the functions which we describe

as  our  mental  life.  I  will  now  turn  to  something  which  is  uniquely

characteristic of what is psychical, and which, indeed, according to a

very widely held opinion, coincides with it to the exclusion of all else.

   The starting-point for this investigation is provided by a fact without

parallel,  which  defies  all  explanation  or  description  -  the  fact  of

consciousness. Nevertheless, if anyone speaks of consciousness we

know  immediately  and  from  our  most  personal  experience  what  is

meant  by  it.¹  Many  people,  both  inside  and  outside  science,  are

satisfied with the assumption that consciousness alone is psychical; in

that case nothing remains for psychology but to discriminate among

psychical  phenomena  between  perceptions,  feelings,  thought-

processes and volitions. It is generally agreed, however, that these

conscious  processes  do  not  form  unbroken  sequences  which  arecomplete  in  themselves;  there  would  thus  be  no  alternative  left  to

assuming  that  there  are  physical  or  somatic  processes  which  are

concomitant with the psychical ones and which we should necessarily

have to recognize as more complete than the psychical sequences,

since some of them would have conscious processes parallel to them

but others would not. If so, it of course becomes plausible to lay the

stress in psychology on these somatic processes, to see in them the

true  essence  of  what  is  psychical  and  to  look  for  some  other

assessment of the conscious processes. The majority of philosophers,

however, as well as many other people, dispute this and declare that

the  idea  of  something  psychical  being  unconscious  is  self-

contradictory.

 

   ¹ One extreme line of thought, exemplified in the American doctrine of behaviourism, thinks

it possible to construct a psychology which disregards this fundamental fact!
 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4968

 

   But that is precisely what psycho-analysis is obliged to assert, and

this is its second fundamental hypothesis. It explains the supposedly

somatic concomitant phenomena as being what is truly psychical, and

thus in the first instance disregards the quality of consciousness. It is

not alone in doing this. Some thinkers (such as Theodor Lipps, for

instance) have asserted the same thing in the same words; and the

general dissatisfaction with the usual view of what is psychical has

resulted  in  an  increasingly  urgent  demand  for  the  inclusion  in

psychological thought of a concept of the unconscious, though this

demand has taken such an indefinite and obscure form that it could

have no influence on science.

   Now it would look as though this dispute between psycho-analysis

and philosophy is concerned only with a trifling matter of definition -

the question whether the name ‘psychical’ should be applied to one or

another  sequence  of  phenomena.  In  fact,  however,  this  step  has

become  of  the  highest  significance.  Whereas  the  psychology  of

consciousness never went beyond the broken sequences which were

obviously dependent on something else, the other view, which heldthat the psychical is unconscious in itself, enabled psychology to take

its place as a natural science like any other. The processes with which

it is concerned are in themselves just as unknowable as those dealt

with by other sciences, by chemistry or physics, for example; but it is

possible  to  establish  the  laws  which  they  obey  and  to  follow  their

mutual relations and interdependences unbroken over long stretches -

in short, to arrive at what is described as an ‘understanding’ of the

field  of  natural  phenomena  in  question.  This  cannot  be  effected

without  framing  fresh  hypotheses  and  creating  fresh  concepts;  but

these are not to be despised as evidence of embarrassment on our

part but deserve on the contrary to be appreciated as an enrichment

of science. They can lay claim to the same value as approximations

that  belongs  to  the  corresponding  intellectual  scaffolding  found  in

other natural sciences, and we look forward to their being modified,

corrected  and  more  precisely  determined  as  further  experience  is

accumulated and sifted. So too it will be entirely in accordance with

our  expectations  if  the  basic  concepts  and  principles  of  the  new

science (instinct, nervous energy, etc.) remain for a considerable time

no less indeterminate than those of the older sciences (force, mass,

attraction, etc.).

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4969

 

   Every science is based on observations and experiences arrived at

through the medium of our psychical apparatus. But since our science

has as its subject that apparatus itself, the analogy ends here. We

make our observations through the medium of the same perceptual

apparatus, precisely with the help of the breaks in the sequence of

‘psychical’  events:  we  fill  in  what  is  omitted  by  making  plausible

inferences and translating it into conscious material. In this way we

construct, as it were, a sequence of conscious events complementary

to the unconscious psychical processes. The relative certainty of our

psychical science is based on the binding force of these inferences.

Anyone who enters deeply into our work will find that our technique

holds its ground against any criticism.   In the course of this work the distinctions which we describe as

psychical qualities force themselves on our notice. There is no need to

characterize  what  we  call  ‘conscious’:  it  is  the  same  as  the

consciousness of philosophers and of everyday opinion. Everything

else psychical is in our view ‘the unconscious’. We are soon led to

make  an  important  division  in  this  unconscious.  Some  processes

become conscious easily; they may then cease to be conscious, but

can become conscious once more without any trouble: as people say,

they  can  be  reproduced  or  remembered.  This  reminds  us  that

consciousness is in general a highly fugitive state. What is conscious

is conscious only for a moment. If our perceptions do not confirm this,

the contradiction is only an apparent one; it is explained by the fact

that the stimuli which lead to perception may persist for considerable

periods, so that meanwhile the perception of them may be repeated.

The whole position is made clear in connection with the conscious

perception of our thought-processes: these too may persist for some

time, but they may just as well pass in a flash. Everything unconscious

that  behaves  in  this  way,  that  can  thus  easily  exchange  the

unconscious  state  for  the  conscious  one,  is  therefore  preferably

described  as  ‘capable  of  becoming  conscious’  or  as preconscious.

Experience  has  taught  us  that  there  is  hardly  a  psychical  process,

however  complicated  it  may  be,  which  cannot  on  occasion  remain

preconscious, even though as a rule it will, as we say, push its way

forward into consciousness. There are other psychical processes and

psychical  material  which  have  no  such  easy  access  to  becoming

conscious  but  must  be  inferred,  recognized  and  translated  into

conscious form in the manner described. For such material we reserve

the name of the unconscious proper.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4970

 

   Thus we have attributed three qualities to psychical processes: they

are  either  conscious,  preconscious  or  unconscious.  The  division

between the three classes of material which possess these qualities is

neither  absolute  nor  permanent.  What  is  preconscious  becomesconscious, as we have seen, without any assistance from us; what is

unconscious can, through our efforts, be made conscious, and in the

process we may have a feeling that we are often overcoming very

strong resistances. When we attempt to do this with someone else, we

should  not  forget  that  the  conscious  filling-in  of  the  gaps  in  his

perceptions - the construction we are presenting him with - does not

mean as yet that we have made the unconscious material in question

conscious to him. All that is true so far is that the material is present in

him in two records, once in the conscious reconstruction he has been

given, and besides this in its original unconscious state. Our continued

efforts usually succeed eventually in making this unconscious material

conscious to him himself, as a result of which the two records are

brought to coincide. The amount of effort we have to use, by which we

estimate  the  resistance  against  the  material  becoming  conscious,

varies  in  magnitude  in  individual  cases.  For  instance,  what  comes

about in an analytic treatment as a result of our efforts can also occur

spontaneously: material which is ordinarily unconscious can transform

itself into preconscious material and then becomes conscious - a thing

that happens to a large extent in psychotic states. From this we infer

that the maintenance of certain internal resistances is a sine qua non

of  normality.  A  relaxation  of  resistances  such  as  this,  with  a

consequent  pushing  forward  of  unconscious  material,  takes  place

regularly  in  the  state  of  sleep,  and  thus  brings  about  a  necessary

precondition for the construction of dreams. Conversely, preconscious

material  can  become  temporarily  inaccessible  and  cut  off  by

resistances, as happens when something is temporarily forgotten or

escapes  the  memory;  or  a  preconscious  thought  can  even  be

temporarily put back into the unconscious state, as seems to be a

precondition  in  the  case  of  jokes.  We  shall  see  that  a  similar

transformation  back  of  preconscious  material  or  processes  into  the

unconscious  state  plays  a  great  part  in  the  causation  of  neurotic

disorders.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4971

    The theory of the three qualities of what is psychical, as described in

this generalized and simplified manner, seems likely to be a source of

limitless  confusion  rather  than  a  help  towards  clarification.  But  it

should not be forgotten that in fact it is not a theory at all but a first

stock-taking of the facts of our observations, that it keeps as close to

those facts as possible and does not attempt to explain them. The

complications  which  it  reveals  may  bring  into  relief  the  peculiar

difficulties with which our investigations have to contend. It may be

suspected, however, that we shall come to a closer understanding of

this theory itself if we trace out the relations between the psychical

qualities  and  the  provinces  or  agencies  of  the  psychical  apparatus

which we have postulated - though these relations too are far from

being simple.

   The process of something becoming conscious is above all linked

with the perceptions which our sense organs receive from the external

world.  From  the  topographical  point  of  view,  therefore,  it  is  a

phenomenon which takes place in the outermost cortex of the ego. It

is true that we also receive conscious information from the inside of

the body - the feelings, which actually exercise a more peremptory

influence on our mental life than external perceptions; moreover, in

certain circumstances the sense organs themselves transmit feelings,

sensations  of  pain,  in  addition  to  the  perceptions  specific  to  them.

Since,  however,  these  sensations  (as  we  call  them  in  contrast  to

conscious  perceptions)  also  emanate  from  the  terminal  organs  and

since we regard all these as prolongations or offshoots of the cortical

layer, we are still able to maintain the assertion made above. The only

distinction would be that, as regards the terminal organs of sensation

and feeling, the body itself would take the place of the external world.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4972

 

   Conscious processes on the periphery of the ego and everything

else in the ego unconscious - such would be the simplest state of

affairs that we might picture. And such may in fact be the state that

prevails in animals. But in men there is an added complication throughwhich internal processes in the ego may also acquire the quality of

consciousness.  This  is  the  work  of  the  function  of  speech,  which

brings material in the ego into a firm connection with mnemic residues

of visual, but more particularly of auditory, perceptions. Thenceforward

the perceptual periphery of the cortical layer can be excited to a much

greater extent from inside as well, internal events such as passages of

ideas and thought-processes can become conscious, and a special

device is called for in order to distinguish between the two possibilities

- a device known as reality-testing. The equation ‘perception = reality

(external world)’ no longer holds. Errors, which can now easily arise

and do so regularly in dreams, are called hallucinations.

      The  inside  of  the  ego,  which  comprises  above  all  the  thought-

processes, has the quality of being preconscious. This is characteristic

of the ego and belongs to it alone. It would not be correct, however, to

think  that  connection  with  the  mnemic  residues  of  speech  is  a

necessary  precondition  of  the  preconscious  state.  On  the  contrary,

that  state  is  independent  of  a  connection  with  them,  though  the

presence of that connection makes it safe to infer the preconscious

nature of a process. The preconscious state, characterized on the one

hand by having access to consciousness and on the other hand by its

connection  with  the  speech-residues,  is  nevertheless  something

peculiar,  the  nature  of  which  is  not  exhausted  by  these  two

characteristics. The evidence for this is the fact that large portions of

the ego, and particularly of the super-ego, which cannot be denied the

characteristic of preconsciousness, none the less remain for the most

part unconscious in the phenomenological sense of the word. We do

not know why this must be so. We shall attempt presently to attack the

problem of the true nature of the preconscious.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4973

 

   The sole prevailing quality in the id is that of being unconscious. Id

and unconscious are as intimately linked as ego and preconscious:

indeed, in the former case the connection is even more exclusive. If

we look back at the developmental history of an individual and of hispsychical  apparatus,  we  shall  be  able  to  perceive  an  important

distinction in the id. Originally, to be sure, everything was id; the ego

was developed out of the id by the continual influence of the external

world. In the course of this slow development certain of the contents of

the id were transformed into the preconscious state and so taken into

the ego; others of its contents remained in the id unchanged, as its

scarcely accessible nucleus. During this development, however, the

young and feeble ego put back into the unconscious state some of the

material it had already taken in, dropped it, and behaved in the same

way to some fresh impressions which it might have taken in, so that

these,  having  been  rejected,  could  leave  a  trace  only  in  the  id.  In

consideration of its origin we speak of this latter portion of the id as the

repressed. It is of little importance that we are not always able to draw

a sharp line between these two categories of contents in the id. They

coincide approximately with the distinction between what was innately

present originally and what was acquired in the course of the ego’s

development.

      Having  now  decided  upon  the  topographical  dissection  of  the

psychical apparatus into an ego and an id, with which the difference in

quality  between  preconscious  and  unconscious  runs  parallel,  and

having agreed that this quality is to be regarded only as an indication

of the difference and not as its essence, a further question faces us.

What, if this is so, is the true nature of the state which is revealed in

the id by the quality of being unconscious and in the ego by that of

being  preconscious  and  in  what  does  the  difference  between  them

consist?

   But of that we know nothing. And the profound obscurity of the

background of our ignorance is scarcely illuminated by a few glimmers

of insight. Here we have approached the still shrouded secret of the

nature of the psychical. We assume, as other natural sciences have

led us to expect, that in mental life some kind of energy is at work; but

we have nothing to go upon which will enable us to come nearer to a

knowledge of it by analogies with other forms of energy. We seem to

recognize that nervous or psychical energy occurs in two forms, one

freely  mobile  and  another,  by  comparison,  bound;  we  speak  of

cathexes and hypercathexes of psychical material, and even venture

to suppose that a hypercathexis brings about a kind of synthesis ofdifferent processes - a synthesis in the course of which free energy is

transformed  into  bound  energy.  Further  than  this  we  have  not

advanced. At any rate, we hold firmly to the view that the distinction

between the unconscious and the preconscious state lies in dynamic

relations  of  this  kind,  which  would  explain  how  it  is  that,  whether

spontaneously or with our assistance, the one can be changed into

the other.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4974

 

   Behind all these uncertainties, however, there lies one new fact,

whose discovery we owe to psycho-analytic research. We have found

that processes in the unconscious or in the id obey different laws from

those in the preconscious ego. We name these laws in their totality

the primary  process,  in  contrast  to  the secondary  process  which

governs the course of events in the preconscious, in the ego. In the

end, therefore, the study of psychical qualities has after all proved not

unfruitful.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4975

 

 
                                        CHAPTER V

 

              DREAM-INTERPRETATION AS AN ILLUSTRATION

 

An investigation of normal, stable states, in which the frontiers of the

ego are safeguarded against the id by resistances (anticathexes) and

have held firm, and in which the super-ego is not distinguished from

the ego, because they work together harmoniously - an investigation

of that kind would teach us little. The only thing that can help us are

states of conflict and uproar, when the contents of the unconscious id

have  a  prospect  of  forcing  their  way  into  the  ego  and  into

consciousness and the ego puts itself once more on the defensiveagainst  this  invasion.  It  is  only  under  these  conditions  that  we  can

make  such  observations  as  will  confirm  or  correct  our  statements

about the two partners. Now, our nightly sleep is precisely a state of

this sort, and for that reason psychical activity during sleep, which we

perceive as dreams, is our most favourable object of study. In that

way,  too,  we  avoid  the  familiar  reproach  that  we  base  our

constructions  of  normal  mental  life  on  pathological  findings;  for

dreams  are  regular  events  in  the  life  of  a  normal  person,  however

much  their  characteristics  may  differ  from  the  productions  of  our

waking  life.  Dreams,  as  everyone  knows,  may  be  confused,

unintelligible or positively nonsensical, what they say may contradict

all that we know of reality, and we behave in them like insane people,

since, so long as we are dreaming, we attribute objective reality to the

contents of the dream.

   We find our way to the understanding (‘interpretation’) of a dream by

assuming that what we recollect as the dream after we have woken up

is  not  the  true  dream-process  but  only  a façade behind which that

process  lies  concealed.  Here  we  have  our  distinction  between  the

manifest  content  of  a  dream  and  the latent  dream-thoughts.  The

process which produces the former out of the latter is described as the

dream-work. The study of the dream-work teaches us by an excellent

example the way in which unconscious material from the id (originally

unconscious and repressed unconscious alike) forces its way into the

ego, becomes preconscious and, as a result of the ego’s opposition,

undergoes the changes which we know as dream-distortion. There are

no features of a dream which cannot be explained in this way.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4976

 

   It is best to begin by pointing out that the formation of a dream can

be  provoked  in  two  different  ways.  Either,  on  the  one  hand,  an

instinctual  impulse  which  is  ordinarily  suppressed  (an  unconscious

wish) finds enough strength during sleep to make itself felt by the ego,

or,  on  the  other  hand,  an  urge  left  over  from  waking  life,  a

preconscious train of thought with all the conflicting impulses attachedto it, finds reinforcement during sleep from an unconscious element. In

short,  dreams  may  arise  either  from  the  id  or  from  the  ego.  The

mechanism of dream-formation is in both cases the same and so also

is the necessary dynamic precondition. The ego gives evidence of its

original derivation from the id by occasionally ceasing its functions and

allowing  a  reversion  to  an  earlier  state  of  things.  This  is  logically

brought about by its breaking off its relations with the external world

and withdrawing its cathexes from the sense organs. We are justified

in saying that there arises at birth an instinct to return to the intra-

uterine life that has been abandoned - an instinct to sleep. Sleep is a

return of this kind to the womb. Since the waking ego governs motility,

that function is paralysed in sleep, and accordingly a good part of the

inhibitions imposed on the unconscious id become superfluous. The

withdrawal or reduction of these ‘anticathexes’ thus allows the id what

is now a harmless amount of liberty.

      The  evidence  of  the  share  taken  by  the  unconscious  id  in  the

formation of dreams is abundant and convincing. (a) Memory is far

more comprehensive in dreams than in waking life. Dreams bring up

recollections which the dreamer has forgotten, which are inaccessible

to him when he is awake. (b) Dreams make an unrestricted use of

linguistic symbols, the meaning of which is for the most part unknown

to the dreamer. Our experience, however, enables us to confirm their

sense.  They  probably  originate  from  earlier  phases  in  the

development of speech. (c) Memory very often reproduces in dreams

impressions  from  the  dreamer’s  early  childhood  of  which  we  can

definitely assert not only that they had been forgotten but that they

had become unconscious owing to repression. That explains the help

- usually indispensable - given us by dreams in the attempts we make

during the analytic treatment of neuroses to reconstruct the dreamer’s

early life. (d) Furthermore, dreams bring to light material which cannot

have  originated  either  from  the  dreamer’s  adult  life  or  from  his

forgotten childhood. We are obliged to regard it as part of the archaic

heritage  which  a  child  brings  with  him  into  the  world,  before  any

experience of his own, influenced by the experiences of his ancestors.

We find the counterpart of this phylogenetic material in the earliest

human legends and in surviving customs. Thus dreams constitute a

source of human prehistory which is not to be despised. 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4977

 

   But what makes dreams so invaluable in giving us insight is the

circumstance that, when the unconscious material makes its way into

the ego, it brings its own modes of working along with it. This means

that the preconscious thoughts in which the unconscious material has

found its expression are handled in the course of the dream-work as

though they were unconscious portions of the id; and, in the case of

the alternative method of dream-formation, the preconscious thoughts

which  have  obtained  reinforcement  from  an  unconscious  instinctual

impulse are brought down to the unconscious state. It is only in this

way that we learn the laws which govern the passage of events in the

unconscious and the respects in which they differ from the rules that

are  familiar  to  us  in  waking  thought.  Thus  the  dream-work  is

essentially  an  instance  of  the  unconscious  working-over  of

preconscious  thought-processes.  To  take  an  analogy  from  history:

invading conquerors govern a conquered country, not according to the

judicial system which they find in force there, but according to their

own.  It  is,  however,  an  unmistakable  fact  that  the  outcome  of  the

dream-work  is  a  compromise.  The  ego-organization  is  not  yet

paralysed, and its influence is to be seen in the distortion imposed on

the  unconscious  material  and  in  what  are  often  very  ineffective

attempts at giving the total result a form not too unacceptable to the

ego (secondary revision). In our analogy this would be an expression

of the continued resistance of the defeated people.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4978

 

   The laws that govern the passage of events in the unconscious,

which come to light in this manner, are remarkable enough and suffice

to explain most of what seems strange to us about dreams. Above all

there  is  a  striking  tendency  to condensation,  an  inclination  to  form

fresh unities out of elements which in our waking thought we shouldcertainly  have  kept  separate.  As  a  consequence  of  this,  a  single

element of the manifest dream often stands for a whole number of

latent dream-thoughts as though it were a combined allusion to all of

them;  and  in  general  the  compass  of  the  manifest  dream  is

extraordinarily small in comparison with the wealth of material from

which it has sprung. Another peculiarity of the dream-work, not entirely

independent  of  the  former  one,  is  the  ease  with  which  psychical

intensities (cathexes) are displaced from one element to another, so

that it often happens that an element which was of little importance in

the  dream-thoughts  appears  as  the  clearest  and  accordingly  most

important  feature  of  the  manifest  dream,  and, vice  versa,  that

essential  elements  of  the  dream-thoughts  are  represented  in  the

manifest  dream  only  by  slight  allusions.  Moreover,  as  a  rule  the

existence  of  quite  insignificant  points  in  common  between  two

elements is enough to allow the dream-work to replace one by the

other in all further operations. It will easily be imagined how greatly

these  mechanisms  of  condensation  and  displacement  can  increase

the  difficulty  of  interpreting  a  dream  and  of  revealing  the  relations

between the manifest dream and the latent dream-thoughts. From the

evidence of the existence of these two tendencies to condensation

and  displacement  our  theory  infers  that  in  the  unconscious  id  the

energy is in a freely mobile state and that the id sets more store by the

possibility  of  discharging  quantities  of  excitation  than  by  any  other

consideration;¹ and our theory makes use of these two peculiarities in

defining the character of the primary process we have attributed to the

id.

 

   ¹ An analogy may be seen in the behaviour of a non-commissioned officer who accepts a

reprimand from his superior in silence but vents his anger on the first innocent private he
comes across.
 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4979

 

      The  study  of  the  dream-work  has  taught  us  many  other

characteristics  of  the  processes  in  the  unconscious  which  are  as

remarkable as they are important; but we must only mention a few ofthem  here.  The  governing  rules  of  logic  carry  no  weight  in  the

unconscious; it might be called the Realm of the Illogical. Urges with

contrary aims exist side by side in the unconscious without any need

arising for an adjustment between them. Either they have no influence

whatever on each other, or, if they have, no decision is reached, but a

compromise  comes  about  which  is  nonsensical  since  it  embraces

mutually  incompatible  details.  With  this  is  connected  the  fact  that

contraries are not kept apart but treated as though they were identical,

so that in the manifest dream any element may also have the meaning

of  its  opposite.  Certain  philologists  have  found  that  the  same  held

good  in  the  most  ancient  languages  and  that  contraries  such  as

‘strong-weak’, ‘light-dark’ and ‘high-deep’ were originally expressed by

the same roots, until two different modifications of the primitive word

distinguished  between  the  two  meanings.  Residues  of  this  original

double meaning seem to have survived even in a highly developed

language  like  Latin  in  its  use  of  words  such  as  ‘altus’  (‘high’  and

‘deep’) and ‘sacer’ (‘sacred’ and ‘infamous’).

   In view of the complication and ambiguity of the relations between

the  manifest  dream  and  the  latent  content  lying  behind  it,  it  is  of

course justifiable to ask how it is at all possible to deduce the one from

the other and whether all we have to go on is a lucky guess, assisted

perhaps  by  a  translation  of  the  symbols  that  occur  in  the  manifest

dream. It may be said in reply that in the great majority of cases the

problem  can  be  satisfactorily  solved,  but  only  with  the  help  of  the

associations provided by the dreamer himself to the elements of the

manifest content. Any other procedure is arbitrary and can yield no

certain  result.  But  the  dreamer’s  associations  bring  to  light

intermediate links which we can insert in the gap between the two and

by aid of which we can reinstate the latent content of the dream and

‘interpret’ it. It is not to be wondered at if this work of interpretation

(acting in a direction opposite to the dream-work) fails occasionally to

arrive at complete certainty.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4980

    It remains for us to give a dynamic explanation of why the sleeping

ego takes on the task of the dream-work at all. The explanation is

fortunately easy to find. With the help of the unconscious, every dream

that is in process of formation makes a demand upon the ego - for the

satisfaction of an instinct, if the dream originates from the id; for the

solution  of  a  conflict,  the  removal  of  a  doubt  or  the  forming  of  an

intention,  if  the  dream  originates  from  a  residue  of  preconscious

activity in waking life. The sleeping ego, however, is focused on the

wish  to  maintain  sleep;  it  feels  this  demand  as  a  disturbance  and

seeks to get rid of the disturbance. The ego succeeds in doing this by

what appears to be an act of compliance: it meets the demand with

what is in the circumstances a harmless fulfilment of a wish and so

gets rid of it. This replacement of the demand by the fulfilment of a

wish remains the essential function of the dream-work. It may perhaps

be worth while to illustrate this by three simple examples - a hunger

dream,  a  dream  of  convenience  and  a  dream  prompted  by  sexual

desire. A need for food makes itself felt in a dreamer during his sleep:

he has a dream of a delicious meal and sleeps on. The choice, of

course, was open to him either of waking up and eating something or

of continuing his sleep. He decided in favour of the latter and satisfied

his hunger by means of the dream - for the time being, at all events,

for  if  his  hunger  had  persisted  he  would  have  had  to  wake  up

nevertheless. Here is the second example. A sleeper had to wake up

so as to be in time for his work at the hospital. But he slept on, and

had a dream that he was already at the hospital - but as a patient, who

has no need to get up. Or again, a desire becomes active during the

night  for  the  enjoyment  of  a  forbidden  sexual  object,  the  wife  of  a

friend  of  the  sleeper.  He  has  a  dream  of  sexual  intercourse  -  not,

indeed, with this person but with someone else of the same name to

whom he is in fact indifferent; or his struggle against the desire may

find expression in his mistress remaining altogether anonymous.

   Naturally, every case is not so simple. Especially in dreams which

have originated from undealt-with residues of the previous day, and

which  have  only  obtained  an  unconscious  reinforcement  during  the

state of sleep, it is often no easy task to uncover the unconscious

motive  force  and  its  wish-fulfilment;  but  we  may  assume  that  it  is

always there. The thesis that dreams are the fulfilments of wishes willeasily arouse scepticism when it is remembered how many dreams

have  an  actually  distressing  content  or  even  wake  the  dreamer  in

anxiety, quite apart from the numerous dreams without any definite

feeling-tone.  But  the  objection  based  on  anxiety  dreams  cannot  be

sustained against analysis. It must not be forgotten that dreams are

invariably the product of a conflict, that they are a kind of compromise-

structure. Something that is a satisfaction for the unconscious id may

for that very reason be a cause of anxiety for the ego.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4981

 

   As the dream-work proceeds, sometimes the unconscious will press

forward more successfully and sometimes the ego will defend itself

with greater energy. Anxiety dreams are mostly those whose content

has  undergone  the  least  distortion.  If  the  demand  made  by  the

unconscious is too great for the sleeping ego to be in a position to

fend it off by the means at its disposal, it abandons the wish to sleep

and returns to waking life. We shall be taking every experience into

account if we say that a dream is invariably an attempt to get rid of a

disturbance of sleep by means of a wish-fulfilment, so that the dream

is  a  guardian  of  sleep.  The  attempt  may  succeed  more  or  less

completely; it may also fail, and in that case the sleeper wakes up,

apparently woken precisely by the dream. So, too, there are occasions

when that excellent fellow the night-watchman, whose business it is to

guard the little township’s sleep, has no alternative but to sound the

alarm and waken the sleeping townspeople.

   I will close this discussion with a comment which will justify the

length  of  time  I  have  spent  on  the  problem  of  the  interpretation  of

dreams.  Experience  has  shown  that  the  unconscious  mechanisms

which we have come to know from our study of the dream-work and

which gave us the explanation of the formation of dreams also help us

to  understand  the  puzzling  symptoms  which  attract  our  interest  to

neuroses and psychoses. A conformity of such a kind cannot fail to

excite high hopes in us.

                           An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4982

 

                                        PART II

 

                            THE PRACTICAL TASK

 

                                      CHAPTER VI

 

                THE TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

A dream, then, is a psychosis, with all the absurdities, delusions and

illusions  of  a  psychosis.  A  psychosis  of  short  duration,  no  doubt,

harmless, even entrusted with a useful function, introduced with the

subject’s consent and terminated by an act of his will. None the less it

is  a  psychosis,  and  we  learn  from  it  that  even  so  deep-going  an

alteration of mental life as this can be undone and can give place to

the normal function. Is it too bold, then, to hope that it must also be

possible to submit the dreaded spontaneous illnesses of mental life to

our influence and bring about their cure?

      We  already  know  a  number  of  things  preliminary  to  such  an

undertaking. According to our hypothesis it is the ego’s task to meet

the demands raised by its three dependent relations to reality, to the id

and to the super-ego - and nevertheless at the same time to preserve

its own organization and maintain its own autonomy. The necessary

precondition of the pathological states under discussion can only be a

relative or absolute weakening of the ego which makes the fulfilment

of its tasks impossible. The severest demand on the ego is probably

the  keeping  down  of  the  instinctual  claims  of  the  id,  to  accomplish

which  it  is  obliged  to  maintain  large  expenditures  of  energy  on

anticathexes.  But  the  demands  made  by  the  super-ego  too  may

become so powerful and so relentless that the ego may be paralysed,

as it were, in the face of its other tasks. We may suspect that, in the

economic conflicts which arise at this point, the id and the super-ego

often make common cause against the hard-pressed ego which tries

to cling to reality in order to retain its normal state. If the other two

become too strong, they succeed in loosening and altering the ego’s

organization, so that its proper relation to reality is disturbed or evenbrought to an end. We have seen it happen in dreaming: when the

ego is detached from the reality of the external world, it slips down,

under the influence of the internal world, into psychosis.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4983

 

      Our  plan  of  cure  is  based  on  these  discoveries.  The  ego  is

weakened  by  the  internal  conflict  and  we  must  go  to  its  help.  The

position  is  like  that  in  a  civil  war  which  has  to  be  decided  by  the

assistance  of  an  ally  from  outside.  The  analytic  physician  and  the

patient’s weakened ego, basing themselves on the real external world,

have to band themselves together into a party against the enemies,

the instinctual demands of the id and the conscientious demands of

the super-ego. We form a pact with each other. The sick ego promises

us  the  most  complete  candour  -  promises,  that  is,  to  put  at  our

disposal all the material which its self-perception yields it; we assure

the  patient  of  the  strictest  discretion  and  place  at  his  service  our

experience  in  interpreting  material  that  has  been  influenced  by  the

unconscious. Our knowledge is to make up for his ignorance and to

give his ego back its mastery over lost provinces of his mental life.

This pact constitutes the analytic situation.

      No  sooner  have  we  taken  this  step  than  a  first  disappointment

awaits us, a first warning against over-confidence. If the patient’s ego

is to be a useful ally in our common work, it must, however hard it may

be pressed by the hostile powers, have retained a certain amount of

coherence and some fragment of understanding for the demands of

reality.  But  this  is  not  to  be  expected  of  the  ego  of  a  psychotic;  it

cannot observe a pact of this kind, indeed it can scarcely enter into

one. It will very soon have tossed us away and the help we offer it and

sent us to join the portions of the external world which no longer mean

anything to it. Thus we discover that we must renounce the idea of

trying our plan of cure upon psychotics - renounce it perhaps for ever

or perhaps only for the time being, till we have found some other plan

better adapted for them.

   There is, however, another class of psychical patients who clearlyresemble  the  psychotics  very  closely  -  the  vast  number  of  people

suffering severely from neuroses. The determinants of their illness as

well as its pathogenic mechanisms must be the same or at least very

similar. But their ego has proved more resistant and has become less

disorganized.  Many  of  them,  in  spite  of  their  maladies  and  the

inadequacies  resulting  from  them,  have  been  able  to  maintain

themselves in real life. These neurotics may show themselves ready

to accept our help. We will confine our interest to them and see how

far and by what methods we are able to ‘cure’ them.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4984

 

   With the neurotics, then, we make our pact: complete candour on

one side and strict discretion on the other. This looks as though we

were only aiming at the post of a secular father confessor. But there is

a great difference, for what we want to hear from our patient is not

only what he knows and conceals from other people; he is to tell us

too what he does not know. With this end in view we give him a more

detailed definition of what we mean by candour. We pledge him to

obey  the fundamental  rule  of  analysis,  which  is  henceforward  to

govern his behaviour towards us. He is to tell us not only what he can

say  intentionally  and  willingly,  what  will  give  him  relief  like  a

confession, but everything else as well that his self-observation yields

him, everything that comes into his head, even if it is disagreeable for

him  to  say  it,  even  if  it  seems  to  him unimportant  or  actually

nonsensical. If he can succeed after this injunction in putting his self-

criticism out of action, he will present us with a mass of material -

thoughts,  ideas,  recollections  -  which  are  already  subject  to  the

influence  of  the  unconscious,  which  are  often  its  direct  derivatives,

and  which  thus  put  us  in  a  position  to  conjecture  his  repressed

unconscious material and to extend, by the information we give him,

his ego’s knowledge of his unconscious.

   But it is far from being the case that his ego is content to play the

part of passively and obediently bringing us the material we require

and of believing and accepting our translation of it. A number of otherthings happen, a few of which we might have foreseen but others of

which are bound to surprise us. The most remarkable thing is this. The

patient is not satisfied with regarding the analyst in the light of reality

as a helper and adviser who, moreover, is remunerated for the trouble

he takes and who would himself be content with some such role as

that  of  a  guide  on  a  difficult  mountain  climb.  On  the  contrary,  the

patient sees in him the return, the reincarnation, of some important

figure out of his childhood or past, and consequently transfers on to

him  feelings  and  reactions  which  undoubtedly  applied  to  this

prototype.  This  fact  of  transference  soon  proves  to  be  a  factor  of

undreamt-of  importance,  on  the  one  hand  an  instrument  of

irreplaceable  value  and  on  the  other  hand  a  source  of  serious

dangers.  This  transference  is ambivalent:  it  comprises  positive

(affectionate)  as  well  as  negative  (hostile)  attitudes  towards  the

analyst,  who  as  a  rule  is  put  in  the  place  of  one  or  other  of  the

patient’s  parents,  his  father  or  mother.  So  long  as  it  is  positive  it

serves us admirably. It alters the whole analytic situation; it pushes to

one side the patient’s rational aim of becoming healthy and free from

his  ailments.  Instead  of  it  there  emerges  the  aim  of  pleasing  the

analyst  and  of  winning  his  applause  and  love.  It  becomes  the  true

motive  force  of  the  patient’s  collaboration;  his  weak  ego  becomes

strong; under its influence he achieves things that would ordinarily be

beyond his power; he leaves off his symptoms and seems apparently

to have recovered - merely for the sake of the analyst. The analyst

may  shamefacedly  admit  to  himself  that  he  set  out  on  a  difficult

undertaking  without  any  suspicion  of  the  extraordinary  powers  that

would be at his command.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4985

 

      Moreover,  the  relation  of  transference  brings  with  it  two  further

advantages. If the patient puts the analyst in the place of his father (or

mother),  he  is  also  giving  him  the  power  which  his  super-ego

exercises over his ego, since his parents were, as we know, the origin

of his super-ego. The new super-ego now has an opportunity for a sortof after-education of the neurotic; it can correct mistakes for which his

parents were responsible in educating him. But at this point a warning

must be given against misusing this new influence. However much the

analyst may be tempted to become a teacher, model and ideal for

other people and to create men in his own image, he should not forget

that that is not his task in the analytic relationship, and indeed that he

will be disloyal to his task if he allows himself to be led on by his

inclinations.  If  he  does,  he  will  only  be  repeating  a  mistake  of  the

parents who crushed their child’s independence by their influence, and

he will only be replacing the patient’s earlier dependence by a new

one.  In  all  his  attempts  at  improving  and  educating  the  patient  the

analyst should respect his individuality. The amount of influence which

he may legitimately allow himself will be determined by the degree of

developmental inhibition present in the patient. Some neurotics have

remained so infantile that in analysis too they can only be treated as

children.

      Another  advantage  of  transference,  too,  is  that  in  it  the  patient

produces before us with plastic clarity an important part of his life-

story, of which he would otherwise have probably given us only an

insufficient  account.  He  acts  it  before  us,  as  it  were,  instead  of

reporting it to us.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4986

 

   And now for the other side of the situation. Since the transference

reproduces  the  patient’s  relation  with  his  parents,  it  takes  over  the

ambivalence of that relation as well. It almost inevitably happens that

one day his positive attitude towards the analyst changes over into the

negative, hostile one. This too is as a rule a repetition of the past. His

obedience  to  his  father  (if  it  is  his  father  that  is  in  question),  his

courting of his father’s favour, had its roots in an erotic wish directed

towards  him.  Some  time  or  other  that  demand  will  press  its  way

forward in the transference as well and insist on being satisfied. In the

analytic  situation  it  can  only  meet  with  frustration.  Real  sexual

relations between patients and analysts are out of the question, andeven  the  subtler  methods  of  satisfaction,  such  as  the  giving  of

preference,  intimacy  and  so  on,  are  only  sparingly  granted  by  the

analyst.  A  rejection  of  this  kind  is  taken  as  the  occasion  for  the

change-over;  probably  things  happened  in  the  same  way  in  the

patient’s childhood.

      The  therapeutic  successes  that  occurred  under  the  sway  of  the

positive  transference  are  open  to  the  suspicion  of  being  of  a

suggestive nature. If the negative transference gains the upper hand,

they  are  blown  away  like  chaff  before  the  wind.  We  observe  with

horror  that  all  our  trouble  and  labour  hitherto  have  been  in  vain.

Indeed, what we might have regarded as a permanent intellectual gain

by the patient, his understanding of psycho-analysis and his reliance

on its efficacy, suddenly vanish. He behaves like a child who has no

power of judgement of his own but blindly believes anyone whom he

loves and no one who is a stranger to him. The danger of these states

of transference evidently lies in the patient’s misunderstanding their

nature  and  taking  them  for  fresh  real  experiences  instead  of

reflections of the past. If he (or she) becomes aware of the strong

erotic desire that lies concealed behind the positive transference, he

believes  that  he  has  fallen  passionately  in  love;  if  the  transference

changes  over,  then  he  feels  insulted  and  neglected,  he  hates  the

analyst as his enemy and is ready to abandon the analysis. In both

these extreme cases he has forgotten the pact that he made at the

beginning of the treatment and has become useless for continuing the

common work. It is the analyst’s task constantly to tear the patient out

of his menacing illusion and to show him again and again that what he

takes to be new real life is a reflection of the past. And lest he should

fall into a state in which he is inaccessible to all evidence, the analyst

takes  care  that  neither  the  love  nor  the  hostility  reach  an  extreme

height.  This  is  effected  by  preparing  him  in  good  time  for  these

possibilities  and  by  not  overlooking  the  first  signs  of  them.  Careful

handling  of  the  transference  on  these  lines  is  as  a  rule  richly

rewarded.  If  we  succeed,  as  we  usually  can,  in  enlightening  the

patient on the true nature of the phenomena of transference, we shall

have struck a powerful weapon out of the hand of his resistance and

shall have converted dangers into gains. For a patient never forgets

again what he has experienced in the form of transference; it carries agreater force of conviction than anything he can acquire in other ways.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4987

 

      We  think  it  most  undesirable  if  the  patient acts  outside  the

transference  instead  of  remembering.  The  ideal  conduct  for  our

purposes would be that he should behave as normally as possible

outside the treatment and express his abnormal reactions only in the

transference.

   The method by which we strengthen the weakened ego has as a

starting-point  an  extending  of  its  self-knowledge.  That  is  not,  of

course,  the  whole  story  but  it  is  a  first  step.  The  loss  of  such

knowledge signifies for the ego a surrender of power and influence; it

is the first tangible sign that it is being hemmed in and hampered by

the demands of the id and the super-ego. Accordingly, the first part of

the  help  we  have  to  offer  is  intellectual  work  on  our  side  and

encouragement  to  the  patient  to  collaborate  in  it.  This  first  kind  of

activity, as we know, is intended to pave the way to another, more

difficult, task. We shall not lose sight of the dynamic element in this

task, even during its preliminary stage. We gather the material for our

work from a variety of sources - from what is conveyed to us by the

information given us by the patient and by his free associations, from

what  he  shows  us  in  his  transferences,  from  what  we  arrive  at  by

interpreting  his  dreams  and  from  what  he  betrays  by  his  slips  or

parapraxes.  All  this  material  helps  us  to  make  constructions  about

what happened to him and has been forgotten as well as about what

is happening in him now without his understanding it. But in all this we

never fail to make a strict distinction between our knowledge and his

knowledge. We avoid telling him at once things that we have often

discovered at an early stage, and we avoid telling him the whole of

what we think we have discovered. We reflect carefully over when we

shall impart the knowledge of one of our constructions to him and we

wait for what seems to us the suitable moment - which it is not always

easy to decide. As a rule we put off telling him of a construction or

explanation till he himself has so nearly arrived at it that only a singlestep  remains  to  be  taken,  though  that  step  is  in  fact  the  decisive

synthesis. If we proceeded in another way and overwhelmed him with

our interpretations before he was prepared for them, our information

would either produce no effect or it would provoke a violent outbreak

of resistance which would make the progress of our work more difficult

or might even threaten to stop it altogether. But if we have prepared

everything  properly,  it  often  happens  that  the  patient  will  at  once

confirm our construction and himself recollect the internal or external

event  which  he  had  forgotten.  The  more  exactly  the  construction

coincides with the details of what has been forgotten the easier will it

be for him to assent. On that particular matter our knowledge will then

have become his knowledge as well.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4988

 

   With the mention of resistance we have reached the second and

more important part of our task. We have already learnt that the ego

protects  itself  against  the  invasion  of  undesired  elements  from  the

unconscious and repressed id by means of anticathexes, which must

remain intact if it is to function normally. The more hard-pressed the

ego  feels,  the  more  convulsively  it  clings  (as  though  in  a  fright)  to

these  anticathexes,  in  order  to  protect  what  remains  of  itself  from

further irruptions. But this defensive purpose does not by any means

accord  with  the  aims  of  our  treatment.  What  we  desire,  on  the

contrary, is that the ego, emboldened by the certainty of our help, shall

dare to take the offensive in order to reconquer what has been lost.

And  it  is  here  that  we  become  aware  of  the  strength  of  these

anticathexes in the form of resistances to our work. The ego draws

back in alarm from such undertakings, which seem dangerous and

threaten unpleasure; it must be constantly encouraged and soothed if

it is not to fail us. This resistance, which persists throughout the whole

treatment and is renewed at every fresh piece of work, is known, not

quite correctly, as the resistance due to repression. We shall find that

it is not the only one that faces us. It is interesting to notice that in this

situation the party-divisions are to some extent reversed: for the egostruggles  against  our  instigation,  while  the  unconscious,  which  is

ordinarily  our  opponent,  comes  to  our  help,  since  it  has  a  natural

‘upward drive’ and desires nothing better than to press forward across

its settled frontiers into the ego and so to consciousness. The struggle

which  develops,  if  we  gain  our  end  and  can  induce  the  ego  to

overcome its resistances, is carried through under our direction and

with our assistance. Its outcome is a matter of indifference: whether it

results in the ego accepting, after a fresh examination, an instinctual

demand which it has hitherto rejected, or whether it dismisses it once

more, this time for good and all. In either case a permanent danger

has been disposed of, the compass of the ego has been extended and

a wasteful expenditure of energy has been made unnecessary.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4989

 

   The overcoming of resistances is the part of our work that requires

the most time and the greatest trouble. It is worth while, however, for it

brings  about  an  advantageous  alteration  of  the  ego  which  will  be

maintained independently of the outcome of the transference and will

hold good in life. We have also worked simultaneously at getting rid of

the  alteration  of  the  ego  which  had  been  brought  about  under  the

influence  of  the  unconscious;  for  whenever  we  have  been  able  to

detect  any  of  its  derivatives  in  the  ego  we  have  pointed  out  their

illegitimate origin and have instigated the ego to reject them. It will be

remembered  that  it  was  one  of  the  necessary  preconditions  of  our

pact  of  assistance  that  any  such  alteration  of  the  ego  due  to  the

intrusion  of  unconscious  elements  should  not  have  gone  beyond  a

certain amount.

      The  further  our  work  proceeds  and  the  more  deeply  our  insight

penetrates into the mental life of neurotics, the more clearly two new

factors  force  themselves  on  our  notice,  which  demand  the  closest

attention  as  sources  of  resistance.  Both  of  them  are  completely

unknown to the patient, neither of them could be taken into account

when our pact was made; nor do they arise from the patient’s ego.

They may both be embraced under the single name of ‘need to he illor to suffer’, but they have different origins though in other respects

they are of a kindred nature. The first of these two factors is the sense

of guilt or consciousness of guilt, as it is called, though the patient

does not feel it and is not aware of it. It is evidently the portion of the

resistance  contributed  by  a  super-ego  that  has  become  particularly

severe and cruel. The patient must not become well but must remain

ill,  for  he  deserves  no  better.  This  resistance  does  not  actually

interfere with our intellectual work, but it makes it inoperative; indeed,

it often allows us to remove one form of neurotic suffering, but is ready

at once to replace it by another, or perhaps by some somatic illness.

The sense of guilt also explains the cure or improvement of severe

neuroses  which  we  occasionally  observe  after  real  misfortunes:  all

that matters is that the patient should be miserable - in what way is of

no  consequence.  The  uncomplaining  resignation  with  which  such

people often put up with their hard fate is most remarkable, but also

revealing.  In  warding  off  this  resistance  we  are  obliged  to  restrict

ourselves to making it conscious and attempting to bring about the

slow demolition of the hostile super-ego.

   It is less easy to demonstrate the existence of another resistance,

our means of combating which are specially inadequate. There are

some neurotics in whom, to judge by all their reactions, the instinct of

self-preservation  has  actually  been  reversed.  They  seem  to  aim  at

nothing  other  than  self-injury  and  self-destruction.  It  is  possible  too

that the people who in fact do in the end commit suicide belong to this

group. It is to be assumed that in such people far-reaching defusions

of instinct have taken place, as a result of which there has been a

liberation  of  excessive  quantities  of  the  destructive  instinct  directed

inwards. Patients of this kind are not able to tolerate recovery through

our treatment and fight against it with all their strength. But we must

confess  that  this  is  a  case  which  we  have  not  yet  succeeded  in

completely explaining.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4990

 

   Let us once more glance over the situation which we have reachedin our attempt at bringing help to the patient’s neurotic ego. That ego

is no longer able to fulfil the task set it by the external world (including

human society). Not all of its experiences are at its disposal, a large

proportion  of  its  store  of  memories  have  escaped  it.  Its  activity  is

inhibited  by  strict  prohibitions  from  the  super-ego,  its  energy  is

consumed  in  vain  attempts  at  fending  off  the  demands  of  the  id.

Beyond  this,  as  a  result  of  continuous  irruptions  by  the  id,  its

organization  is  impaired,  it  is  no  longer  capable  of  any  proper

synthesis, it is torn by mutually opposed urges, by unsettled conflicts

and  by  unsolved  doubts.  To  start  with,  we  get  the  patient’s  thus

weakened  ego  to  take  part  in  the  purely  intellectual  work  of

interpretation, which aims at provisionally filling the gaps in his mental

assets,  and  to  transfer  to  us  the  authority  of  his  super-ego;  we

encourage  it  to  take  up  the  struggle  over  each  individual  demand

made  by  the  id  and  to  conquer  the  resistances  which  arise  in

connection with it. At the same time we restore order in the ego by

detecting the material and urges which have forced their way in from

the unconscious, and expose them to criticism by tracing them back to

their origin. We serve the patient in various functions, as an authority

and a substitute for his parents, as a teacher and educator; and we

have  done  the  best  for  him  if,  as  analysts,  we  raise  the  mental

processes in his ego to a normal level, transform what has become

unconscious and repressed into preconscious material and thus return

it once more to the possession of his ego. On the patient’s side a few

rational  factors  work  in  our  favour,  such  as  the  need  for  recovery

which has its motive in his sufferings, and the intellectual interest that

we  may  awaken  in  him  in  the  theories  and  revelations  of  psycho-

analysis; but of far greater force is the positive transference with which

he meets us. Fighting against us, on the other hand, are the negative

transference,  the  ego’s  resistance  due  to  repression  (that  is,  its

unpleasure at having to lay itself open to the hard work imposed on it),

the sense of guilt arising from its relation to the super-ego and the

need  to  be  ill  due  to  deep-going  changes  in  the  economics  of  his

instincts. The share taken by the last two factors decides whether the

case is to be regarded as slight or severe. Apart from these, a few

other  factors  may  be  discerned  as  having  a  favourable  or

unfavourable  bearing.  A  certain  psychical  inertia,  a  sluggishness  ofthe  libido,  which  is  unwilling  to  abandon  its  fixations  cannot  be

welcome to us; the patient’s capacity for sublimating his instincts plays

a large part and so does his capacity for rising above the crude life of

the  instincts;  so,  too,  does  the  relative  power  of  his  intellectual

functions.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4991

 

   We shall not be disappointed, but, on the contrary, we shall find it

entirely intelligible, if we reach the conclusion that the final outcome of

the struggle we have engaged in depends on quantitative relations -

on the quota of energy we are able to mobilize in the patient to our

advantage as compared with the sum of energy of the powers working

against us. Here once again God is on the side of the big battalions. It

is true that we do not always succeed in winning, but at least we can

usually  recognize  why  we  have  not  won.  Those  who  have  been

following our discussion only out of therapeutic interest will perhaps

turn  away  in  contempt  after  this  admission.  But  here  we  are

concerned  with  therapy  only  in  so  far  as  it  works  by  psychological

means; and for the time being we have no other. The future may teach

us  to  exercise  a  direct  influence,  by  means  of  particular  chemical

substances,  on  the  amounts  of  energy  and  their  distribution  in  the

mental  apparatus.  It  may  be  that  there  are  other  still  undreamt-of

possibilities of therapy. But for the moment we have nothing better at

our  disposal  than  the  technique  of  psycho-analysis,  and  for  that

reason, in spite of its limitations, it should not be despised.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4992

 

 
                                      CHAPTER VII

 

              AN EXAMPLE OF PSYCHO-ANALYTIC WORK

 We  have  arrived  at  a  general  acquaintance  with  the  psychical

apparatus,  with  the  parts,  organs  and  agencies  of  which  it  is

composed, with the forces which operate in it and with the functions

allotted to its parts. The neuroses and psychoses are the states in

which  disturbances  in  the  functioning  of  the  apparatus  come  to

expression.  We  have  chosen  the  neuroses  as  the  subjects  of  our

study  because  they  alone  seem  accessible  to  the  psychological

methods of our intervention. While we are trying to influence them, we

collect observations which give us a picture of their origin and of the

manner in which they arise.

   I will state in advance one of our chief findings before proceeding

with  my  description.  The  neuroses  (unlike  infectious  diseases,  for

instance) have no specific determinants. It would be idle to seek in

them for pathogenic excitants. They shade off by easy transitions into

what  is  described  as  the  normal;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is

scarcely  any  state  recognized  as  normal  in  which  indications  of

neurotic traits could not be pointed out. Neurotics have approximately

the  same  innate  dispositions  as  other  people,  they  have  the  same

experiences and they have the same tasks to perform. Why is it, then,

that they live so much worse and with so much greater difficulty and,

in the process, suffer more feelings of unpleasure, anxiety and pain?

      We  need  not  be  at  a  loss  to  find  an  answer  to  this  question.

Quantitative disharmonies are what must be held responsible for the

inadequacy and sufferings of neurotics. The determining cause of all

the forms taken by human mental life, is, indeed, to be sought in the

reciprocal  action  between  innate  dispositions  and  accidental

experiences. Now a particular instinct may be too strong or too weak

innately,  or  a  particular  capacity  may  be  stunted  or  insufficiently

developed  in  life.  On  the  other  hand,  external  impressions  and

experiences  may  make  demands  of  differing  strength  on  different

people; and what one person’s constitution can deal with may prove

an unmanageable task for another’s. These quantitative differences

will determine the variety of the results.

      We  shall  very  soon  feel,  however,  that  this  explanation  is

unsatisfactory: it is too general, it explains too much. The aetiology put

forward  applies  to  every  case  of  mental  suffering,  misery  and

disablement, but not every such state can be termed neurotic. Theneuroses  have  specific  characteristics,  they  are  miseries  of  a

particular kind. So we must after all expect to find particular causes for

them. Or we may adopt the supposition that, among the tasks with

which  mental  life  has  to  deal,  there  are  a  few  on  which  it  can

especially  easily  come  to  grief;  so  that  the  peculiarity  of  the

phenomena of neurosis, which are often so very remarkable, would

follow from this without our needing to withdraw our earlier assertions.

If  it  remains  true  that  the  neuroses  do  not  differ  in  any  essential

respect  from  the  normal,  their  study  promises  to  yield  us  valuable

contributions to our knowledge of the normal. It may be that we shall

thus discover the ‘weak points’ in a normal organization.

      The  supposition  we  have  just  made  finds  confirmation.  Analytic

experiences  teach  us  that  there  is  in  fact  one  instinctual  demand

attempts to deal with which most easily fail or succeed imperfectly and

that there is one period of life which comes in question exclusively or

predominantly in connection with the generation of a neurosis. These

two factors - the nature of the instinct and the period of life concerned

-  call  for  separate  consideration,  although  they  are  closely  enough

connected.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4993

 

   We can speak with a fair degree of certainty about the part played

by the period of life. It seems that neuroses are acquired only in early

childhood (up to the age of six), even though their symptoms may not

make their appearance till much later. The childhood neurosis may

become manifest for a short time or may even be overlooked. In every

case the later neurotic illness links up with the prelude in childhood. It

is  possible  that  what  are  known  as  traumatic  neuroses  (due  to

excessive fright or severe somatic shocks, such as railway collisions,

burial under falls of earth, and so on) are an exception to this: their

relations  to  determinants  in  childhood  have  hitherto  eluded

investigation. There is no difficulty in accounting for this aetiological

preference for the first period of childhood. The neuroses are, as we

know, disorders of the ego; and it is not to be wondered at if the ego,so long as it is feeble, immature and incapable of resistance, fails to

deal with tasks which it could cope with later on with the utmost ease.

In these circumstances instinctual demands from within, no less than

excitations from the external world, operate as ‘traumas’, particularly if

they are met half way by certain innate dispositions. The helpless ego

fends them off by means of attempts at flight (repression), which later

turn out to be inefficient and which involve permanent restrictions on

further  development.  The  damage  inflicted  on  the  ego  by  its  first

experiences  gives  us  the  appearance  of  being  disproportionately

great; but we have only to take as an analogy the differences in the

results produced by the prick of a needle into a mass of cells in the act

of  cell-division  (as  in  Roux’s  experiments)  and  into  the  fully  grown

animal which eventually develops out of them. No human individual is

spared such traumatic experiences; none escapes the repressions to

which they give rise. These questionable reactions on the part of the

ego may perhaps be indispensable for the attainment of another aim

which is set for the same period of life: in the space of a few years the

little primitive creature must turn into a civilized human being; he must

pass  through  an  immensely  long  stretch  of  human  cultural

development in an almost uncannily abbreviated form. This is made

possible by hereditary disposition; but it can almost never be achieved

without the additional help of upbringing, of parental influence, which,

as  a  precursor  of  the  super-ego,  restricts  the  ego’s  activity  by

prohibitions and punishments, and encourages or compels the setting-

up  of  repressions.  We  must  therefore  not  forget  to  include  the

influence of civilization among the determinants of neurosis. It is easy,

as we can see, for a barbarian to be healthy; for a civilized man the

task is hard. The desire for a powerful, uninhibited ego may seem to

us intelligible; but, as we are taught by the times we live in, it is in the

profoundest sense hostile to civilization. And since the demands of

civilization are represented by family upbringing, we must bear in mind

the part played by this biological characteristic of the human species -

the prolonged period of its childhood dependence - in the aetiology of

the neuroses.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis                                                                                      4994

 

   As regards the other point - the specific instinctual factor - we come

upon  an  interesting  discrepancy  between  theory  and  experience.

Theoretically  there  is  no  objection  to  supposing  that  any  sort  of

instinctual  demand  might  occasion  the  same  repressions  and  their

consequences; but our observation shows us invariably, so far as we

can judge, that the excitations that play this pathogenic part arise from

the component instincts of sexual life. The symptoms of neuroses are,

it might be said, without exception either a substitutive satisfaction of

some sexual urge or measures to prevent such a satisfaction; and as

a rule they are compromises between the two, of the kind that come

about in accordance with the laws operating between contraries in the

unconscious. The gap in our theory cannot at present be filled; our

decision is made more difficult by the fact that most of the urges of

sexual life are not of a purely erotic nature but have arisen from alloys

of  the  erotic  instinct  with  portions  of  the  destructive  instinct.  But  it

cannot  be  doubted  that  the  instincts  which  manifest  themselves

physiologically as sexuality play a prominent, unexpectedly large part

in  the  causation  of  the  neuroses  -  whether  it  is  an  exclusive  one

remains to be decided. It must also be borne in mind that in the course

of cultural development no other function has been so energetically

and extensively repudiated as precisely the sexual one. Theory must

rest satisfied with a few hints that betray a deeper connection: the fact

that the first period of childhood, during which the ego begins to be

differentiated  from  the  id,  is  also  the  period  of  the  early  sexual

efflorescence which is brought to an end by the period of latency; that

it can hardly be a matter of chance that this momentous early period

subsequently  falls  a  victim  to  infantile  amnesia;  and  lastly,  that

biological changes in sexual life (such as the function’s diphasic onset

which we have already mentioned, the disappearance of the periodic

character of sexual excitation and the transformation in the relation

between  female  menstruation  and  male  excitation)  -  that  these

innovations  in  sexuality  must  have  been  of  high  importance  in  the

evolution of animals into man. It is left for the science of the future to

bring these still isolated data together into a new understanding. It is

not in psychology but in biology that there is a gap here. We shall notbe  wrong,  perhaps,  in  saying  that  the  weak  point  in  the  ego’s

organization  seems  to  lie  in  its  attitude  to  the  sexual  function,  as

though  the  biological  antithesis  between  self-preservation  and  the

preservation of the species had found a psychological expression at

that point.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4995

 

   Analytic experience has convinced us of the complete truth of the

assertion so often to be heard that the child is psychologically father to

the  adult  and  that  the  events  of  his  first  years  are  of  paramount

importance for his whole later life. It will thus be of special interest to

us  if  there  is  something  that  may  be  described  as  the  central

experience of this period of childhood. Our attention is first attracted

by the effects of certain influences which do not apply to all children,

though  they  are  common  enough  -  such  as  the  sexual  abuse  of

children  by  adults,  their  seduction  by  other  children  (brothers  or

sisters) slightly their seniors, and, what we should not expect, their

being  deeply  stirred  by  seeing  or  hearing  at  first  hand  sexual

behaviour between adults (their parents) mostly at a time at which one

would  not  have  thought  they  could  either  be  interested  in  or

understand  any  such  impressions,  or  be  capable  of  remembering

them later. It is easy to confirm the extent to which such experiences

arouse  a  child’s  susceptibility  and  force  his  own  sexual  urges  into

certain  channels  from  which  they  cannot  afterwards  depart.  Since

these impressions are subjected to repression either at once or as

soon  as  they  seek  to  return  as  memories,  they  constitute  the

determinant for the neurotic compulsion which will subsequently make

it  impossible  for  the  ego  to  control  the  sexual  function  and  will

probably cause it to turn away from that function permanently. If this

latter reaction occurs, the result will be a neurosis; if it is absent, a

variety  of  perversions  will  develop,  or  the  function,  which  is  of

immense importance not only for reproduction but also for the entire

shaping of life, will become totally unmanageable.

   However instructive cases of this kind may be, a still higher degreeof interest must attach to the influence of a situation which every child

is  destined  to  pass  through  and  which  follows  inevitably  from  the

factor  of  the  prolonged  period  during  which  a  child  is  cared  for  by

other people and lives with his parents. I am thinking of the Oedipus

complex, so named because its essential substance is to be found in

the  Greek  legend  of  King  Oedipus,  which  has  fortunately  been

preserved for us in a version by a great dramatist. The Greek hero

killed his father and took his mother to wife. That he did so unwittingly,

since he did not know them as his parents, is a deviation from the

analytic facts which we can easily understand and which, indeed, we

shall recognize as inevitable.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4996

 

   At this point we must give separate accounts of the development of

boys and girls (of males and females), for it is now that the difference

between the sexes finds psychological expression for the first time.

We are faced here by the great enigma of the biological fact of the

duality of the sexes: it is an ultimate fact for our knowledge, it defies

every attempt to trace it back to something else. Psycho-analysis has

contributed  nothing  to  clearing  up  this  problem,  which  clearly  falls

wholly  within  the  province  of  biology.  In  mental  life  we  only  find

reflections  of  this  great  antithesis;  and  their  interpretation  is  made

more difficult by the fact, long suspected, that no individual is limited to

the modes of reaction of a single sex but always finds some room for

those of the opposite one, just as his body bears, alongside of the fully

developed organs of one sex, atrophied and often useless rudiments

of those of the other. For distinguishing between male and female in

mental life we make use of what is obviously an inadequate empirical

and conventional equation: we call everything that is strong and active

male, and everything that is weak and passive female. This fact of

psychological bisexuality, too, embarrasses all our enquiries into the

subject and makes them harder to describe.

   A child’s first erotic object is the mother’s breast that nourishes it;

love has its origin in attachment to the satisfied need for nourishment.There is no doubt that, to begin with, the child does not distinguish

between  the  breast  and  its  own  body;  when  the  breast  has  to  be

separated from the body and shifted to the ‘outside’ because the child

so often finds it absent, it carries with it as an ‘object’ a part of the

original  narcissistic  libidinal  cathexis.  This  first  object  is  later

completed  into  the  person  of  the  child’s  mother,  who  not  only

nourishes it but also looks after it and thus arouses in it a number of

other physical sensations, pleasurable and unpleasurable. By her care

of  the  child’s  body  she  becomes  its  first  seducer.  In  these  two

relations  lies  the  root  of  a  mother’s  importance,  unique,  without

parallel, established unalterably for a whole lifetime as the first and

strongest love-object and as the prototype of all later love-relations -

for both sexes. In all this the phylogenetic foundation has so much the

upper  hand  over  personal  accidental  experience  that  it  makes  no

difference whether a child has really sucked at the breast or has been

brought  up  on  the  bottle  and  never  enjoyed  the  tenderness  of  a

mother’s care. In both cases the child’s development takes the same

path; it may be that in the second case its later longing grows all the

greater. And for however long it is fed at its mother’s breast, it will

always  be  left  with  a  conviction  after  it  has  been  weaned  that  its

feeding was too short and too little.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4997

 

   This preface is not superfluous, for it can heighten our realization of

the intensity of the Oedipus complex. When a boy (from the age of two

or three) has entered the phallic phrase of his libidinal development, is

feeling pleasurable sensations in his sexual organ and has learnt to

procure these at will by manual stimulation, he becomes his mother’s

lover. He wishes to possess her physically in such ways as he has

divined from his observations and intuitions about sexual life, and he

tries to seduce her by showing her the male organ which he is proud

to own. In a word, his early awakened masculinity seeks to take his

father’s place with her; his father has hitherto in any case been an

envied model to the boy, owing to the physical strength he perceivesin him and the authority with which he finds him clothed. His father

now becomes a rival who stands in his way and whom he would like to

get rid of. If while his father is away he is allowed to share his mother’s

bed and if when his father returns he is once more banished from it,

his  satisfaction  when  his  father  disappears  and  his  disappointment

when  he  emerges  again  are  deeply  felt  experiences.  This  is  the

subject  of  the  Oedipus  complex,  which  the  Greek  legend  has

translated from the world of a child’s phantasy into pretended reality.

Under  the  conditions  of  our  civilization  it  is  invariably  doomed  to  a

frightening end.

      The  boy’s  mother  has  understood  quite  well  that  his  sexual

excitation relates to herself. Sooner or later she reflects that it is not

right to allow it to continue. She thinks she is doing the correct thing in

forbidding him to handle his genital organ. Her prohibition has little

effect; at the most it brings about some modification in his method of

obtaining  satisfaction.  At  last  his  mother  adopts  the  severest

measures; she threatens to take away from him the thing he is defying

her with. Usually, in order to make the threat more frightening and

more credible, she delegates its execution to the boy’s father, saying

that she will tell him and that he will cut the penis off. Strange to say,

this  threat  operates  only  if  another  condition  is  fulfilled  before  or

afterwards. In itself it seems too inconceivable to the boy that such a

thing could happen. But if at the time of the threat he can recall the

appearance of female genitals or if shortly afterwards he has a sight of

them  -  of  genitals,  that  is  to  say,  which  really  lack  this  supremely

valued part, then he takes what he has heard seriously and, coming

under  the  influence  of  the castration  complex,  experiences  the

severest trauma of his young life.¹

 

   ¹ Castration has a place too in the Oedipus legend, for the blinding with which Oedipus

punishes himself after the discovery of his crime is, by the evidence of dreams, a symbolic
substitute for castration. The possibility cannot be excluded that a phylogenetic memory-trace
may contribute to the extraordinarily terrifying effect of the threat - a memory-trace from the
prehistory of the primal family, where the jealous father actually robbed his son of his genitals
if the latter became troublesome to him as a rival with a woman. The primaeval custom of
circumcision,  another  symbolic  substitute  for  castration,  can  only  be  understood  as  an
expression of submission to the father’s will. (Cf. the puberty rites of primitive peoples.) No
investigation has yet been made of the form taken by the events described above among
peoples and in civilizations which do not suppress masturbation in children.
                           An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4998

 

      The  results  of  the  threat  of  castration  are  multifarious  and

incalculable; they affect the whole of a boy’s relations with his father

and mother and subsequently with men and women in general. As a

rule the child’s masculinity is unable to stand up to this first shock. In

order to preserve his sexual organ he renounces the possession of his

mother  more  or  less  completely;  his  sexual  life  often  remains

permanently  encumbered  by  the  prohibition.  If  a  strong  feminine

component, as we call it, is present in him, its strength is increased by

this intimidation of his masculinity. He falls into a passive attitude to

his father, such as he attributes to his mother. It is true that as a result

of the threat he has given up masturbation, but not the activities of his

imagination accompanying it. On the contrary, since these are now the

only form of sexual satisfaction remaining to him, he indulges in them

more than before and in these phantasies, though he still continues to

identify himself with his father, he also does so, simultaneously and

perhaps  predominantly,  with  his  mother.  Derivatives  and  modified

products of these early masturbatory phantasies usually make their

way into his later ego and play a part in the formation of his character.

Apart from this encouragement of his femininity, fear and hatred of his

father gain greatly in intensity. The boy’s masculinity withdraws, as it

were, into a defiant attitude towards his father, which will dominate his

later behaviour in human society in a compulsive fashion. A residue of

his erotic fixation to his mother is often left in the form of an excessive

dependence on her, and this persists as a kind of bondage to women.

He no longer ventures to love his mother, but he cannot risk not being

loved by her, for in that case he would be in danger of being betrayed

by  her  to  his  father  and  handed  over  to  castration.  The  whole

experience, with all its antecedents and consequences, of which my

account has only been able to give a selection, is subjected to a highly

energetic repression, and, as is made possible by the laws operating

in the unconscious id, all the mutually contending emotional impulses

and reactions which are set going at that time are preserved in the

unconscious and ready to disturb the later development of the ego

after puberty. When the somatic process of sexual maturation putsfresh  life  into  the  old  libidinal  fixations  which  had  apparently  been

surmounted,  sexual  life  will  turn  out  to  be  inhibited,  without

homogeneity and fallen apart into mutually conflicting urges.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4999

 

   It is no doubt true that the impact of the threat of castration upon a

boy’s  budding  sexual  life  does  not  always  have  these  dreaded

consequences. It will depend once again on quantitative relations how

much damage is done and how much avoided. The whole occurrence,

which  may  probably  be  regarded  as  the  central  experience  of  the

years of childhood, the greatest problem of early life and the strongest

source  of  later  inadequacy,  is  so  completely  forgotten  that  its

reconstruction during the work of analysis is met in adults by the most

decided disbelief. Indeed, aversion to it is so great that people try to

silence any mention of the proscribed subject and the most obvious

reminders of it are overlooked by a strange intellectual blindness. One

may hear it objected, for instance, that the legend of King Oedipus has

in  fact  no  connection  with  the  construction  made  by  analysis:  the

cases are quite different, since Oedipus did not know that it was his

father  that  he  killed  and  his  mother  that  he  married.  What  is

overlooked in this is that a distortion of this kind is inevitable if an

attempt is made at a poetic handling of the material, and that there is

no introduction of extraneous material but only a skilful employment of

the factors presented by the theme. The ignorance of Oedipus is a

legitimate  representation  of  the  unconscious  state  into  which,  for

adults, the whole experience has fallen; and the coercive power of the

oracle,  which  makes  or  should  make  the  hero  innocent,  is  a

recognition of the inevitability of the fate which has condemned every

son to live through the Oedipus complex. Again it was pointed out

from  psycho-analytic  quarters  how  easily  the  riddle  of  another

dramatic hero, Shakespeare’s procrastinator, Hamlet, can be solved

by reference to the Oedipus complex, since the prince came to grief

over the task of punishing someone else for what coincided with the

substance of his own Oedipus wish - whereupon the general lack ofunderstanding on the part of the literary world showed how ready is

the mass of mankind to hold fast to its infantile repressions.¹

   Yet more than a century before the emergence of psycho-analysis

the French philosopher Diderot bore witness to the importance of the

Oedipus complex by expressing the difference between the primitive

and  civilized  worlds  in  this  sentence:  ‘Si  le  petit  sauvage  était

abandonné à lui-même, qu’il conservât toute son imbécillité, et qu’il

réunît  au  peu  de  raison  de  l’enfant  au  berceau  la  violence  des

passions de l’homme de trente ans, il tordrait le col à son père et

coucherait  avec  sa  mère.’²  I  venture  to  say  that  if  psycho-analysis

could  boast  of  no  other  achievement  than  the  discovery  of  the

repressed Oedipus complex, that alone would give it a claim to be

included among the precious new acquisitions of mankind.

 

   ¹ The name ‘William Shakespeare’ is very probably a pseudonym behind which a great

unknown lies concealed. Edward de Vere, Earl of Oxford, a man who has been thought to be
identifiable with the author of Shakespeare’s works, lost a beloved and admired father while
he was still a boy and completely repudiated his mother, who contracted a new marriage very
soon after her husband’s death.

   ² [‘If the little savage were left to himself, preserving all his foolishness and adding to the

small sense of a child in the cradle the violent passions of a man of thirty, he would strangle
his father and lie with his mother.’]
 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      5000

 

   The effects of the castration complex in little girls are more uniform

and no less profound. A female child has, of course, no need to fear

the loss of a penis; she must, however, react to the fact of not having

received one. From the very first she envies boys its possession; her

whole development may be said to take place under the colours of

envy  for  the  penis.  She  begins  by  making  vain  attempts  to  do  the

same  as  boys  and  later,  with  greater  success,  makes  efforts  to

compensate for her defect - efforts which may lead in the end to a

normal feminine attitude. If during the phallic phase she tries to get

pleasure like a boy by the manual stimulation of her genitals, it often

happens that she fails to obtain sufficient satisfaction and extends her

judgement of inferiority from her stunted penis to her whole self. As arule she soon gives up masturbating, since she has no wish to be

reminded of the superiority of her brother or playmate, and turns away

from sexuality altogether.

   If a little girl persists in her first wish - to grow into a boy - in extreme

cases she will end as a manifest homosexual, and otherwise she will

exhibit markedly masculine traits in the conduct of her later life, will

choose a masculine vocation, and so on. The other path leads by way

of  abandoning  the  mother  she  has  loved:  the  daughter,  under  the

influence  of  her  envy  for  the  penis,  cannot  forgive  her  mother  for

having  sent  her  into  the  world  so  insufficiently  equipped.  In  her

resentment over this she gives up her mother and puts someone else

in her place as the object of her love - her father. If one has lost a

love-object, the most obvious reaction is to identify oneself with it, to

replace it from within, as it were, by identification. This mechanism

now comes to the little girl’s help. Identification with her mother can

take the place of attachment to her mother. The little daughter puts

herself in her mother’s place, as she has always done in her games;

she tries to take her mother’s place with her father, and begins to hate

the mother she used to love, and from two motives: from jealousy as

well as from mortification over the penis she has been denied. Her

new relation to her father may start by having as its content a wish to

have his penis at her disposal, but it culminates in another wish - to

have a baby from him as a gift. The wish for a baby has thus taken the

place of the wish for a penis, or has at all events split off from it.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      5001

 

      It  is  an  interesting  thing  that  the  relation  between  the  Oedipus

complex  and  the  castration  complex  should  take  such  a  different

shape - an opposite one, in fact - in the case of females as compared

to that of males. In males, as we have seen, the threat of castration

brings the Oedipus complex to an end; in females we find that, on the

contrary, it is their lack of a penis that forces them into their Oedipus

complex. It does little harm to a woman if she remains in her feminine

Oedipus attitude. (The term ‘Electra complex’ has been proposed forit.)  She  will  in  that  case  choose  her  husband  for  his  paternal

characteristics and be ready to recognize his authority. Her longing to

possess a penis, which is in fact unappeasable, may find satisfaction if

she can succeed in completing her love for the organ by extending it

to  the  bearer  of  the  organ,  just  as  happened  earlier  when  she

progressed from her mother’s breast to her mother as a whole person.

      If  we  ask  an  analyst  what  his  experience  has  shown  to  be  the

mental  structures  least  accessible  to  influence  in  his  patients,  the

answer will be: in a woman her wish for a penis, in a man his feminine

attitude towards his own sex, a precondition of which would, of course,

be the loss of his penis.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      5002

 

 

                                        PART III

 

                          THE THEORETICAL YIELD

 

                                      CHAPTER VIII

 

  THE PSYCHICAL APPARATUS AND THE EXTERNAL WORLD

 

All of the general discoveries and hypotheses which I brought forward

in the first chapter were, of course, arrived at by laborious and patient

detailed  work  of  the  kind  of  which  I  have  given  an  example  in  the

previous chapter. We may now feel tempted to make a survey of the

increases in knowledge that we have achieved by work such as this

and to consider what paths we have opened for further advances. In

this connection we may be struck by the fact that we have so often

been  obliged  to  venture  beyond  the  frontiers  of  the  science  of

psychology.  The  phenomena  with  which  we  were  dealing  do  not

belong to psychology alone; they have an organic and biological side

as  well,  and  accordingly  in  the  course  of  our  efforts  at  building  up

psycho-analysis  we  have  also  made  some  important  biological

discoveries and have not been able to avoid framing new biologicalhypotheses.

   But let us for the moment keep to psychology. We have seen that it

is  not  scientifically  feasible  to  draw  a  line  of  demarcation  between

what is psychically normal and abnormal; so that that distinction, in

spite of its practical importance, possesses only a conventional value.

We have thus established a right to arrive at an understanding of the

normal life of the mind from a study of its disorders - which would not

be admissible if these pathological states, neuroses and psychoses,

had specific causes operating in the manner of foreign bodies.

      The  study  of  a  mental  disorder  occurring  during  sleep,  which  is

transient and harmless and which, indeed, performs a useful function,

has given us a key to the understanding of the mental diseases which

are permanent and injurious to life. And we may now venture on the

assertion that the psychology of consciousness was no better capable

of  understanding  the  normal  functioning  of  the  mind  than  of

understanding dreams. The data of conscious self-perception, which

alone were at its disposal, have proved in every respect inadequate to

fathom the profusion and complexity of the processes of the mind, to

reveal their interconnections and so to recognize the determinants of

their disturbances.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      5003

 

   The hypothesis we have adopted of a psychical apparatus extended

in space, expediently put together, developed by the exigencies of life,

which  gives  rise  to  the  phenomena  of  consciousness  only  at  one

particular point and under certain conditions - this hypothesis has put

us in a position to establish psychology on foundations similar to those

of any other science, such, for instance, as physics. In our science as

in the others the problem is the same: behind the attributes (qualities)

of the object under examination which are presented directly to our

perception,  we  have  to  discover  something  else  which  is  more

independent of the particular receptive capacity of our sense organs

and which approximates more closely to what may be supposed to be

the real state of affairs. We have no hope of being able to reach thelatter  itself,  since  it  is  evident  that  everything  new  that  we  have

inferred must nevertheless be translated back into the language of our

perceptions, from which it is simply impossible for us to free ourselves.

But herein lies the very nature and limitation of our science. It is as

though we were to say in physics: ‘If we could see clearly enough we

should  find  that  what  appears  to  be  a  solid  body  is  made  up  of

particles of such and such a shape and size and occupying such and

such  relative  positions.’  In  the  meantime  we  try  to  increase  the

efficiency  of  our  sense  organs  to  the  furthest  possible  extent  by

artificial aids; but it may be expected that all such efforts will fail to

affect the ultimate outcome. Reality will always remain ‘unknowable’.

The yield brought to light by scientific work from our primary sense

perceptions will consist in an insight into connections and dependent

relations which are present in the external world, which can somehow

be reliably reproduced or reflected in the internal world of our thought

and a knowledge of which enables us to ‘understand’ something in the

external world, to foresee it and possibly to alter it. Our procedure in

psycho-analysis  is  quite  similar.  We  have  discovered  technical

methods  of  filling  up  the  gaps  in  the  phenomena  of  our

consciousness, and we make use of those methods just as a physicist

makes  use  of  experiment.  In  this  manner  we  infer  a  number  of

processes which are in themselves ‘unknowable’ and interpolate them

in those that are conscious to us. And if, for instance, we say: ‘At this

point an unconscious memory intervened’, what that means is: ‘At this

point  something  occurred  of  which  we  are  totally  unable  to  form  a

conception, but which, if it had entered our consciousness, could only

have been described in such and such a way.’

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      5004

 

   Our justification for making such inferences and interpolations and

the degree of certainty attaching to them of course remain open to

criticism in each individual instance; and it cannot be denied that it is

often  extremely  difficult  to  arrive  at  a  decision  -  a  fact  which  finds

expression in the lack of agreement among analysts. The novelty ofthe problem is to blame for this - that is to say, a lack of training. But

there is besides this a special factor inherent in the subject itself; for in

psychology, unlike physics, we are not always concerned with things

which can only arouse a cool scientific interest. Thus we shall not be

very  greatly  surprised  if  a  woman  analyst  who  has  not  been

sufficiently convinced of the intensity of her own wish for a penis also

fails to attach proper importance to that factor in her patients. But such

sources of error, arising from the personal equation, have no great

importance in the long run. If one looks through old text-books on the

use  of  the  microscope,  one  is  astonished  to  find  the  extraordinary

demands  which  were  made  on  the  personality  of  those  who  made

observations with that instrument while its technique was still young -

of all of which there is no question to-day.

      I  cannot  undertake  to  attempt  a  complete  picture  here  of  the

psychical apparatus and its activities; I should find myself hindered,

among other things, by the circumstance that psycho-analysis has not

yet  had  time  to  study  all  those  functions  equally.  I  shall  therefore

content  myself  with  a  detailed  recapitulation  of  the  account  in  my

opening chapter.

   The core of our being, then, is formed by the obscure id, which has

no  direct  communication  with  the  external  world  and  is  accessible

even  to  our  own  knowledge  only  though  the  medium  of  another

agency.  Within  this  id  the  organic instincts  operate,  which  are

themselves  compounded  of  fusions  of  two  primal  forces  (Eros  and

destructiveness) in varying proportions and are differentiated from one

another by their relation to organs or systems of organs. The one and

only urge of these instincts is towards satisfaction, which is expected

to arise from certain changes in the organs with the help of objects in

the external world. But immediate and unheeding satisfaction of the

instincts,  such  as  the  id  demands,  would  often  lead  to  perilous

conflicts with the external world and to extinction. The id knows no

solicitude about ensuring survival and no anxiety; or it would perhaps

be  more  correct  to  say  that,  though  it  can  generate  the  sensory

elements of anxiety, it cannot make use of them. The processes which

are possible in and between the assumed psychical elements in the id

(the primary process) differ widely from those which are familiar to us

through conscious perception in our intellectual and emotional life; norare they subject to the critical restrictions of logic, which repudiates

some of these processes as invalid and seeks to undo them.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      5005

 

   The id, cut off from the external world, has a world of perception of

its own. It detects with extraordinary acuteness certain changes in its

interior, especially oscillations in the tension of its instinctual needs,

and  these  changes  become  conscious  as  feelings  in  the  pleasure-

unpleasure series. It is hard to say, to be sure, by what means and

with the help of what sensory terminal organs these perceptions come

about.  But  it  is  an  established  fact  that  self-perceptions  -

coenaesthetic feelings and feelings of pleasure-unpleasure - govern

the passage of events in the id with despotic force. The id obeys the

inexorable pleasure principle. But not the id alone. It seems that the

activity of the other psychical agencies too is able only to modify the

pleasure principle but not to nullify it; and it remains a question of the

highest  theoretical  importance,  and  one  that  has  not  yet  been

answered, when and how it is ever possible for the pleasure principle

to  be  overcome.  The  consideration  that  the  pleasure  principle

demands a reduction, at bottom the extinction perhaps, of the tensions

of  instinctual  needs  (that  is, Nirvana)  leads  to  the  still  unassessed

relations  between  the  pleasure  principle  and  the  two  primal  forces,

Eros and the death instinct.

   The other agency of the mind, which we believe we know best and

in which we recognize ourselves most easily - what is known as the

ego - has been developed out of the id’s cortical layer, which, through

being adapted to the reception and exclusion of stimuli, is in direct

contact  with  the  external  world  (reality).  Starting  from  conscious

perception  it  has  subjected  to  its  influence  ever  larger  regions  and

deeper strata of the id, and, in the persistence with which it maintains

its dependence on the external world, it bears the indelible stamp of its

origin (as it might be ‘Made in Germany’). Its psychological function

consists  in  raising  the  passage  in  the  id  to  a  higher  dynamic  level

(perhaps  by  transforming  freely  mobile  energy  into  bound  energy,such  as  corresponds  to  the  preconscious  state);  its  constructive

function consists in interpolating, between the demand made by an

instinct and the action that satisfies it, the activity of thought which,

after  taking  its  bearings  in  the  present  and  assessing  earlier

experiences,  endeavours  by  means  of  experimental  actions  to

calculate the consequences of the course of action proposed. In this

way the ego comes to a decision on whether the attempt to obtain

satisfaction is to be carried out or postponed or whether it may not be

necessary for the demand by the instinct to be suppressed altogether

as being dangerous. (Here we have the reality principle.) Just as the

id is directed exclusively to obtaining pleasure, so the ego is governed

by considerations of safety. The ego has set itself the task of self-

preservation,  which  the  id  appears  to  neglect.  It  makes  use  of  the

sensations of anxiety as a signal to give a warning of dangers that

threaten its integrity. Since memory traces can become conscious just

as perceptions do, especially through their association with residues

of speech, the possibility arises of a confusion which would lead to a

mistaking of reality. The ego guards itself against this possibility by the

institution of reality-testing, which is allowed to fall into abeyance in

dreams on account of the conditions prevailing in the state of sleep.

The  ego,  which  seeks  to  maintain  itself  in  an  environment  of

overwhelming  mechanical  forces,  is  threatened  by  dangers  which

come in the first instance from external reality; but dangers do not

threaten it from there alone. Its own id is a source of similar dangers,

and  that  for  two  different  reasons.  In  the  first  place,  an  excessive

strength  of  instinct  can  damage  the  ego  in  a  similar  way  to  an

excessive ‘stimulus’ from the external world. It is true that the former

cannot  destroy  it;  but  it  can  destroy  its  characteristic  dynamic

organization and change the ego back into a portion of the id. In the

second  place,  experience  may  have  taught  the  ego  that  the

satisfaction  of  some  instinctual  demand  which  is  not  in  itself

intolerable  would  involve  dangers  in  the  external  world,  so  that  an

instinctual demand of that kind itself becomes a danger. Thus the ego

is  fighting  on  two  fronts:  it  has  to  defend  its  existence  against  an

external world which threatens it with annihilation as well as against

an internal world that makes excessive demands. It adopts the same

methods of defence against both, but its defence against the internalenemy is particularly inadequate. As a result of having originally been

identical with this latter enemy and of having lived with it since on the

most intimate terms, it has great difficulty in escaping from the internal

dangers. They persist as threats, even if they can be temporarily held

down.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      5006

 

   We have heard how the weak and immature ego of the first period of

childhood is permanently damaged by the stresses put upon it in its

efforts to fend off the dangers that are peculiar to that period of life.

Children are protected against the dangers that threaten them from

the external world by the solicitude of their parents; they pay for this

security  by  a  fear  of loss  of  love  which  would  deliver  them  over

helpless  to  the  dangers  of  the  external  world.  This  factor  exerts  a

decisive influence on the outcome of the conflict when a boy finds

himself in the situation of the Oedipus complex, in which the threat to

his narcissism by the danger of castration, reinforced from primaeval

sources, takes possession of him. Driven by the combined operation

of  these  two  influences,  the  contemporary  real  danger  and  the

remembered one with its phylogenetic basis, the child embarks on his

attempts at defence - repressions - which are effective for the moment

but nevertheless turn out to be psychologically inadequate when the

later  re-animation  of  sexual  life  brings  a  reinforcement  to  the

instinctual demands which have been repudiated in the past. If this is

so, it would have to be said from a biological standpoint that the ego

comes to grief over the task of mastering the excitations of the early

sexual period, at a time when its immaturity makes it incompetent to

do  so.  It  is  in  this  lagging  of  ego  development  behind  libidinal

development that we see the essential precondition of neurosis; and

we cannot escape the conclusion that neuroses could be avoided if

the childish ego were spared this task - if, that is to say, the child’s

sexual life were allowed free play, as happens among many primitive

peoples.  It  may  be  that  the  aetiology  of  neurotic  illnesses  is  more

complicated than we have here described it; if so, we have at leastbrought out one essential part of the aetiological complex. Nor should

we forget the phylogenetic influences, which are represented in some

way in the id in forms that we are not yet able to grasp, and which

must certainly act upon the ego more powerfully in that early period

than later. On the other hand, the realization dawns on us that such an

early  attempt  at  damming  up  the  sexual  instinct,  so  decided  a

partisanship by the young ego in favour of the external as opposed to

the  internal  world,  brought  about  by  the  prohibition  of  infantile

sexuality,  cannot  be  without  its  effect  on  the  individual’s  later

readiness for culture. The instinctual demands forced away from direct

satisfaction  are  compelled  to  enter  on  new  paths  leading  to

substitutive satisfaction, and in the course of these détours they may

become  desexualized  and  their  connection  with  their  original

instinctual  aims  may  become  looser.  And  at  this  point  we  may

anticipate  the  thesis  that  many  of  the  highly  valued  assets  of  our

civilization were acquired at the cost of sexuality and by the restriction

of sexual motive forces.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      5007

 

   We have repeatedly had to insist on the fact that the ego owes its

origin as well as the most important of its acquired characteristics to

its relation to the real external world. We are thus prepared to assume

that the ego’s pathological states, in which it most approximates once

again  to  the  id,  are  founded  on  a  cessation  or  slackening  of  that

relation to the external world. This tallies very well with what we learn

from clinical experience - namely, that the precipitating cause of the

outbreak of a psychosis is either that reality has become intolerably

painful or that the instincts have become extraordinarily intensified -

both of which, in view of the rival claims made on the ego by the id

and the external world, must lead to the same result. The problem of

psychoses would be simple and perspicuous if the ego’s detachment

from reality could be carried through completely. But that seems to

happen only rarely or perhaps never. Even in a state so far removed

from the reality of the external world as one of hallucinatory confusion,one learns from patients after their recovery that at the time in some

corner of their mind (as they put it) there was a normal person hidden,

who, like a detached spectator, watched the hubbub of illness go past

him. I do not know if we may assume that this is so in general, but I

can  report  the  same  of  other  psychoses  with  a  less  tempestuous

course. I call to mind a case of chronic paranoia in which after each

attack of jealousy a dream conveyed to the analyst a correct picture of

the precipitating cause, free from any delusion. An interesting contrast

was thus brought to light: while we are accustomed to discover from

the  dreams  of  neurotics  jealousies  which  are  alien  to  their  waking

lives, in this psychotic case the delusion which dominated the patient

in the day-time was corrected by his dream. We may probably take it

as  being  generally  true  that  what  occurs  in  all  these  cases  is  a

psychical split. Two psychical attitudes have been formed instead of a

single one - one, the normal one, which takes account of reality, and

another which under the influence of the instincts detaches the ego

from reality. The two exist alongside of each other. The issue depends

on their relative strength. If the second is or becomes the stronger, the

necessary precondition for a psychosis is present. If the relation is

reversed, then there is an apparent cure of the delusional disorder.

Actually it has only retreated into the unconscious - just as numerous

observations lead us to believe that the delusion existed ready-made

for a long time before its manifest irruption.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      5008

 

   The view which postulates that in all psychoses there is a splitting of

the ego could not call for so much notice if it did not turn out to apply

to other states more like the neuroses and, finally, to the neuroses

themselves. I first became convinced of this in cases fetishism. This

abnormality, which may be counted as one of the perversions, is, as is

well  known,  based  on  the  patient  (who  is  almost  always  male)  not

recognizing  the  fact  that  females  have  no  penis  -  a  fact  which  is

extremely undesirable to him since it is a proof of the possibility of his

being  castrated  himself.  He  therefore  disavows  his  own  sense-perception which showed him that the female genitals lack a penis

and holds fast to the contrary conviction. The disavowed perception

does not, however, remain entirely without influence for, in spite of

everything, he has not the courage to assert that he actually saw a

penis. He takes hold of something else instead - a part of the body or

some  other  object  -  and  assigns  it  the  role  of  the  penis  which  he

cannot do without. It is usually something that he in fact saw at the

moment at which he saw the female genitals, or it is something that

can suitably serve as a symbolic substitute for the penis. Now it would

be incorrect to describe this process when a fetish is constructed as a

splitting  of  the  ego;  it  is  a  compromise  formed  with  the  help  of

displacement, such as we have been familiar with in dreams. But our

observations show us still more. The creation of the fetish was due to

an intention to destroy the evidence for the possibility of castration, so

that fear of castration could be avoided. If females, like other living

creatures,  possess  a  penis,  there  is  no  need  to  tremble  for  the

continued  possession  of  one’s  own  penis.  Now  we  come  across

fetishists  who  have  developed  the  same  fear  of  castration  as  non-

fetishists and react in the same way to it. Their behaviour is therefore

simultaneously expressing two contrary premisses. On the one hand

they are disavowing the fact of their perception - the fact that they saw

no  penis  in  the  female  genitals;  and  on  the  other  hand  they  are

recognizing the fact that females have no penis and are drawing the

correct  conclusions  from  it.  The  two  attitudes  persist  side  by  side

throughout their lives without influencing each other. Here is what may

rightly be called a splitting of the ego. This circumstance also enables

us  to  understand  how  it  is  that  fetishism  is  so  often  only  partially

developed.  It  does  not  govern  the  choice  of  object  exclusively  but

leaves  room  for  a  greater  or  lesser  amount  of  normal  sexual

behaviour; sometimes, indeed, it retires into playing a modest part or

is limited to a mere hint. In festishists, therefore, the detachment of the

ego  from  the  reality  of  the  external  world  has  never  succeeded

completely.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      5009 

   It must not be thought that fetishism presents an exceptional case

as regards a splitting of the ego; it is merely a particularly favourable

subject for studying the question. Let us return to our thesis that the

childish  ego,  under  the  domination  of  the  real  world,  gets  rid  of

undesirable instinctual demands by what are called repressions. We

will now supplement this by further asserting that, during the same

period  of  life,  the  ego  often  enough  finds  itself  in  the  position  of

fending  off  some  demand  from  the  external  world  which  it  feels

distressing and that this is effected by means of a disavowal of the

perceptions  which  bring  to  knowledge  this  demand  from  reality.

Disavowals of this kind occur very often and not only with fetishists;

and whenever we are in a position to study them they turn out to be

half-measures, incomplete attempts at detachment from reality. The

disavowal  is  always  supplemented  by  an  acknowledgement;  two

contrary  and  independent  attitudes  always  arise  and  result  in  the

situation of there being a splitting of the ego. Once more the issue

depends on which of the two can seize hold of the greater intensity.

   The facts of this splitting of the ego, which we have just described,

are neither so new nor so strange as they may at first appear. It is

indeed a universal characteristic of neuroses that there are present in

the subject’s mental life, as regards some particular behaviour, two

different  attitudes,  contrary  to  each  other  and  independent  of  each

other.  In  the  case  of  neuroses,  however,  one  of  these  attitudes

belongs to the ego and the contrary one, which is repressed, belongs

to the id. The difference between this case and the other is essentially

a topographical or structural one, and it is not always easy to decide in

an individual instance with which of the two possibilities one is dealing.

They have, however, the following important characteristic in common.

Whatever the ego does in its efforts of defence, whether it seeks to

disavow a portion of the real external world or whether it seeks to

reject  an  instinctual  demand  from  the  internal  world,  its  success  is

never  complete  and  unqualified.  The  outcome  always  lies  in  two

contrary attitudes, of which the defeated, weaker one, no less than the

other,  leads  to  psychical  complications.  In  conclusion,  it  is  only

necessary  to  point  out  how  little  of  all  these  processes  becomes

known to us through our conscious perception. 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      5010

 

 
                                      CHAPTER IX

 

                            THE INTERNAL WORLD

 

We  have  no  way  of  conveying  knowledge  of  a  complicated  set  of

simultaneous  events  except  by  describing  them  successively;  and

thus it happens that all our accounts are at fault to begin with owing to

one-sided simplification and must wait till they can be supplemented,

built on to, and so set right.

      The  picture  of  an  ego  which  mediates  between  the  id  and  the

external world, which takes over the instinctual demands of the former

in order to lead them to satisfaction, which derives perceptions from

the  latter  and  uses  them  as  memories,  which,  intent  on  its  self-

preservation, puts itself in defence against excessively strong claims

from  both  sides  and  which,  at  the  same  time,  is  guided  in  all  its

decisions  by  the  injunctions  of  a  modified  pleasure  principle  -  this

picture in fact applies to the ego only up to the end of the first period of

childhood, till about the age of five. At about that time an important

change has taken place. A portion of the external world has, at least

partially,  been  abandoned  as  an  object  and  has  instead,  by

identification, been taken into the ego and thus become an integral

part  of  the  internal  world.  This  new  psychical  agency  continues  to

carry  on  the  functions  which  have  hitherto  been  performed  by  the

people  in  the  external  world:  it  observes  the  ego,  gives  it  orders,

judges it and threatens it with punishments, exactly like the parents

whose place it has taken. We call this agency the super-ego and are

aware of it in its judicial functions as our conscience. It is a remarkable

thing that the super-ego often displays a severity for which no model

has been provided by the real parents, and moreover that it calls the

ego to account not only for its deeds but equally for its thoughts and

unexecuted  intentions,  of  which  the  super-ego  seems  to  have

knowledge. This reminds us that the hero of the Oedipus legend toofelt  guilty  for  his  deeds  and  submitted  himself  to  self-punishment,

although the coercive power of the oracle should have acquitted him

of guilt in our judgement and his own. The super-ego is in fact the heir

to the Oedipus complex and is only established after that complex has

been  disposed  of.  For  that  reason  its  excessive  severity  does  not

follow a real model but corresponds to the strength of the defence

used against the temptation of the Oedipus complex. Some suspicion

of this state of things lies, no doubt, at the bottom of the assertion

made  by  philosophers  and  believers  that  the  moral  sense  is  not

instilled into men by education or acquired by them in their social life

but is implanted in them from a higher source.

 


                          An Outline Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      5011

 

   So long as the ego works in full harmony with the super-ego it is not

easy  to  distinguish  between  their  manifestations;  but  tensions  and

estrangements between them make themselves very plainly visible.

The  torments  caused  by  the  reproaches  of  conscience  correspond

precisely to a child’s fear of loss of love, a fear the place of which has

been taken by the moral agency. On the other hand, if the ego has

successfully resisted a temptation to do something which would be

objectionable to the super-ego, it feels raised in its self-esteem and

strengthened  in  its  pride,  as  though  it  had  made  some  precious

acquisition. In this way the super-ego continues to play the part of an

external world for the ego, although it has become a portion of the

internal  world.  Throughout  later  life  it  represents  the  influence  of  a

person’s  childhood,  of  the  care  and  education  given  him  by  his

parents  and  of  his  dependence  on  them  -  a  childhood  which  is

prolonged so greatly in human beings by a family life in common. And

in all this it is not only the personal qualities of these parents that is

making itself felt, but also everything that had a determining effect on

them themselves, the tastes and standards of the social class in which

they lived and the innate dispositions and traditions of the race from

which they sprang. Those who have a liking for generalizations and

sharp  distinctions  may  say  that  the  external  world,  in  which  theindividual finds himself exposed after being detached from his parents,

represents  the  power  of  the  present;  that  his  id,  with  its  inherited

trends,  represents  the  organic  past;  and  that  the  super-ego,  which

comes to join them later, represents more than anything the cultural

past, which a child has, as it were, to repeat as an after-experience

during  the  few  years  of  his  early  life.  It  is  unlikely  that  such

generalizations can be universally correct. Some portion of the cultural

acquisitions have undoubtedly left a precipitate behind them in the id;

much of what is contributed by the super-ego will awaken an echo in

the  id;  not  a  few  of  the  child’s  new  experiences  will  be  intensified

because  they  are  repetitions  of  some  primaeval  phylogenetic

experience.

 

                                                ‘Was du ererbt von deinen Vätern hast,
                                                Erwirb es, um es zu besitzen.’¹

 

   Thus the super-ego takes up a kind of intermediate position between

the id and the external world; it unites in itself the influences of the

present and the past. In the establishment of the super-ego we have

before us, as it were, an example of the way in which the present is

changed into the past. . . .

 

                              *       *       *       *       *

   ¹ [‘What thou hast inherited from thy fathers, acquire it to make it thine’]

                                                                                       5012

 

                ANALYSIS TERMINABLE AND INTERMINABLE

                                        (1937)

 


                                                                                      5013

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      5014

 

 

                ANALYSIS TERMINABLE AND INTERMINABLE

 

                                            I

 

Experience has taught us that psycho-analytic therapy - the freeing of

someone from his neurotic symptoms, inhibitions and abnormalities of

character - is a time-consuming business. Hence, from the very first,

attempts have been made to shorten the duration of analyses. Such

endeavours required no justification; they could claim to be based on

the strongest considerations of reason and expediency. But there was

probably  still  at  work  in  them  as  well  some  trace  of  the  impatient

contempt with which the medical science of an earlier day regarded

the neuroses as being uncalled-for consequences of invisible injuries.

If it had now become necessary to attend to them, they should at least

be disposed of as quickly as possible.

   A particularly energetic attempt in this direction was made by Otto

Rank,  following  upon  his  book, The  Trauma  of  Birth  (1924).  He

supposed that the true source of neurosis was the act of birth, since

this involves the possibility of a child’s ‘primal fixation’ to his mother

not  being  surmounted  but  persisting  as  a  ‘primal  repression’.  Rank

hoped  that  if  this  primal  trauma  were  dealt  with  by  a  subsequent

analysis the whole neurosis would be got rid of. Thus this one small

piece of analytic work would save the necessity for all the rest. And afew  months  should  be  enough  to  accomplish  this.  It  cannot  be

disputed that Rank’s argument was bold and ingenious; but it did not

stand the test of critical examination. Moreover, it was a child of its

time, conceived under the stress of the contrast between the post-war

misery  of  Europe  and  the  ‘prosperity’  of  America,  and  designed  to

adapt the tempo of analytic therapy to the haste of American life. We

have not heard much about what the implementation of Rank’s plan

has done for cases of sickness. Probably not more than if the fire-

brigade, called to deal with a house that had been set on fire by an

overturned  oil-lamp,  contented  themselves  with  removing  the  lamp

from the room in which the blaze had started. No doubt a considerable

shortening of the brigade’s activities would be effected by this means.

The theory and practice of Rank’s experiment are now things of the

past - no less than American ‘prosperity’ itself.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5015

 

      I  myself  had  adopted  another  way  of  speeding  up  an  analytic

treatment even before the war. At that time I had taken on the case of

a young Russian, a man spoilt by wealth, who had come to Vienna in

a state of complete helplessness, accompanied by a private doctor

and an attendant.¹ In the course of a few years it was possible to give

him back a large amount of his independence, to awaken his interest

in life and to adjust his relations to the people most important to him.

But there progress came to a stop. We advanced no further in clearing

up the neurosis of his childhood, on which his later illness was based,

and it was obvious that the patient found his present position highly

comfortable and had no wish to take any step forward which would

bring  him  nearer  to  the  end  of  his  treatment.  It  was  a  case  of  the

treatment inhibiting itself: it was in danger of failing as a result of its -

partial - success. In this predicament I resorted to the heroic measure

of fixing a time limit for the analysis. At the beginning of a year’s work I

informed the patient that the coming year was to be the last one of his

treatment, no matter what he achieved in the time still left to him. At

first he did not believe me, but once he was convinced that I was indeadly earnest, the desired change set in. His resistances shrank up,

and in these last months of his treatment he was able to reproduce all

the  memories  and  to  discover  all  the  connections  which  seemed

necessary  for  understanding  his  early  neurosis  and  mastering  his

present one. When he left me in the midsummer of 1914, with as little

suspicion as the rest of us of what lay so shortly ahead, I believed that

his cure was radical and permanent.

 

   ¹ See my paper published with the patient’s consent, ‘From the History of an Infantile

Neurosis’ (1918b). It contains no detailed account of the young man’s adult illness, which is
touched on only when its connection with his infantile neurosis absolutely requires it.
 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5016

 

   In a footnote added to this patient’s case history in 1923, I have

already reported that I was mistaken. When, towards the end of the

war, he returned to Vienna, a refugee and destitute, I had to help him

to master a part of the transference which had not been resolved. This

was accomplished in a few months, and I was able to end my footnote

with the statement that ‘since then the patient has felt normal and has

behaved unexceptionably, in spite of the war having robbed him of his

home, his possessions, and all his family relationships’. Fifteen years

have passed since then without disproving the truth of this verdict; but

certain reservations have become necessary. The patient has stayed

on in Vienna and has kept a place in society, if a humble one. But

several  times  during  this  period  his  good  state  of  health  has  been

interrupted  by  attacks  of  illness  which  could  only  be  construed  as

offshoots of his perennial neurosis. Thanks to the skill of one of my

pupils, Dr. Ruth Mack Brunswick, a short course of treatment has on

each  occasion  brought  these  conditions  to  an  end.  I  hope  that  Dr.

Mack Brunswick herself will shortly report on the circumstances. Some

of  these  attacks  were  still  concerned  with  residual  portions  of  the

transference; and, where this was so, short-lived though they were,

they showed a distinctly paranoid character. In other attacks, however,

the pathogenic material consisted of pieces of the patient’s childhood

history, which had not come to light while I was analysing him andwhich now came away - the comparison is unavoidable - like sutures

after an operation, or small fragments of necrotic bone. I have found

the history of this patient’s recovery scarcely less interesting than that

of his illness.

   I have subsequently employed this fixing of a time-limit in other

cases as well, and I have also taken the experiences of other analysts

into account. There can be only one verdict about the value of this

blackmailing device: it is effective provided that one hits the right time

for it. But it cannot guarantee to accomplish the task completely. On

the  contrary,  we  may  be  sure  that,  while  part  of  the  material  will

become accessible under the pressure of the threat, another part will

be  kept  back  and  thus  become  buried,  as  it  were,  and  lost  to  our

therapeutic efforts. For once the analyst has fixed the time-limit he

cannot extend it; otherwise the patient would lose all faith in him. The

most  obvious  way  out  would  be  for  the  patient  to  continue  his

treatment with another analyst, although we know that such a change

will involve a fresh loss of time and abandoning fruits of work already

done. Nor can any general rule be laid down as to the right time for

resorting to this forcible technical device; the decision must be left to

the analyst’s tact. A miscalculation cannot be rectified. The saying that

a lion only springs once must apply here.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5017

 

 

                                            II

 

   The discussion of the technical problem of how to accelerate the

slow  progress  of  an  analysis  leads  us  to  another,  more  deeply

interesting  question:  is  there  such  a  thing  as  a  natural  end  to  an

analysis - is there any possibility at all of bringing an analysis to such

an end? To judge by the common talk of analysts it would seem to be

so, for we often hear them say, when they are deploring or excusing

the recognized imperfections of some fellow-mortal: ‘His analysis was

not finished’ or ‘he was never analysed to the end.’   We must first of all decide what is meant by the ambiguous phrase

‘the  end  of  an  analysis’.  From  a  practical  standpoint  it  is  easy  to

answer. An analysis is ended when the analyst and the patient cease

to meet each other for the analytic session. This happens when two

conditions have been approximately fulfilled: first, that the patient shall

no longer be suffering from his symptoms and shall have overcome

his anxieties and his inhibitions; and secondly, that the analyst shall

judge that so much repressed material has been made conscious, so

much that was unintelligible has been explained, and so much internal

resistance conquered, that there is no need to fear a repetition of the

pathological  processes  concerned.  If  one  is  prevented  by  external

difficulties  from  reaching  this  goal,  it  is  better  to  speak  of  an

incomplete analysis rather than of an unfinished one.

      The  other  meaning  of  the  ‘end’  of  an  analysis  is  much  more

ambitious.  In  this  sense  of  it,  what  we  are  asking  is  whether  the

analyst has had such a far-reaching influence on the patient that no

further change could be expected to take place in him if his analysis

were continued. It is as though it were possible by means of analysis

to attain to a level of absolute psychical normality - a level, moreover,

which  we  could  feel  confident  would  be  able  to  remain  stable,  as

though,  perhaps,  we  had  succeeded  in  resolving  every  one  of  the

patient’s repressions and in filling in all the gaps in his memory. We

may first consult our experience to enquire whether such things do in

fact happen, and then turn to our theory to discover whether there is

any possibility of their happening.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5018

 

   Every analyst will have treated a few cases which have had this

gratifying  outcome.  He  has  succeeded  in  clearing  up  the  patient’s

neurotic  disturbance,  and  it  has  not  returned  and  has  not  been

replaced  by  any  other  such  disturbance.  Nor  are  we  without  some

insight into the determinants of these successes. The patient’s ego

had not been noticeably altered and the aetiology of his disturbance

had  been  essentially  traumatic.  The  aetiology  of  every  neuroticdisturbance  is,  after  all,  a  mixed  one.  It  is  a  question  either  of  the

instincts being excessively strong - that is to say, recalcitrant to taming

by the ego - or of the effects of early (i.e. premature) traumas which

the  immature  ego  was  unable  to  master.  As  a  rule  there  is  a

combination of both factors, the constitutional and the accidental. The

stronger the constitutional factor, the more readily will a trauma lead to

a fixation and leave behind a developmental disturbance; the stronger

the  trauma,  the  more  certainly  will  its  injurious  effects  become

manifest  even  when  the  instinctual  situation  is  normal.  There  is  no

doubt that an aetiology of the traumatic sort offers by far the more

favourable  field  for  analysis.  Only  when  a  case  is  a  predominantly

traumatic one will analysis succeed in doing what it is so superlatively

able to do; only then will it, thanks to having strengthened the patient’s

ego,  succeed  in  replacing  by  a  correct  solution  the  inadequate

decision made in his early life. Only in such cases can one speak of

an analysis having been definitively ended. In them, analysis has done

all that it should and does not need to be continued. It is true that, if

the patient who has been restored in this way never produces another

disorder calling for analysis, we do not know how much his immunity

may not be due to a kind fate which has spared him ordeals that are

too severe.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5019

 

   A constitutional strength of instinct and an unfavourable alteration of

the ego acquired in its defensive struggle in the sense of its being

dislocated and restricted - these are the factors which are prejudicial

to  the  effectiveness  of  analysis  and  which  may  make  its  duration

interminable.  One  is  tempted  to  make  the  first  factor  -  strength  of

instinct - responsible as well for the emergence of the second - the

alteration of the ego; but it seems that the latter too has an aetiology

of its own. And, indeed, it must be admitted that our knowledge of

these matters is as yet insufficient. They are only now becoming the

subject of analytic study. In this field the interest of analysts seems to

me to be quite wrongly directed. Instead of an enquiry into how a cureby analysis comes about (a matter which I think has been sufficiently

elucidated) the question should be asked of what are the obstacles

that stand in the way of such a cure.

   This brings me to two problems which arise directly out of analytic

practice, as I hope to show by the following examples. A certain man,

who had himself practised analysis with great success, came to the

conclusion that his relations both to men and women - to the men who

were  his  competitors  and  to  the  woman  whom  he  loved  -  were

nevertheless  not  free  from  neurotic  impediments;  and  he  therefore

made himself the subject of an analysis by someone else whom he

regarded as superior to himself. This critical illumination of his own

self  had  a  completely  successful  result.  He  married  the  woman  he

loved  and  turned  into  a  friend  and  teacher  of  his  supposed  rivals.

Many years passed in this way, during which his relations with his

former analyst also remained unclouded. But then, for no assignable

external  reason,  trouble  arose.  The  man  who  had  been  analysed

became  antagonistic  to  the  analyst  and  reproached  him  for  having

failed to give him a complete analysis. The analyst, he said, ought to

have  known  and  to  have  taken  into  account  the  fact  that  a

transference-relation  can  never  be  purely  positive;  he  should  have

given his attention to the possibilities of a negative transference. The

analyst defended himself by saying that, at the time of the analysis,

there was no sign of a negative transference. But even if he had failed

to observe some very faint signs of it - which was not altogether ruled

out, considering the limited horizon of analysis in those early days - it

was still doubtful, he thought, whether he would have had the power to

activate a topic (or, as we say, a ‘complex’) by merely pointing it out,

so long as it was not currently active in the patient himself at the time.

To activate it would certainly have required some unfriendly piece of

behaviour in reality on the analyst’s part. Furthermore, he added, not

every good relation between an analyst and his subject during and

after analysis was to be regarded as a transference; there were also

friendly relations which were based on reality and which proved to be

viable.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable                                                                                      5020

 

      I  now  pass  on  to  my  second  example,  which  raises  the  same

problem.  An  unmarried  woman,  no  longer  young,  had  been  cut  off

from life since puberty by an inability to walk, owing to severe pains in

the legs. Her condition was obviously of a hysterical nature, and it had

defied many kinds of treatment. An analysis lasting three-quarters of a

year removed the trouble and restored to the patient, an excellent and

worthy person, her right to a share in life. In the years following her

recovery  she  was  consistently  unfortunate.  There  were  disasters  in

her  family,  and  financial  losses,  and,  as  she  grew  older,  she  saw

every hope of happiness in love and marriage vanish. But the one-

time  invalid  stood  up  to  all  this  valiantly  and  was  a  support  to  her

family in difficult times. I cannot remember whether it was twelve or

fourteen  years  after  the  end  of  her  analysis  that,  owing  to  profuse

haemorrhages,  she  was  obliged  to  undergo  a  gynaecological

examination.  A  myoma  was  found,  which  made  a  complete

hysterectomy advisable. From the time of this operation, the woman

became ill once more. She fell in love with her surgeon, wallowed in

masochistic  phantasies  about  the  fearful  changes  in  her  inside  -

phantasies  with  which  she  concealed  her  romance  -  and  proved

inaccessible to a further attempt at analysis. She remained abnormal

to the end of her life. The successful analytic treatment took place so

long ago that we cannot expect too much from it; it was in the earliest

years of my work as an analyst. No doubt the patient’s second illness

may have sprung from the same source as her first one which had

been  successfully  overcome:  it  may  have  been  a  different

manifestation of the same repressed impulses, which the analysis had

only incompletely resolved. But I am inclined to think that, were it not

for  the  new  trauma,  there  would  have  been  no  fresh  outbreak  of

neurosis.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5021

 

   These two examples, which have been purposely selected from a

large number of similar ones, will suffice to start a discussion of thetopics  we  are  considering.  The  sceptical,  the  optimistic  and  the

ambitious will take quite different views of them. The first will say that it

is  now  proved  that  even  a  successful  analytic  treatment  does  not

protect the patient, who at the time has been cured, from falling ill later

on of another neurosis - for, indeed, of a neurosis derived from the

same  instinctual  root  -  that  is  to  say,  from  a  recurrence  of  his  old

trouble.  The  others  will  consider  that  this  is  not  proved.  They  will

object  that  the  two  examples  date  from  the  early  days  of  analysis,

twenty and thirty years ago, respectively; and that since then we have

acquired deeper insight and wider knowledge, and that our technique

has changed in accordance with our new discoveries. To-day, they will

say,  we  may  demand  and  expect  that  an  analytic  cure  shall  prove

permanent, or at least that if a patient falls ill again, his new illness

shall not turn out to be a revival of his earlier instinctual disturbance,

manifesting  itself  in  new  forms.  Our  experience,  they  will  maintain,

does not oblige us to restrict so materially the demands that can be

made upon our therapeutic method.

   My reason for choosing these two examples is, of course, precisely

because they lie so far back in the past. It is obvious that the more

recent the successful outcome of an analysis is, the less utilizable it is

for our discussion, since we have no means of predicting what the

later history of the recovery will be. The optimists’ expectations clearly

presuppose a number of things which are not precisely self-evident.

They assume, firstly, that there really is a possibility of disposing of an

instinctual conflict (or, more correctly, a conflict between the ego and

an instinct) definitively and for all time; secondly, that while we are

treating  someone  for  one  instinctual  conflict  we  can,  as  it  were,

inoculate him against the possibility of any other such conflicts; and

thirdly, that we have the power, for purposes of prophylaxis, to stir up

a pathogenic conflict of this sort which is not betraying itself at the time

by  any  indications,  and  that  it  is  wise  to  do  so.  I  throw  out  these

questions without proposing to answer them now. Perhaps it may not

be possible at present to give any certain answer to them at all.

      Some  light  may  probably  be  thrown  on  them  by  theoretical

considerations.  But  another  point  has  already  become  clear:  if  we

wish to fulfil the more exacting demands upon analytic therapy, our

road will not lead us to, or by way of, a shortening of its duration. 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5022

 

 

                                            III

 

   An analytic experience which now extends over several decades,

and a change which has taken place in the nature and mode of my

activity, encourage me to attempt to answer the questions before us.

In earlier days I treated quite a large number of patients, who, as was

natural, wanted to be dealt with as quickly as possible. Of late years I

have  been  mainly  engaged  in  training  analyses;  a  relatively  small

number of severe cases of illness remained with me for continuous

treatment, interrupted, however, by longer or shorter intervals. With

them,  the  therapeutic  aim  was  no  longer  the  same.  There  was  no

question  of  shortening  the  treatment;  the  purpose  was  radically  to

exhaust the possibilities of illness in them and to bring about a deep-

going alteration of their personality.

   Of the three factors which we have recognized as being decisive for

the  success  or  otherwise  of  analytic  treatment  -  the  influence  of

traumas, the constitutional strength of the instincts and alterations of

the ego - what concerns us here is only the second, the strength of the

instincts. A moment’s reflection raises a doubt whether the restrictive

use  of  the  adjective  ‘constitutional’  (or  ‘congenital’)  is  essential.

However  true  it  may  be  that  the  constitutional  factor  is  of  decisive

importance from the very beginning, it is nevertheless conceivable that

a reinforcement of instinct coming later in life might produce the same

effects.  If  so,  we  should  have  to  modify  our  formula  and  say  ‘the

strength  of  the  instincts at  the  time’  instead  of  ‘the constitutional

strength of the instincts’. The first of our questions was: ‘Is it possible

by  means  of  analytic  therapy  to  dispose  of  a  conflict  between  an

instinct and the ego, or of a pathogenic instinctual demand upon the

ego, permanently and definitively?’ To avoid misunderstanding it is not

unnecessary,  perhaps,  to  explain  more  exactly  what  is  meant  by

‘permanently  disposing  of  an  instinctual  demand’.  Certainly  not‘causing the demand to disappear so that nothing more is ever heard

from  it  again’.  This  is  in  general  impossible,  nor  is  it  at  all  to  be

desired.  No,  we  mean  something  else,  something  which  may  be

roughly  described  as  a  ‘taming’  of  the  instinct.  That  is  to  say,  the

instinct is brought completely into the harmony of the ego, becomes

accessible to all the influences of the other trends in the ego and no

longer seeks to go its independent way to satisfaction. If we are asked

by what methods and means this result is achieved, it is not easy to

find an answer. We can only say: ‘So muss denn doch die Hexe dran!’

- the Witch Metapsychology. Without metapsychological speculation

and  theorizing  -  I  had  almost  said  ‘phantasying’  -  we  shall  not  get

another  step  forward.  Unfortunately,  here  as  elsewhere,  what  our

Witch reveals is neither very clear nor very detailed. We have only a

single clue to start from - though it is a clue of the highest value -

namely,  the  antithesis  between  the  primary  and  the  secondary

processes; and to that antithesis I shall at this point turn.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5023

 

   If now we take up our first question once more, we find that our new

line of approach inevitably leads us to a particular conclusion. The

question was whether it is possible to dispose of an instinctual conflict

permanently and definitively - i.e. to ‘tame’ an instinctual demand in

that  fashion.  Formulated  in  these  terms,  the  question  makes  no

mention at all of the strength of the instinct; but it is precisely on this

that the outcome depends. Let us start from the assumption that what

analysis  achieves  for  neurotics  is  nothing  other  than  what  normal

people  bring  about  for  themselves  without  its  help.  Everyday

experience, however, teaches us that in a normal person any solution

of an instinctual conflict only holds good for a particular strength of

instinct, or, more correctly, only for a particular relation between the

strength of the instinct and the strength of the ego.¹ If the strength of

the  ego  diminishes,  whether  through  illness  or  exhaustion,  or  from

some  similar  cause,  all  the  instincts  which  have  so  far  been

successfully  tamed  may  renew  their  demands  and  strive  to  obtainsubstitutive satisfactions in abnormal ways.² Irrefutable proof of this

statement is supplied by our nightly dreams; they react to the sleeping

attitude  assumed  by  the  ego  with  an  awakening  of  instinctual

demands.

 

   ¹ Or, to be perfectly accurate, where that relation falls within certain limits.

   ² Here we have a justification of the claim to aetiological importance of such non-specific

factors  as  overwork,  shock,  etc.  These  factors  have  always  been  assured  of  general
recognition, but have had to be pushed into the background precisely by psycho-analysis. It is
impossible  to  define  health  except  in  metapsychological  terms:  i.e.  by  reference  to  the
dynamic relations between the agencies of the mental apparatus which have been recognized
- or (if that is preferred) inferred or conjectured - by us.
 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5024

 

   The material on the other side is equally unambiguous. Twice in the

course  of  individual  development  certain  instincts  are  considerably

reinforced: at puberty, and, in women, at the menopause. We are not

in  the  least  surprised  if  a  person  who  was  not  neurotic  before

becomes so at these times. When his instincts were not so strong, he

succeeded in taming them; but when they are reinforced he can no

longer do so. The repressions behave like dams against the pressure

of  water.  The  same  effects  which  are  produced  by  these  two

physiological reinforcements of instinct, may be brought about in an

irregular fashion by accidental causes at any other period of life. Such

reinforcements may be set up by fresh traumas, enforced frustrations,

or the collateral influence of instincts upon one another. The result is

always  the  same,  and  it  underlines  the  irresistible  power  of  the

quantitative factor in the causation of illness.

      I  feel  as  though  I  ought  to  be  ashamed  of  so  much  ponderous

exposition, seeing that everything I have said has long been familiar

and self-evident. It is a fact that we have always behaved as if we

knew  all  this;  but,  for  the  most  part,  our  theoretical  concepts  have

neglected  to  attach  the  same  importance  to  the economic  line  of

approach as they have to the dynamic and topographical ones. My

excuse is therefore that I am drawing attention to this neglect.

   Before we decide on an answer to this question, however, we mustconsider an objection whose force lies in the fact that we are probably

predisposed  in  its  favour.  Our  arguments,  it  will  be  said,  are  all

deduced from the processes which take place spontaneously between

the ego and the instincts, and they presuppose that analytic therapy

can accomplish nothing which does not, under favourable and normal

conditions, occur of itself. But is this really so? Is it not precisely the

claim of our theory that analysis produces a state which never does

arise  spontaneously  in  the  ego  and  that  this  newly  created  state

constitutes the essential difference between a person who has been

analysed and a person who has not? Let us bear in mind what this

claim is based on. All repressions take place in early childhood; they

are primitive defensive measures taken by the immature, feeble ego.

In later years no fresh repressions are carried out; but the old ones

persist, and their services continue to be made use of by the ego for

mastering the instincts. New conflicts are disposed of by what we call

‘after-repression’.  We  may  apply  to  these  infantile  repressions  our

general statement that repressions depend absolutely and entirely on

the relative strength of the forces involved and that they cannot hold

out  against  an  increase  in  the  strength  of  the  instincts.  Analysis,

however, enables the ego, which has attained greater maturity and

strength, to undertake a revision of these old repressions; a few are

demolished, while others are recognized but constructed afresh out of

more solid material. These new dams are of quite a different degree of

firmness from the earlier ones; we may be confident that they will not

give way so easily before a rising flood of instinctual strength. Thus

the  real  achievement  of  analytic  therapy  would  be  the  subsequent

correction  of  the  original  process  of  repression,  a  correction  which

puts an end to the dominance of the quantitative factor.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5025

 

      Thus  far  our  theory,  which  we  cannot  give  up  except  under

irresistible compulsion. And what does our experience have to say to

this? Perhaps our experience is not yet wide enough for us to come to

a settled conclusion. It confirms our expectations often enough, butnot always. One has an impression that one ought not to be surprised

if it should turn out in the end that the difference between a person

who has not been analysed and the behaviour of a person after he

has been analysed is not so thorough-going as we aim at making it

and as we expect and maintain it to be. If this is so, it would mean that

analysis sometimes  succeeds  in  eliminating  the  influence  of  an

increase in instinct, but not invariably, or that the effect of analysis is

limited to increasing the power of resistance of the inhibitions, so that

they are equal to much greater demands than before the analysis or if

no  analysis  had  taken  place.  I  really  cannot  commit  myself  to  a

decision on this point, nor do I know whether a decision is possible at

the present time.

   There is, however, another angle from which we can approach this

problem of the variability in the effect of analysis. We know that the

first step towards attaining intellectual mastery of our environment is to

discover generalizations, rules and laws which bring order into chaos.

In doing this we simplify the world of phenomena; but we cannot avoid

falsifying it, especially if we are dealing with processes of development

and change. What we are concerned with is discerning a qualitative

alteration, and as a rule in doing so we neglect, at any rate to begin

with,  a quantitative  factor.  In  the  real  world,  transitions  and

intermediate stages are far more common than sharply differentiated

opposite states. In studying developments and changes we direct our

attention solely to the outcome; we readily overlook the fact that such

processes are usually more or less incomplete - that is to say, that

they are in fact only partial alterations. A shrewd satirist of old Austria,

Johann Nestroy, once said: ‘Every step forward is only half as big as it

looks at first.’ It is tempting to attribute a quite general validity to this

malicious  dictum.  There  are  nearly  always  residual  phenomena,  a

partial hanging-back. When an open-handed Maecenas surprises us

by  some  isolated  trait  of  miserliness,  or  when  a  person  who  is

consistently  over-kind  suddenly  indulges  in  a  hostile  action,  such

‘residual phenomena’ are invaluable for genetic research. They show

us  that  these  praiseworthy  and  precious  qualities  are  based  on

compensation  and  overcompensation  which,  as  was  to  have  been

expected,  have  not  been  absolutely  and  fully  successful.  Our  first

account  of  the  development  of  the  libido  was  that  an  original  oralphase gave way to a sadistic-anal phase and that this was in turn

succeeded  by  a  phallic-genital  one.  Later  research  has  not

contradicted  this  view,  but  it  has  corrected  it  by  adding  that  these

replacements do not take place all of a sudden but gradually, so that

portions  of  the  earlier  organization  always  persist  alongside  of  the

more recent one, and even in normal development the transformation

is never complete and residues of earlier libidinal fixations may still be

retained in the final configuration. The same thing is to be seen in

quite  other  fields.  Of  all  the  erroneous  and  superstitious  beliefs  of

mankind  that  have  supposedly  been  surmounted  there  is  not  one

whose residues do not live on among us to-day in the lower strata of

civilized peoples or even in the highest strata of cultural society. What

has once come to life clings tenaciously to its existence. One feels

inclined to doubt sometimes whether the dragons of primaeval days

are really extinct.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5026

 

      Applying  these  remarks  to  our  present  problem,  I  think  that  the

answer to the question of how to explain the variable results of our

analytic therapy might well be that we, too, in endeavouring to replace

repressions that are insecure by reliable ego-syntonic controls, do not

always achieve our aim to its full extent - that is, do not achieve it

thoroughly  enough.  The  transformation  is  achieved,  but  often  only

partially:  portions  of  the  old  mechanisms  remain  untouched  by  the

work of analysis. It is difficult to prove that this is really so; for we have

no other way of judging what happens but by the outcome which we

are  trying  to  explain.  Nevertheless,  the  impressions  one  receives

during the work of analysis do not contradict this assumption; indeed,

they seem rather to confirm it. But we must not take the clarity of our

own insight as a measure of the conviction which we produce in the

patient. His conviction may lack ‘depth’, as one might say; it is always

a question of the quantitative factor, which is so easily overlooked. If

this is the correct answer to our question, we may say that analysis, in

claiming to cure neuroses by ensuring control over instinct, is alwaysright in theory but not always right in practice. And this is because it

does  not  always  succeed  in  ensuring  to  a  sufficient  degree  the

foundations on which a control of instinct is based. The cause of such

a partial failure is easily discovered. In the past, the quantitative factor

of  instinctual  strength  opposed  the  ego’s  defensive  efforts;  for  that

reason we called in the work of analysis to help; and now that same

factor sets a limit to the efficacy of this new effort. If the strength of the

instinct is excessive, the mature ego, supported by analysis, fails in its

task, just as the helpless ego failed formerly. Its control over instinct is

improved, but it remains imperfect because the transformation in the

defensive mechanism is only incomplete. There is nothing surprising

in  this,  since  the  power  of  the  instruments  with  which  analysis

operates is not unlimited but restricted, and the final upshot always

depends on the relative strength of the psychical agencies which are

struggling with one another.

   No doubt it is desirable to shorten the duration of analytic treatment,

but we can only achieve our therapeutic purpose by increasing the

power  of  analysis  to  come  to  the  assistance  of  the  ego.  Hypnotic

influence seemed to be an excellent instrument for our purposes; but

the reasons for our having to abandon it are well known. No substitute

for  hypnosis  has  yet  been  found.  From  this  point  of  view  we  can

understand  how  such  a  master  of  analysis  as  Ferenczi  came  to

devote  the  last  years  of  his  life  to  therapeutic  experiments,  which,

unhappily, proved to be vain.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5027

 

 

                                            IV

 

      The  two  further  questions  -  whether,  while  we  are  treating  one

instinctual conflict, we can protect a patient from future conflicts, and

whether it is feasible and expedient, for prophylactic purposes, to stir

up  a  conflict  which  is  not  at  the  time  manifest  -  must  be  treated

together; for obviously the first task can only be carried out in so far asthe second one is - that is, in so far as a possible future conflict is

turned into an actual present one upon which influence is then brought

to  bear.  This  new  way  of  stating  the  problem  is  at  bottom  only  an

extension of the earlier one. Whereas in the first instance we were

considering how to guard against a return of the same conflict, we are

now  considering  how  to  guard  against  its  possible  replacement  by

another conflict. This sounds a very ambitious proposal, but all we are

trying  to  do  is  to  make  clear  what  limits  are  set  to  the  efficacy  of

analytic therapy.

      However  much  our  therapeutic  ambition  may  be  tempted  to

undertake  such  tasks,  experience  flatly  rejects  the  notion.  If  an

instinctual  conflict  is  not  a  currently  active  one,  is  not  manifesting

itself, we cannot influence it even by analysis. The warning that we

should  let  sleeping  dogs  lie,  which  we  have  so  often  heard  in

connection  with  our  efforts  to  explore  the  psychical  underworld,  is

peculiarly inapposite when applied to the conditions of mental life. For

if the instincts are causing disturbances, it is a proof that the dogs are

not sleeping; and if they seem really to be sleeping, it is not in our

power to awaken them. This last statement, however, does not seem

to be quite accurate and calls for a more detailed discussion. Let us

consider what means we have at our disposal for turning an instinctual

conflict  which  is  at  the  moment  latent  into  one  which  is  currently

active. Obviously there are only two things that we can do. We can

bring  about  situations  in  which  the  conflict  does  become  currently

active, or we can content ourselves with discussing it in the analysis

and pointing out the possibility of its arising. The first of these two

alternatives  can  be  carried  out  in  two  ways:  in  reality,  or  in  the

transference  -  in  either  case  by  exposing  the  patient  to  a  certain

amount of real suffering through frustration and the damming up of

libido. Now it is true that we already make use of a technique of this

kind in our ordinary analytic procedure. What would otherwise be the

meaning of the rule that analysis must be carried out ‘in a state of

frustration’? But this is a technique which we use in treating a conflict

which is already currently active. We seek to bring this conflict to a

head,  to  develop  it  to  its  highest  pitch,  in  order  to  increase  the

instinctual  force  available  for  its  solution.  Analytic  experience  has

taught us that the better is always the enemy of the good and that inevery  phase  of  the  patient’s  recovery  we  have  to  fight  against  his

inertia, which is ready to be content with an incomplete solution.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5028

 

   If, however, what we are aiming at is a prophylactic treatment of

instinctual conflicts that are not currently active but merely potential, it

will not be enough to regulate sufferings which are already present in

the patient and which he cannot avoid. We should have to make up

our minds to provoke fresh sufferings in him; and this we have hitherto

quite rightly left to fate. We should receive admonitions from all sides

against the presumption of vying with fate in subjecting poor human

creatures  to  such  cruel  experiments.  And  what  sort  of  experiments

would  they  be?  Could  we,  for  purposes  of  prophylaxis,  take  the

responsibility  of  destroying  a  satisfactory  marriage,  or  causing  a

patient  to  give  up  a  post  upon  which  his  livelihood  depends?

Fortunately,  we  never  find  ourselves  in  the  position  of  having  to

consider  whether  such  interventions  in  the  patient’s  real  life  are

justified;  we  do  not  possess  the  plenary  powers  which  they  would

necessitate,  and  the  subject  of  our  therapeutic  experiment  would

certainly refuse to co-operate in it. In practice, then, such a procedure

is virtually excluded; but there are, besides, theoretical objections to it.

For  the  work  of  analysis  proceeds  best  if  the  patient’s  pathogenic

experiences  belong  to  the  past,  so  that  his  ego  can  stand  at  a

distance from them. In states of acute crisis analysis is to all intents

and purposes unusable. The ego’s whole interest is taken up by the

painful reality and it withholds itself from analysis, which is attempting

to go below the surface and uncover the influences of the past. To

create a fresh conflict would thus only be to make the work of analysis

longer and more difficult.

   It will be objected that these remarks are quite unnecessary. Nobody

thinks of purposely conjuring up new situations of suffering in order to

make  it  possible  for  a  latent  instinctual  conflict  to  be  treated.  This

would not be much to boast of as a prophylactic achievement. We

know, for instance, that a patient who has recovered from scarlet feveris immune to a return of the same illness; yet it never occurs to a

doctor  to  take  a  healthy  person  who  may  possibly  fall  ill  of  scarlet

fever and infect him with scarlet fever in order to make him immune to

it.  The  protective  measure  must  not  produce  the  same  situation  of

danger as is produced by the illness itself, but only something very

much slighter, as is the case with vaccination against small-pox and

many  other  similar  procedures.  In  analytic  prophylaxis  against

instinctual  conflicts,  therefore,  the  only  methods  which  come  into

consideration are the other two which we have mentioned: the artificial

production of new conflicts in the transference (conflicts which, after

all, lack the character of reality), and the arousing of such conflicts in

the patient’s imagination by talking to him about them and making him

familiar with their possibility.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5029

 

   I do not know whether we can assert that the first of these two

milder procedures is altogether ruled out in analysis. No experiments

have been particularly made in this direction. But difficulties at once

suggest  themselves,  which  do  not  throw  a  very  promising  light  on

such an undertaking. In the first place, the choice of such situations for

the transference is very limited. The patients cannot themselves bring

all their conflicts into the transference; nor is the analyst able to call

out  all  their  possible  instinctual  conflicts  from  the  transference

situation. He may make them jealous or cause them to experience

disappointments in love; but no technical purpose is required to bring

this about. Such things happen of themselves in any case in most

analyses. In the second place, we must not overlook the fact that all

measures  of  this  sort  would  oblige  the  analyst  to  behave  in  an

unfriendly way to the patient, and this would have a damaging effect

upon the affectionate attitude - upon the positive transference - which

is the strongest motive for the patient’s taking a share in the joint work

of analysis. Thus we should on no account expect very much from this

procedure.

   This therefore leaves only the one method open to us - the onewhich was in all probability the only one originally contemplated. We

tell the patient about the possibilities of other instinctual conflicts, and

we arouse his expectation that such conflicts may occur in him. What

we hope is that this information and this warning will have the effect of

activating in him one of the conflicts we have indicated, in a modest

degree  and  yet  sufficiently  for  treatment.  But  this  time  experience

speaks with no uncertain voice. The expected result does not come

about. The patient hears our message, but there is no response. He

may think to himself: ‘This is very interesting, but I feel no trace of it.’

We have increased his knowledge, but altered nothing else in him.

The situation is much the same as when people read psycho-analytic

writings. The reader is ‘stimulated’ only by those passages which he

feels apply to himself - that is, which concern conflicts that are active

in  him  at  the  time.  Everything  else  leaves  him  cold.  We  can  have

analogous  experiences,  I  think,  when  we  give  children  sexual

enlightenment.  I  am  far  from  maintaining  that  this  is  a  harmful  or

unnecessary thing to do, but it is clear that the prophylactic effect of

this  liberal  measure  has  been  greatly  over-estimated.  After  such

enlightenment, children know something they did not know before, but

they make no use of the new knowledge that has been presented to

them. We come to see that they are not even in so great a hurry to

sacrifice for this new knowledge the sexual theories which might be

described  as  a  natural  growth  and  which  they  have  constructed  in

harmony  with,  and  dependence  on,  their  imperfect  libidinal

organization - theories about the part played by the stork, about the

nature of sexual intercourse and about the way in which babies are

made.  For  a  long  time  after  they  have  been  given  sexual

enlightenment  they  behave  like  primitive  races  who  have  had

Christianity thrust upon them and who continue to worship their old

idols in secret.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5030

 

 

                                            V 

      We  started  from  the  question  of  how  we  can  shorten  the

inconveniently long duration of analytic treatment, and, still with this

question of time in mind, we went on to consider whether it is possible

to  achieve  a  permanent  cure  or  even  to  prevent  future  illness  by

prophylactic treatment. In doing so, we found that the factors which

were  decisive  for  the  success  of  our  therapeutic  efforts  were  the

influence of traumatic aetiology, the relative strength of the instincts

which have to be controlled, and something which we have called an

alteration  of  the  ego.  Only  the  second  of  these  factors  has  been

discussed by us in any detail, and in connection with it we have had

occasion to recognize the paramount importance of the quantitative

factor  and  to  stress  the  claim  of  the  metapsychological  line  of

approach to be taken into account in any attempt at explanation.

   Concerning the third factor, the alteration of the ego, we have as yet

said nothing. When we turn our attention to it, the first impression we

receive is that there is much to ask and much to answer here, and that

what we have to say about it will prove to be very inadequate. This

first impression is confirmed when we go further into the problem. As

is well known, the analytic situation consists in our allying ourselves

with  the  ego  of  the  person  under  treatment,  in  order  to  subdue

portions of his id which are uncontrolled - that is to say to include them

in the synthesis of his ego. The fact that a co-operation of this kind

habitually fails in the case of psychotics affords us a first solid footing

for our judgement. The ego, if we are to be able to make such a pact

with it, must be a normal one. But a normal ego of this sort is, like

normality  in  general,  an  ideal  fiction.  The  abnormal  ego,  which  is

unserviceable  for  our  purposes,  is  unfortunately  no  fiction.  Every

normal  person,  in  fact,  is  only  normal  on  the  average.  His  ego

approximates to that of the psychotic in some part or other and to a

greater or lesser extent; and the degree of its remoteness from one

end of the series and of its proximity to the other will furnish us with a

provisional  measure  of  what  we  have  so  indefinitely  termed  an

‘alteration of the ego’.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable                                                                                      5031

 

      If  we  ask  what  is  the  source  of  the  great  variety  of  kinds  and

degrees of alteration of the ego, we cannot escape the first obvious

alternative, that such alterations are either congenital or acquired. Of

these, the second sort will be the easier to treat. If they are acquired, it

will certainly have been in the course of development, starting from

the first years of life. For the ego has to try from the very outset to fulfil

its  task  of  mediating  between  its  id  and  the  external  world  in  the

service  of  the  pleasure  principle,  and  to  protect  the  id  from  the

dangers of the external world. If, in the course of these efforts, the ego

learns to adopt a defensive attitude towards its own id as well and to

treat  the  latter’s  instinctual  demands  as  external  dangers,  this

happens, at any rate in part, because it understands that a satisfaction

of instinct would lead to conflicts with the external world. Thereafter,

under  the  influence  of  education,  the  ego  grows  accustomed  to

removing the scene of the fight from outside to within and to mastering

the internal  danger  before  it  has  become  an external  one;  and

probably it is most often right in doing so. During this fight on two

fronts - later there will be a third front as well - the ego makes use of

various  procedures  for  fulfilling  its  task,  which,  to  put  it  in  general

terms,  is  to  avoid  danger,  anxiety  and  unpleasure.  We  call  these

procedures ‘mechanisms of defence’. Our knowledge of them is not

yet sufficiently complete. Anna Freud’s book (1936) has given us a

first insight into their multiplicity and many-sided significance.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5032

 

   It was from one of those mechanisms, repression, that the study of

neurotic processes took its whole start. There was never any doubt

that  repression  was  not  the  only  procedure  which  the  ego  could

employ for its purposes. Nevertheless, repression is something quite

peculiar and is more sharply differentiated from the other mechanisms

than they are from one another. I should like to make this relation to

the  other  mechanisms  clear  by  an  analogy,  though  I  know  that  in

these matters analogies never carry us very far. Let us imagine whatmight  have  happened  to  a  book,  at  a  time  when  books  were  not

printed in editions but were written out individually. We will suppose

that a book of this kind contained statements which in later times were

regarded as undesirable - as, for instance, according to Robert Eisler

(1929),  the  writings  of  Flavius  Josephus  must  have  contained

passages  about  Jesus  Christ  which  were  offensive  to  later

Christendom. At the present day, the only defensive mechanism to

which the official censorship could resort would be to confiscate and

destroy every copy of the whole edition. At that time, however, various

methods were used for making the book innocuous. One way would

be for the offending passages to be thickly crossed through so that

they were illegible. In that case they could not be transcribed, and the

next  copyist  of  the  book  would  produce  a  text  which  was

unexceptionable  but  which  had  gaps  in  certain  passages,  and  so

might  be  unintelligible  in  them.  Another  way,  however,  if  the

authorities were not satisfied with this, but wanted also to conceal any

indication  that  the  text  had  been  mutilated,  would  be  for  them  to

proceed to distort the text. Single words would be left out or replaced

by  others,  and  new  sentences  interpolated.  Best  of  all,  the  whole

passage  would  be  erased  and  a  new  one  which  said  exactly  the

opposite put in its place. The next transcriber could then produce a

text that aroused no suspicion but which was falsified. It no longer

contained what the author wanted to say; and it is highly probable that

the corrections had not been made in the direction of truth.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5033

 

   If the analogy is not pursued too strictly, we may say that repression

has the same relation to the other methods of defence as omission

has to distortion of the text, and we may discover in the different forms

of this falsification parallels to the variety of ways in which the ego is

altered.  An  attempt  may  be  made  to  raise  the  objection  that  the

analogy goes wrong in an essential point, for the distortion of a text is

the work of a tendentious censorship, no counterpart to which is to be

found  in  the  development  of  the  ego.  But  this  is  not  so;  for  atendentious purpose of this kind is to a great extent represented by

the  compelling  force  of  the  pleasure  principle.  The  psychical

apparatus is intolerant of unpleasure; it has to fend it off at all costs,

and if the perception of reality entails unpleasure, that perception -

that  is,  the  truth  -  must  be  sacrificed.  Where  external  dangers  are

concerned, the individual can help himself for some time by flight and

by avoiding the situation of danger, until he is strong enough later on

to remove the threat by actively altering reality. But one cannot flee

from oneself; flight is no help against internal dangers. And for that

reason the defensive mechanisms of the ego are condemned to falsify

one’s  internal  perception  and  to  give  one  only  an  imperfect  and

distorted picture of one’s id. In its relations to the id, therefore, the ego

is paralysed by its restrictions or blinded by its errors; and the result of

this in the sphere of psychical events can only be compared to being

out walking in a country one does not know and without having a good

pair of legs.

      The  mechanisms  of  defence  serve  the  purpose  of  keeping  off

dangers. It cannot be disputed that they are successful in this; and it is

doubtful whether the ego could do without them altogether during its

development.  But  it  is  also  certain  that  they  may  become  dangers

themselves. It sometimes turns out that the ego has paid too high a

price  for  the  services  they  render  it.  The  dynamic  expenditure

necessary for maintaining them, and the restrictions of the ego which

they almost invariably entail, prove a heavy burden on the psychical

economy.  Moreover,  these  mechanisms  are  not  relinquished  after

they  have  assisted  the  ego  during  the  difficult  years  of  its

development.  No  one  individual,  of  course,  makes  use  of  all  the

possible mechanisms of defence. Each person uses no more than a

selection of them. But these become fixated in his ego. They become

regular  modes  of  reaction  of  his  character,  which  are  repeated

throughout his life whenever a situation occurs that is similar to the

original one. This turns them into infantilisms, and they share the fate

of so many institutions which attempt to keep themselves in existence

after the time of their usefulness has passed. ‘Vernunft wird Unsinn,

Wohltat  Plage’¹  as  the  poet  complains.  The  adult’s  ego,  with  its

increased strength, continues to defend itself against dangers which

no longer exist in reality; indeed, it finds itself compelled to seek outthose  situations  in  reality  which  can  serve  as  an  approximate

substitute for the original danger, so as to be able to justify, in relation

to them, its maintaining its habitual modes of reaction. Thus we can

easily understand how the defensive mechanisms, by bringing about

an  ever  more  extensive  alienation  from  the  external  world  and  a

permanent weakening of the ego, pave the way for, and encourage,

the outbreak of neurosis.

 

   ¹ [‘Reason becomes unreason, kindness torment.’]

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5034

 

   At the moment, however, we are not concerned with the pathogenic

role of the defensive mechanisms. What we are trying to discover is

what influence the alteration of the ego which corresponds to them

has upon our therapeutic efforts. The material for an answer to this

question is given in the volume by Anna Freud to which I have already

referred. The essential point is that the patient repeats these modes of

reaction during the work of analysis as well, that he produces them

before our eyes, as it were. In fact, it is only in this way that we get to

know them. This does not mean that they make analysis impossible.

On the contrary, they constitute half of our analytic task. The other

half, the one which was first tackled by analysis in its early days, is the

uncovering  of  what  is  hidden  in  the  id.  During  the  treatment  our

therapeutic work is constantly swinging backwards and forwards like a

pendulum between a piece of id-analysis and a piece of ego-analysis.

In the one case we want to make something from the id conscious, in

the other we want to correct something in the ego. The crux of the

matter  is  that  the  defensive  mechanisms  directed  against  former

danger  recur  in  the  treatment  as resistances  against  recovery.  It

follows from this that the ego treats recovery itself as a new danger.

      The  therapeutic  effect  depends  on  making  conscious  what  is

repressed, in the widest sense of the word, in the id. We prepare the

way for this making conscious by interpretations and constructions,

but we have interpreted only for ourselves not for the patient so longas the ego holds on to its earlier defences and does not give up its

resistances. Now these resistances, although they belong to the ego,

are nevertheless unconscious and in some sense separated off within

the ego. The analyst recognizes them more easily than he does the

hidden material in the id. One might suppose that it would be sufficient

to treat them like portions of the id and, by making them conscious,

bring them into connection with the rest of the ego. In this way, we

should  suppose,  one  half  of  the  task  of  analysis  would  be

accomplished;  we  should  not  reckon  on  meeting  with  a  resistance

against  the  uncovering  of  resistances.  But  what  happens  is  this.

During the work on the resistances the ego withdraws - with a greater

or  less  degree  of  seriousness  -  from  the  agreement  on  which  the

analytic situation is founded. The ego ceases to support our efforts at

uncovering the id; it opposes them, disobeys the fundamental rule of

analysis, and allows no further derivatives of the repressed to emerge.

We  cannot  expect  the  patient  to  have  a  strong  conviction  of  the

curative power of analysis. He may have brought along with him a

certain amount of confidence in his analyst, which will be strengthened

to an effective point by the factors of the positive transference which

will  be  aroused  in  him.  Under  the  influence  of  the  unpleasurable

impulses  which  he  feels  as  a  result  of  the  fresh  activation  of  his

defensive conflicts, negative transferences may now gain the upper

hand  and  completely  annul  the  analytic  situation.  The  patient  now

regards  the  analyst  as  no  more  than  a  stranger  who  is  making

disagreeable demands on him, and he behaves towards him exactly

like  a  child  who  does  not  like  the  stranger  and  does  not  believe

anything he says. If the analyst tries to explain to the patient one of

the  distortions  made  by  him  for  the  purposes  of  defence,  and  to

correct it, he finds him uncomprehending and inaccessible to sound

arguments.  Thus  we  see  that  there  is  a  resistance  against  the

uncovering of resistances, and the defensive mechanisms really do

deserve  the  name  which  we  gave  them  originally,  before  they  had

been  more  closely  examined.  They  are  resistances  not  only  to  the

making conscious of contents of the id, but also to the analysis as a

whole, and thus to recovery.

   The effect brought about in the ego by the defences can rightly be

described  as  an  ‘alteration  of  the  ego’  if  by  that  we  understand  adeviation  from  the  fiction  of  a  normal  ego  which  would  guarantee

unshakable loyalty to the work of analysis. It is easy, then, to accept

the fact, shown by daily experience, that the outcome of an analytic

treatment depends essentially on the strength and on the depth of root

of these resistances that bring about an alteration of the ego. Once

again we are confronted with the importance of the quantitative factor,

and once again we are reminded that analysis can only draw upon

definite and limited amounts of energy which have to be measured

against the hostile forces. And it seems as if victory is in fact as a rule

on the side of the big battalions.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5035

 

 

                                            VI

 

   The next question we come to is whether every alteration of the ego

- in our sense of the term - is acquired during the defensive struggles

of the earliest years. There can be no doubt about the answer. We

have no reason to dispute the existence and importance of original,

innate distinguishing characteristics of the ego. This is made certain

by  the  single  fact  that  each  person  makes  a  selection  from  the

possible mechanisms of defence, that he always uses a few only of

them and always the same ones. This would seem to indicate that

each ego is endowed from the first with individual dispositions and

trends, though it is true that we cannot specify their nature or what

determines them. Moreover, we know that we must not exaggerate

the  difference  between  inherited  and  acquired  characters  into  an

antithesis;  what  was  acquired  by  our  forefathers  certainly  forms  an

important  part  of  what  we  inherit.  When  we  speak  of  an  ‘archaic

heritage’  we  are  usually  thinking  only  of  the  id  and  we  seem  to

assume that at the beginning of the individual’s life no ego is as yet in

existence.  But  we  shall  not  overlook  the  fact  that  id  and  ego  are

originally one; nor does it imply any mystical overvaluation of heredity

if  we  think  it  credible  that,  even  before  the  ego  has  come  intoexistence, the lines of development, trends and reactions which it will

later  exhibit  are  already  laid  down  for  it.  The  psychological

peculiarities  of  families,  races  and  nations,  even  in  their  attitude  to

analysis,  allow  of  no  other  explanation.  Indeed,  more  than  this:

analytic experience has forced on us a conviction that even particular

psychical contents, such as symbolism, have no other sources than

hereditary  transmission,  and  researches  in  various  fields  of  social

anthropology,  make  it  plausible  to  suppose  that  other,  equally

specialized  precipitates  left  by  early  human  development  are  also

present in the archaic heritage.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5036

 

   With the recognition that the properties of the ego which we meet

with  in  the  form  of  resistances  can  equally  well  be  determined  by

heredity  as  acquired  in  defensive  struggles,  the  topographical

distinction between what is ego and what is id loses much of its value

for  our  investigation.  If  we  advance  a  step  further  in  our  analytic

experience, we come upon resistances of another kind, which we can

no  longer  localize  and  which  seem  to  depend  on  fundamental

conditions in the mental apparatus. I can only give a few examples of

this type of resistance; the whole field of enquiry is still bewilderingly

strange  and  insufficiently  explored.  We  come  across  people,  for

instance,  to  whom  we  should  be  inclined  to  attribute  a  special

‘adhesiveness of the libido’. The processes which the treatment sets

in motion in them are so much slower than in other people because,

apparently,  they  cannot  make  up  their  minds  to  detach  libidinal

cathexes from one object and displace them on to another, although

we  can  discover  no  special  reason  for  this  cathectic  loyalty.  One

meets with the opposite type of person, too, in whom the libido seems

particularly mobile; it enters readily upon the new cathexes suggested

by analysis, abandoning its former ones in exchange for them. The

difference between the two types is comparable to the one felt by a

sculptor, according to whether he works in hard stone or soft clay.

Unfortunately, in this second type the results of analysis often turn outto be very impermanent: the new cathexes are soon given up once

more, and we have an impression, not of having worked in clay, but of

having written on water. In the words of the proverb: ‘Soon got, soon

gone.’¹

 

   ¹ [‘Wie gewonnen, so zerronnen.’]

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5037

 

   In another group of cases we are surprised by an attitude in our

patients which can only be put down to a depletion of the plasticity, the

capacity  for  change  and  further  development,  which  we  should

ordinarily  expect.  We  are,  it  is  true,  prepared  to  find  in  analysis  a

certain amount of psychical inertia. When the work of analysis has

opened up new paths for an instinctual impulse, we almost invariably

observe that the impulse does not enter upon them without marked

hesitation. We have called this behaviour, perhaps not quite correctly,

‘resistance from the id’. But with the patients I here have in mind, all

the  mental  processes,  relationships  and  distributions  of  force  are

unchangeable, fixed and rigid. One finds the same thing in very old

people, in which case it is explained as being due to what is described

as force of habit or an exhaustion of receptivity - a kind of psychical

entropy. But we are dealing here with people who are still young. Our

theoretical  knowledge  does  not  seem  adequate  to  give  a  correct

explanation of such types. Probably some temporal characteristics are

concerned - some alterations of a rhythm of development in psychical

life which we have not yet appreciated.

   In yet another group of cases the distinguishing characteristics of

the ego, which are to be held responsible as sources of resistance

against analytic treatment and as impediments to therapeutic success,

may spring from different and deeper roots. Here we are dealing with

the ultimate things which psychological research can learn about: the

behaviour of the two primal instincts, their distribution, mingling and

defusion  -  things  which  we  cannot  think  of  as  being  confined  to  a

single province of the mental apparatus, the id, the ego or the super-ego. No stronger impression arises from the resistances during the

work of analysis than of there being a force which is defending itself

by  every  possible  means  against  recovery  and  which  is  absolutely

resolved to hold on to illness and suffering. One portion of this force

has been recognized by us, undoubtedly with justice, as the sense of

guilt and need for punishment, and has been localized by us in the

ego’s relation to the super-ego. But this is only the portion of it which

is, as it were, psychically bound by the super-ego and thus becomes

recognizable; other quotas of the same force, whether bound or free,

may  be  at  work  in  other,  unspecified  places.  If  we  take  into

consideration  the  total  picture  made  up  of  the  phenomena  of

masochism  immanent  in  so  many  people,  the  negative  therapeutic

reaction and the sense of guilt found in so many neurotics, we shall no

longer  be  able  to  adhere  to  the  belief  that  mental  events  are

exclusively governed by the desire for pleasure. These phenomena

are unmistakable indications of the presence of a power in mental life

which we call the instinct of aggression or of destruction according to

its aims, and which we trace back to the original death instinct of living

matter. It is not a question of an antithesis between an optimistic and a

pessimistic theory of life. Only by the concurrent or mutually opposing

action of the two primal instincts - Eros and the death instinct -, never

by one or the other alone, can we explain the rich multiplicity of the

phenomena of life.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5038

 

   How parts of these two classes of instincts combine to fulfil the

various vital functions, under what conditions such combinations grow

looser or break up, to what disturbances these changes correspond

and with what feelings the perceptual scale of the pleasure principle

replies to them - these are problems whose elucidation would be the

most  rewarding  achievement  of  psychological  research.  For  the

moment we must bow to the superiority of the forces against which we

see our efforts come to nothing. Even to exert a psychical influence on

simple masochism is a severe tax upon our powers.      In  studying  the  phenomena  which  testify  to  the  activity  of  the

destructive  instinct,  we  are  not  confined  to  observations  on

pathological material. Numerous facts of normal mental life call for an

explanation  of  this  kind,  and  the  sharper  our  eye  grows,  the  more

copiously they strike us. The subject is too new and too important for

me  to  treat  it  as  a  side-issue  in  this  discussion.  I  shall  therefore

content myself with selecting a few sample cases.

   Here is one instance. It is well known that at all periods there have

been, as there still are, people who can take as their sexual objects

members of their own sex as well as of the opposite one, without the

one trend interfering with the other. We call such people bisexuals,

and we accept their existence without feeling much surprise about it.

We have come to learn, however, that every human being is bisexual

in this sense and that his libido is distributed, either in a manifest or a

latent fashion, over objects of both sexes. But we are struck by the

following point. Whereas in the first class of people the two trends

have  got  on  together  without  clashing,  in  the  second  and  more

numerous class they are in a state of irreconcilable conflict. A man’s

heterosexuality will not put up with any homosexuality, and vice versa.

If the former is the stronger it succeeds in keeping the latter latent and

forcing it away from satisfaction in reality. On the other hand, there is

no greater danger for a man’s heterosexual function than its being

disturbed by his latent homosexuality. We might attempt to explain this

by saying that each individual only has a certain quota of libido at his

disposal, for which the two rival trends have to struggle. But it is not

clear why the rivals do not always divide up the available quota of

libido between them according to their relative strength, since they are

able to do so in a number of cases. We are forced to the conclusion

that the tendency to a conflict is something special, something which

is newly added to the situation, irrespective of the quantity of libido. An

independently-emerging tendency to conflict of this sort can scarcely

be  attributed  to  anything  but  the  intervention  of  an  element  of  free

aggressiveness.

   If we recognize the case we are discussing as an expression of the

destructive or aggressive instinct, the question at once arises whether

this view should not be extended to other instances of conflict, and,

indeed, whether all that we know about psychical conflict should notbe revised from this new angle. After all, we assume that in the course

of  man’s  development  from  a  primitive  state  to  a  civilized  one  his

aggressiveness  undergoes  a  very  considerable  degree  of

internalization  or  turning  inwards;  if  so,  his  internal  conflicts  would

certainly  be  the  proper  equivalent  for  the  external  struggles  which

have then ceased. I am well aware that the dualistic theory according

to which an instinct of death or of destruction or aggression claims

equal rights as a partner with Eros as manifested in the libido, has

found little sympathy and has not really been accepted even among

psycho-analysts. This made me all the more pleased when not long

ago I came upon this theory of mine in the writings of one of the great

thinkers of ancient Greece. I am very ready to give up the prestige of

originality  for  the  sake  of  such  a  confirmation,  especially  as  I  can

never be certain, in view of the wide extent of my reading in early

years, whether what I took for a new creation might not be an effect of

cryptomnesia.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5039

 

   Empedocles of Acragas (Girgenti),¹ born about 495 B.C., is one of

the  grandest  and  most  remarkable  figures  in  the  history  of  Greek

civilization. The activities of his many-sided personality pursued the

most  varied  directions.  He  was  an  investigator  and  a  thinker,  a

prophet and a magician, a politician, a philanthropist and a physician

with a knowledge of natural science. He was said to have freed the

town of Selinunte from malaria, and his contemporaries revered him

as a god. His mind seems to have united the sharpest contrasts. He

was exact and sober in his physical and physiological researches, yet

he  did  not  shrink  from  the  obscurities  of  mysticism,  and  built  up

cosmic  speculations  of  astonishingly  imaginative  boldness.  Capelle

compares him with Dr. Faust ‘to whom many a secret was revealed’.

Born  as  he  was  at  a  time  when  the  realm  of  science  was  not  yet

divided into so many provinces, some of his theories must inevitably

strike us as primitive. He explained the variety of things by the mixture

of the four elements, earth, air, fire and water. He held that all naturewas animate, and he believed in the transmigration of souls. But he

also included in his theoretical body of knowledge such modern ideas

as the gradual evolution of living creatures, the survival of the fittest

and a recognition of the part played by chance (τύχη) in that evolution.

   But the theory of Empedocles which especially deserves our interest

is one which approximates so closely to the psycho-analytic theory of

the instincts that we should be tempted to maintain that the two are

identical, if it were not for the difference that the Greek philosopher’s

theory is a cosmic phantasy while ours is content to claim biological

validity. At the same time, the fact that Empedocles ascribes to the

universe the same animate nature as to individual organisms robs this

difference of much of its importance.

 

   ¹ I have based what follows on a work by Wilhelm Capelle (1935).

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5040

 

   The philosopher taught that two principles governed events in the

life of the universe and in the life of the mind, and that those principles

were everlastingly at war with each other. He called them φιλία (love)

and υεΐκος (strife). Of these two powers - which he conceived of as

being  at  bottom  ‘natural  forces  operating  like  instincts,  and  by  no

means intelligences with a conscious purpose’¹ - the one strives to

agglomerate  the  primal  particles  of  the  four  elements  into  a  single

unity, while the other, on the contrary, seeks to undo all those fusions

and to separate the primal particles of the elements from one another.

Empedocles thought of the process of the universe as a continuous,

never-ceasing alternation of periods, in which the one or the other of

the two fundamental forces gain the upper hand, so that at one time

love and at another strife puts its purpose completely into effect and

dominates  the  universe,  after  which  the  other,  vanquished,  side

asserts itself and in its turn defeats its partner.

   The two fundamental principles of Empedocles - φιλία and υεΐκος -

are, both in name and function, the same as our two primal instincts,

Eros and destructiveness, the first of which endeavours to combine

what exists into ever greater unities, while the second endeavours todissolve those combinations and to destroy the structures to which

they have given rise. We shall not be surprised, however, to find that,

on  its  re-emergence  after  two  and  a  half  millennia,  this  theory  has

been altered in some of its features. Apart from the restriction to the

biophysical field which is imposed on us, we no longer have as our

basic substances the four elements of Empedocles; what is living has

been sharply differentiated from what is inanimate, and we no longer

think of the mingling and separation of particles of substance, but of

the  soldering  together  and  defusion  of  instinctual  components.

Moreover,  we  have  provided  some  sort  of  biological  basis  for  the

principle  of  ‘strife’  by  tracing  back  our  instinct  of  destruction  to  the

death instinct, to the urge of what is living to return to an inanimate

state. This is not to deny that an analogous instinct already existed

earlier, nor, of course, to assert that an instinct of this sort only came

into existence with the emergence of life. And no one can foresee in

what guise the nucleus of truth contained in the theory of Empedocles

will present itself to later understanding.

 

   ¹ Capelle (1935), 186.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5041

 

 

                                          VII

 

   In 1927, Ferenczi read an instructive paper on the problem of the

termination  of  analyses.  It  ends  with  a  comforting  assurance  that

‘analysis is not an endless process, but one which can be brought to a

natural end with sufficient skill and patience on the analyst’s part’. The

paper as a whole, however, seems to me to be in the nature of a

warning not to aim at shortening analysis but at deepening it. Ferenczi

makes the further important point that success depends very largely

on  the  analyst’s  having  learnt  sufficiently  from  his  own  ‘errors  and

mistakes’ and having got the better of ‘the weak points in his own

personality’.  This  provides  an  important  supplement  to  our  theme.

Among the factors which influence the prospects of analytic treatmentand add to its difficulties in the same manner as the resistances, must

be  reckoned  not  only  the  nature  of  the  patient’s  ego  but  the

individuality of the analyst.

   It cannot be disputed that analysts in their own personalities have

not invariably come up to the standard of psychical normality to which

they wish to educate their patients. Opponents of analysis often point

to  this  fact  with  scorn  and  use  it  as  an  argument  to  show  the

uselessness  of  analytic  exertions.  We  might  reject  this  criticism  as

making unjustifiable demands. Analysts are people who have learned

to practise a particular art; alongside of this, they may be allowed to

be human beings like anyone else. After all, nobody maintains that a

physician is incapable of treating internal diseases if his own internal

organs are not sound; on the contrary, it may be argued that there are

certain  advantages  in  a  man  who  is  himself  threatened  with

tuberculosis  specializing  in  the  treatment  of  persons  suffering  from

that  disease.  But  the  cases  are  not  on  all  fours.  So  long  as  he  is

capable  of  practising  at  all,  a  doctor  suffering  from  disease  of  the

lungs  or  heart  is  not  handicapped  either  in  diagnosing  or  treating

internal complaints; whereas the special conditions of analytic work do

actually cause the analyst’s own defects to interfere with his making a

correct assessment of the state of things in his patient and reacting to

them  in  a  useful  way.  It  is  therefore  reasonable  to  expect  of  an

analyst, as a part of his qualifications, a considerable degree of mental

normality and correctness. In addition, he must possess some kind of

superiority, so that in certain analytic situations he can act as a model

for his patient and in others as a teacher. And finally we must not

forget that the analytic relationship is based on a love of truth - that is,

on a recognition of reality - and that it precludes any kind of sham or

deceit.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5042

 

   Here let us pause for a moment to assure the analyst that he has

our sincere sympathy in the very exacting demands he has to fulfil in

carrying out his activities. It almost looks as if analysis were the thirdof those ‘impossible’ professions in which one can be sure beforehand

of  achieving  unsatisfying  results.  The  other  two,  which  have  been

known  much  longer,  are  education  and  government.  Obviously  we

cannot demand that the prospective analyst should be a perfect being

before he takes up analysis, in other words that only persons of such

high and rare perfection should enter the profession. But where and

how is the poor wretch to acquire the ideal qualifications which he will

need in his profession? The answer is, in an analysis of himself, with

which  his  preparation  for  his  future  activity  begins.  For  practical

reasons  this  analysis  can  only  be  short  and  incomplete.  Its  main

object is to enable his teacher to make a judgement as to whether the

candidate can be accepted for further training. It has accomplished its

purpose if it gives the learner a firm conviction of the existence of the

unconscious, if it enables him, when repressed material emerges, to

perceive in himself things which would otherwise be incredible to him,

and if it shows him a first sample of the technique which has proved to

be the only effective one in analytic work. This alone would not suffice

for his instruction; but we reckon on the stimuli that he has received in

his own analysis not ceasing when it ends and on the processes of

remodelling the ego continuing spontaneously in the analysed subject

and making use of all subsequent experiences in this newly-acquired

sense. This does in fact happen, and in so far as it happens it makes

the analysed subject qualified to be an analyst himself.

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5043

 

   Unfortunately something else happens as well. In trying to describe

this, one can only rely on impressions. Hostility on the one side and

partisanship  on  the  other  create  an  atmosphere  which  is  not

favourable  to  objective  investigation.  It  seems  that  a  number  of

analysts  learn  to  make  use  of  defensive  mechanisms  which  allow

them  to  divert  the  implications  and  demands  of  analysis  from

themselves (probably by directing them on to other people), so that

they themselves remain as they are and are able to withdraw from the

critical and corrective influence of analysis. Such an event may justifythe words of the writer who warns us that when a man is endowed

with power it is hard for him not to misuse it.¹ Sometimes, when we try

to understand this, we are driven into drawing a disagreeable analogy

with the effect of X-rays on people who handle them without taking

special  precautions.  It  would  not  be  surprising  if  the  effect  of  a

constant preoccupation with all the repressed material which struggles

for freedom in the human mind were to stir up in the analyst as well all

the  instinctual  demands  which  he  is  otherwise  able  to  keep  under

suppression.  These,  too,  are  ‘dangers  of  analysis’,  though  they

threaten,  not  the  passive  but  the  active  partner  in  the  analytic

situation; and we ought not to neglect to meet them. There can be no

doubt how this is to be done. Every analyst should periodically - at

intervals of five years or so - submit himself to analysis once more,

without feeling ashamed of taking this step. This would mean, then,

that not only the therapeutic analysis of patients but his own analysis

would change from a terminable into an interminable task.

   At this point, however, we must guard against a misconception. I am

not intending to assert that analysis is altogether an endless business.

Whatever  one’s  theoretical  attitude  to  the  question  may  be,  the

termination  of  an  analysis  is,  I  think  a  practical  matter.  Every

experienced analyst will be able to recall a number of cases in which

he has bidden his patient a permanent farewell rebus bene gestis². In

cases of what is known as character-analysis there is a far smaller

discrepancy  between  theory  and  practice.  Here  it  is  not  easy  to

foresee  a  natural  end,  even  if  one  avoids  any  exaggerated

expectations and sets the analysis no excessive tasks. Our aim will

not be to rub off every peculiarity of human character for the sake of a

schematic  ‘normality’,  nor  yet  to  demand  that  the  person  who  has

been  ‘thoroughly  analysed’  shall  feel  no  passions  and  develop  no

internal conflicts. The business of the analysis is to secure the best

possible psychological conditions for the functions of the ego; with that

it has discharged its task.

 

   ¹ Anatole France, La révolte des anges.

   ² [‘Things having gone well.’]

                       Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5044

 

 

                                          VIII

 

   Both in therapeutic and in character-analyses we notice that two

themes  come  into  especial  prominence  and  give  the  analyst  an

unusual amount of trouble. It soon becomes evident that a general

principle is at work here. The two themes are tied to the distinction

between the sexes; one is as characteristic of males as the other is of

females.  In  spite  of  the  dissimilarity  of  their  content,  there  is  an

obvious correspondence between them. Something which both sexes

have  in  common  has  been  forced,  by  the  difference  between  the

sexes, into different forms of expression.

   The two corresponding themes are in the female, an envy for the

penis - a positive striving to possess a male genital - and, in the male,

a struggle against his passive or feminine attitude to another male.

What is common to the two themes was singled out at an early date

by psycho-analytic nomenclature as an attitude towards the castration

complex.  Subsequently  Alfred  Adler  brought  the  term  ‘masculine

protest’ into current use. It fits the case of males perfectly; but I think

that,  from  the  start,  ‘repudiation  of  femininity’  would  have  been  the

correct description of this remarkable feature in the psychical life of

human beings.

   In trying to introduce this factor into the structure of our theory, we

must not overlook the fact that it cannot, by its very nature, occupy the

same position in both sexes. In males the striving to be masculine is

completely ego-syntonic from the first; the passive attitude, since it

presupposes an acceptance of castration, is energetically repressed,

and  often  its  presence  is  only  indicated  by  excessive

overcompensations. In females, too, the striving to be masculine is

ego-syntonic at a certain period - namely in the phallic phase, before

the development to femininity has set in. But it then succumbs to the

momentous process of repression whose outcome, as has so often

been shown, determines the fortunes of a woman’s femininity. A great

deal  depends  on  whether  a  sufficient  amount  of  her  masculinitycomplex escapes repression and exercises a permanent influence on

her character. Normally, large portions of the complex are transformed

and contribute to the construction of her femininity: the appeased wish

for a penis is destined to be converted into a wish for a baby and for a

husband, who possesses a penis. It is strange, however, how often

we  find  that  the  wish  for  masculinity  has  been  retained  in  the

unconscious  and,  from  out  of  its  state  of  repression,  exercises  a

disturbing influence.

   As will be seen from what I have said, in both cases it is the attitude

proper to the opposite sex which has succumbed to repression. I have

already stated elsewhere¹ that it was Wilhelm Fliess who called my

attention  to  this  point.  Fliess  was  inclined  to  regard  the  antithesis

between  the  sexes  as  the  true  cause  and  primal  motive  force  of

repression. I am only repeating what I said then in disagreeing with his

view, when I decline to sexualize repression in this way - that is, to

explain  it  on  biological  grounds  instead  of  on  purely  psychological

ones.

 

   ¹ ‘"A Child is being Beaten"’ (1919e).

 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5045

 

   The paramount importance of these two themes - in females the

wish for a penis and in males the struggle against passivity - did not

escape Ferenczi’s notice. In the paper read by him in 1927 he made it

a requirement that in every successful analysis those two complexes

must have been mastered.¹ I should like to add that, speaking from my

own experience, I think that in this Ferenczi was asking a very great

deal. At no other point in one’s analytic work does one suffer more

from an oppressive feeling that all one’s repeated efforts have been in

vain, and from a suspicion that one has been ‘preaching to the winds’,

than when one is trying to persuade a woman to abandon her wish for

a penis on the ground of its being unrealizable or when one is seeking

to convince a man that a passive attitude to men does not always

signify castration and that it is indispensable in many relationships in

life. The rebellious overcompensation of the male produces one of thestrongest transference-resistances. He refuses to subject himself to a

father-substitute,  or  to  feel  indebted  to  him  for  anything,  and

consequently he refuses to accept his recovery from the doctor. No

analogous transference can arise from the female’s wish for a penis,

but it is the source of outbreaks of severe depression in her, owing to

an  internal  conviction  that  the  analysis  will  be  of  no  use  and  that

nothing can be done to help her. And we can only agree that she is

right, when we learn that her strongest motive in coming for treatment

was the hope that, after all, she might still obtain a male organ, the

lack of which was so painful to her.

 

   ¹ ‘. . . Every male patient must attain a feeling of equality in relation to the physician as a

sign that he has overcome his fear of castration; every female patient, if her neurosis is to be
regarded  as  fully  disposed  of,  must  have  got  rid  of  her  masculinity  complex  and  must
emotionally  accept  without  a  trace  of  resentment  the  implications  of  her  female  role.’
(Ferenczi, 1928, 8.)
 


                      Analysis Terminable And Interminable

                                                                                      5046

 

   But we also learn from this that it is not important in what form the

resistance appears, whether as a transference or not. The decisive

thing  remains  that  the  resistance  prevents  any  change  from  taking

place - that everything stays as it was. We often have the impression

that  with  the  wish  for  a  penis  and  the  masculine  protest  we  have

penetrated  through  all  the  psychological  strata  and  have  reached

bedrock, and that thus our activities are at an end. This is probably

true, since, for the psychical field, the biological field does in fact play

the part of the underlying bedrock. The repudiation of femininity can

be nothing else than a biological fact, a part of the great riddle of sex.¹

It  would  be  hard  to  say  whether  and  when  we  have  succeeded  in

mastering this factor in an analytic treatment. We can only console

ourselves with the certainty that we have given the person analysed

every possible encouragement to re-examine and alter his attitude to

it.

 

   ¹ We must not be misled by the term ‘masculine protest’ into supposing that what the man

is repudiating is his passive attitude - what might be called the social aspect of femininity.Such a view is contradicted by an observation that is easily verifiable - namely that such men
often display a masochistic attitude - a state that amounts to bondage - towards women. What
they  reject  is  not  passivity  in  general,  but  passivity  towards  a  male.  In  other  words,  the
‘masculine protest’ is in fact nothing else than castration anxiety.

                                                                                       5047

 

                          CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS

                                        (1937)

 


                                                                                      5048

 

Intentionally left blank

 


 5049

 

                          CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS

 

                                            I

 

It has always seemed to me to be greatly to the credit of a certain

well-known man of science that he treated psycho-analysis fairly at a

time  when  most  other  people  felt  themselves  under  no  such

obligation. On one occasion, nevertheless, he gave expression to an

opinion upon analytic technique which was at once derogatory and

unjust. He said that in giving interpretations to a patient we treat him

upon the famous principle of ‘Heads I win, tails you lose’.¹ That is to

say, if the patient agrees with us, then the interpretation is right; but if

he contradicts us, that is only a sign of his resistance, which again

shows that we are right. In this way we are always in the right against

the poor helpless wretch whom we are analysing, no matter how he

may respond to what we put forward. Now, since it is in fact true that a

‘No’  from  one  of  our  patients  is  not  as  a  rule  enough  to  make  us

abandon an interpretation as incorrect, a revelation such as this of the

nature of our technique has been most welcome to the opponents of

analysis. It is therefore worth while to give a detailed account of how

we are accustomed to arrive at an assessment of the ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ of

our  patients  during  analytic  treatment  -  of  their  expression  of

agreement  or  of  denial.  The  practising  analyst  will  naturally  learnnothing in the course of this apologia that he does not know already.

 

   ¹ [In English in the original.]

 


                                Constructions In Analysis

                                                                                      5050

 

   It is familiar ground that the work of analysis aims at inducing the

patient to give up the repressions (using the word in the widest sense)

belonging to his early development and to replace them by reactions

of a sort that would correspond to a psychically mature condition. With

this  purpose  in  view  he  must  be  brought  to  recollect  certain

experiences and the affective impulses called up by them which he

has for the time being forgotten. We know that his present symptoms

and inhibitions are the consequences of repressions of this kind: thus

that they are a substitute for these things that he has forgotten. What

sort of material does he put at our disposal which we can make use of

to put him on the way to recovering the lost memories? All kinds of

things.  He  gives  us  fragments  of  these  memories  in  his  dreams,

invaluable in themselves but seriously distorted as a rule by all the

factors  concerned  in  the  formation  of  dreams.  Again,  he  produces

ideas,  if  he  gives  himself  up  to  ‘free  association’,  in  which  we  can

discover allusions to the repressed experiences and derivatives of the

suppressed  affective  impulses  as  well  as  of  the  reactions  against

them.  And,  finally,  there  are  hints  of  repetitions  of  the  affects

belonging to the repressed material to be found in actions performed

by  the  patient,  some  fairly  important,  some  trivial,  both  inside  and

outside  the  analytic  situation.  Our  experience  has  shown  that  the

relation  of  transference,  which  becomes  established  towards  the

analyst,  is  particularly  calculated  to  favour  the  return  of  these

emotional connections. It is out of such raw material - if we may so

describe it - that we have to put together what we are in search of.

   What we are in search of is a picture of the patient’s forgotten years

that shall be alike trustworthy and in all essential respects complete.

But at this point we are reminded that the work of analysis consists of

two  quite  different  portions,  that  it  is  carried  on  in  two  separatelocalities, that it involves two people, to each of whom a distinct task is

assigned. It may for a moment seem strange that such a fundamental

fact should not have been pointed out long ago; but it will immediately

be perceived that there was nothing being kept back in this, that it is a

fact which is universally known and, as it were, self-evident and is

merely being brought into relief here and separately examined for a

particular purpose. We all know that the person who is being analysed

has to be induced to remember something that has been experienced

by him and repressed; and the dynamic determinants of this process

are  so  interesting  that  the  other  portion  of  the  work,  the  task

performed by the analyst, has been pushed into the background. The

analyst  has  neither  experienced  nor  repressed  any  of  the  material

under consideration; his task cannot be to remember anything. What

then is his task? His task is to make out what has been forgotten from

the traces which it has left behind or, more correctly, to construct it.

The time and manner in which he conveys his constructions to the

person who is being analysed, as well as the explanations with which

he accompanies them, constitute the link between the two portions of

the work of analysis, between his own part and that of the patient.

 


                                Constructions In Analysis

                                                                                      5051

 

      His  work  of  construction,  or,  if  it  is  preferred,  of  reconstruction,

resembles  to  a  great  extent  an  archaeologist’s  excavation  of  some

dwelling-place that has been destroyed and buried or of some ancient

edifice. The two processes are in fact identical, except that the analyst

works under better conditions and has more material at his command

to assist him, since what he is dealing with is not something destroyed

but something that is still alive - and perhaps for another reason as

well. But just as the archaeologist builds up the walls of the building

from  the  foundations  that  have  remained  standing,  determines  the

number and position of the columns from depressions in the floor and

reconstructs  the  mural  decorations  and  paintings  from  the  remains

found in the debris, so does the analyst proceed when he draws his

inferences from the fragments of memories, from the associations andfrom the behaviour of the subject of the analysis. Both of them have

an  undisputed  right  to  reconstruct  by  means  of  supplementing  and

combining the surviving remains. Both of them, moreover, are subject

to many of the same difficulties and sources of error. One of the most

ticklish  problems  that  confronts  the  archaeologist  is  notoriously  the

determination of the relative age of his finds; and if an object makes its

appearance in some particular level, it often remains to be decided

whether it belongs to that level or whether it was carried down to that

level owing to some subsequent disturbance. It is easy to imagine the

corresponding doubts that arise in the case of analytic constructions.

      The  analyst,  as  we  have  said,  works  under  more  favourable

conditions than the archaeologist since he has at his disposal material

which can have no counterpart in excavations, such as the repetitions

of  reactions  dating  from  infancy  and  all  that  is  indicated  by  the

transference in connection with these repetitions. But in addition to

this  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  excavator  is  dealing  with

destroyed objects of which large and important portions have quite

certainly been lost, by mechanical violence, by fire and by plundering.

No amount of effort can result in their discovery and lead to their being

united with the surviving remains. The one and only course open is

that of reconstruction, which for this reason can often reach only a

certain degree of probability. But it is different with the psychical object

whose early history the analyst is seeking to recover. Here we are

regularly  met  by  a  situation  which  with  the  archaeological  object

occurs only in such rare circumstances as those of Pompeii or of the

tomb  of  Tut’ankhamun.  All  of  the  essentials  are  preserved;  even

things  that  seem  completely  forgotten  are  present  somehow  and

somewhere, and have merely been buried and made inaccessible to

the  subject.  Indeed,  it  may,  as  we  know,  be  doubted  whether  any

psychical  structure  can  really  be  the  victim  of  total  destruction.  It

depends only upon analytic technique whether we shall succeed in

bringing  what  is  concealed  completely  to  light.  There  are  only  two

other facts that weigh against the extraordinary advantage which is

thus enjoyed by the work of analysis: namely, that psychical objects

are  incomparably  more  complicated  than  the  excavator’s  material

ones and that we have insufficient knowledge of what we may expect

to  find,  since  their  finer  structure  contains  so  much  that  is  stillmysterious. But our comparison between the two forms of work can go

no further than this; for the main difference between them lies in the

fact that for the archaeologist the reconstruction is the aim and end of

his endeavours while for analysis the construction is only a preliminary

labour.

 


                                Constructions In Analysis

                                                                                      5052

 

 

                                            II

 

   It is not, however, a preliminary labour in the sense that the whole of

it must be completed before the next piece of work can be begun, as,

for instance, is the case with house-building, where all the walls must

be erected and all the windows inserted before the internal decoration

of the rooms can be taken in hand. Every analyst knows that things

happen differently in an analytic treatment and that there both kinds of

work are carried on side by side, the one kind being always a little

ahead and the other following upon it. The analyst finishes a piece of

construction and communicates it to the subject of the analysis so that

it may work upon him; he then constructs a further piece out of the

fresh material pouring in upon him, deals with it in the same way and

proceeds in this alternating fashion until the end. If, in accounts of

analytic  technique,  so  little  is  said  about  ‘constructions’,  that  is

because ‘interpretations’ and their effects are spoken of instead. But I

think  that  ‘construction’  is  by  far  the  more  appropriate  description.

‘Interpretation’  applies  to  something  that  one  does  to  some  single

element of the material, such as an association or a parapraxis. But it

is a ‘construction’ when one lays before the subject of the analysis a

piece of his early history that he has forgotten, in some such way as

this:  ‘Up  to  your nth  year  you  regarded  yourself  as  the  sole  and

unlimited  possessor  of  your  mother;  then  came  another  baby  and

brought you grave disillusionment. Your mother left you for some time,

and even after her reappearance she was never again devoted to you

exclusively. Your feelings towards your mother became ambivalent,your father gained a new importance for you,’ . . . and so on.

 


                                Constructions In Analysis

                                                                                      5053

 

   In the present paper our attention will be turned exclusively to this

preliminary labour performed by constructions. And here, at the very

start, the question arises of what guarantee we have while we are

working on these constructions that we are not making mistakes and

risking  the  success  of  the  treatment  by  putting  forward  some

construction that is incorrect. It may seem that no general reply can in

my event be given to this question; but even before discussing it we

may lend our ear to some comforting information that is afforded by

analytic experience. For we learn from it that no damage is done if, for

once  in  a  way,  we  make  a  mistake  and  offer  the  patient  a  wrong

construction  as  the  probable  historical  truth.  A  waste  of  time  is,  of

course,  involved,  and  anyone  who  does  nothing  but  present  the

patient  with  false  combinations  will  neither  create  a  very  good

impression  on  him  nor  carry  the  treatment  very  far;  but  a  single

mistake of the sort can do no harm. What in fact occurs in such an

event is rather that the patient remains as though he were untouched

by what has been said and reacts to it with neither a ‘Yes’ nor a ‘No’.

This may possibly mean no more than that his reaction is postponed;

but if nothing further develops we may conclude that we have made a

mistake and we shall admit as much to the patient at some suitable

opportunity  without  sacrificing  any  of  our  authority.  Such  an

opportunity will arise when some new material has come to light which

allows us to make a better construction and so to correct our error. In

this  way  the  false  construction  drops  out,  as  if  it  had  never  been

made; and, indeed, we often get an impression as though, to borrow

the words of Polonius, our bait of falsehood had taken a carp of truth.

The  danger  of  our  leading  a  patient  astray  by  suggestion,  by

persuading him to accept things which we ourselves believe but which

he  ought  not  to,  has  certainly  been  enormously  exaggerated.  An

analyst  would  have  had  to  behave  very  incorrectly  before  such  a

misfortune  could  overtake  him;  above  all,  he  would  have  to  blamehimself with not allowing his patients to have their say. I can assert

without  boasting  that  such  an  abuse  of  ‘suggestion’  has  never

occurred in my practice.

 


                                Constructions In Analysis

                                                                                      5054

 

   It already follows from what has been said that we are not at all

inclined  to  neglect  the  indications  that  can  be  inferred  from  the

patient’s reaction when we have offered him one of our constructions.

The point must be gone into in detail. It is true that we do not accept

the ‘No’ of a person under analysis at its face value; but neither do we

allow  his  ‘Yes’  to  pass.  There  is  no  justification  for  accusing  us  of

invariably twisting his remarks into a confirmation. In reality things are

not so simple and we do not make it so easy for ourselves to come to

a conclusion.

   A plain ‘Yes’ from a patient is by no means unambiguous. It can

indeed signify that he recognizes the correctness of the construction

that has been presented to him; but it can also be meaningless, or can

even  deserve  to  be  described  as  ‘hypocritical’,  since  it  may  be

convenient  for  his  resistance  to  make  use  of  an  assent  in  such

circumstances in order to prolong the concealment of a truth that has

not been discovered. The ‘Yes’ has no value unless it is followed by

indirect confirmations, unless the patient, immediately after his ‘Yes’,

produces new memories which complete and extend the construction.

Only  in  such  an  event  do  we  consider  that  the  ‘Yes’  has  dealt

completely with the subject under discussion.

   A ‘No’ from a person in analysis is quite as ambiguous as a ‘Yes’,

and is indeed of even less value. In some rare cases it turns out to be

the  expression  of  a  legitimate  dissent.  Far  more  frequently  it

expresses a resistance which may have been evoked by the subject-

matter of the construction that has been put forward but which may

just  as  easily  have  arisen  from  some  other  factor  in  the  complex

analytic  situation.  Thus,  a  patient’s  ‘No’  is  no  evidence  of  the

correctness of a construction, though it is perfectly compatible with it.

Since every such construction is an incomplete one, since it coversonly a small fragment of the forgotten events, we are free to suppose

that the patient is not in fact disputing what has been said to him but is

basing  his  contradiction  upon  the  part  that  has  not  yet  been

uncovered. As a rule he will not give his assent until he has learnt the

whole truth - which often covers a very great deal of ground. So that

the  only  safe  interpretation  of  his  ‘No’  is  that  it  points  to

incompleteness; there can be no doubt that the construction has not

told him everything.

 


                                Constructions In Analysis

                                                                                      5055

 

   It appears, therefore, that the direct utterances of the patient after he

has been offered a construction afford very little evidence upon the

question whether we have been right or wrong. It is of all the greater

interest that there are indirect forms of confirmation which are in every

respect trustworthy. One of these is a form of words that is used (as

though  by  general  agreement)  with  very  little  variation  by  the  most

different people: ‘I didn’t ever think’ (or ‘I shouldn’t ever have thought’)

‘that’ (or ‘of that’). This can be translated without any hesitation into:

‘Yes, you’re right this time - about my unconscious.’ Unfortunately this

formula, which is so welcome to the analyst, reaches his ears more

often  after  single  interpretations  than  after  he  has  produced  an

extensive  construction.  An  equally  valuable  confirmation  is  implied

(expressed  this  time  positively)  when  the  patient  answers  with  an

association  which  contains  something  similar  or  analogous  to  the

content of the construction. Instead of taking an example of this from

an analysis (which would be easy to find but lengthy to describe) I

prefer to give an account of a small extra-analytical experience which

presents  a  similar  situation  so  strikingly  that  it  produces  an  almost

comic effect. It concerned one of my colleagues who - it was long ago

- had chosen me as a consultant in his medical practice. One day,

however, he brought his young wife to see me, as she was causing

him  trouble.  She  refused  on  all  sorts  of  pretexts  to  have  sexual

relations with him, and what he expected of me was evidently that I

should lay before her the consequences of her ill-advised behaviour. Iwent  into  the  matter  and  explained  to  her  that  her  refusal  would

probably have unfortunate results for her husband’s health or would

lay  him  open  to  temptations  that  might  lead  to  a  break-up  of  their

marriage. At this point he suddenly interrupted me with the remark:

‘The Englishman you diagnosed as suffering from a cerebral tumour

has died too.’ At first the remark seemed incomprehensible; the ‘too’ in

his sentence was a mystery, for we had not been speaking of anyone

else who had died. But a short time afterwards I understood. The man

was evidently intending to confirm what I had been saying; he was

meaning to say: ‘Yes, you’re certainly quite right. Your diagnosis was

confirmed in the case of the other patient too.’ It was an exact parallel

to  the  indirect  confirmations  that  we  obtain  in  analysis  from

associations. I will not attempt to deny that there were other thoughts

as  well,  put  on  one  side  by  my  colleague,  which  had  a  share  in

determining his remark.

 


                                Constructions In Analysis

                                                                                      5056

 

   Indirect confirmation from associations that fit in with the content of a

construction - that give us a ‘too’ like the one in my story - provides a

valuable  basis  for  judging  whether  the  construction  is  likely  to  be

confirmed in the course of the analysis. It is particularly striking when,

by means of a parapraxis, a confirmation of this kind insinuates itself

into a direct denial. I once published elsewhere a nice example of this.

The name ‘Jauner’ (a familiar one in Vienna) came up repeatedly in

one of my patient’s dreams without a sufficient explanation appearing

in his associations. I finally put forward the interpretation that when he

said  ‘Jauner’  he  probably  meant  ‘Gauner’,  whereupon  he  promptly

replied:  ‘That  seems  to  me  too  "jewagt".’  Or  there  was  the  other

instance, in which, when I suggested to a patient that he considered a

particular  fee  too  high,  he  meant  to  deny  the  suggestion  with  the

words ‘Ten dollars mean nothing to me’ but instead of dollars put in a

coin of lower value and said ‘ten shillings’.

      If  an  analysis  is  dominated  by  powerful  factors  that  impose  a

negative therapeutic reaction, such as a sense of guilt, a masochisticneed for suffering or repugnance to receiving help from the analyst,

the patient’s behaviour after he has been offered a construction often

makes  it  very  easy  for  us  to  arrive  at  the  decision  that  we  are  in

search  of.  If  the  construction  is  wrong,  there  is  no  change  in  the

patient; but if it is right or gives an approximation to the truth, he reacts

to  it  with  an  unmistakable  aggravation  of  his  symptoms  and  of  his

general condition.

   We may sum the matter up by asserting that there is no justification

for the reproach that we neglect or underestimate the importance of

the  attitude  taken  up  by  those  under  analysis  towards  our

constructions.  We  pay  attention  to  them  and  often  derive  valuable

information from them. But these reactions on the part of the patient

are rarely unambiguous and give no opportunity for a final judgement.

Only the further course of the analysis enables us to decide whether

our constructions are correct or unserviceable. We do not pretend that

an individual construction is anything more than a conjecture which

awaits examination, confirmation or rejection. We claim no authority

for  it,  we  require  no  direct  agreement  from  the  patient,  nor  do  we

argue with him if at first he denies it. In short, we conduct ourselves on

the  model  of  a  familiar  figure  in  one  of  Nestroy’s  farces  -  the

manservant who has a single answer on his lips to every question or

objection:  ‘It  will  all  become  clear  in  the  course  of  future

developments.’

 


                                Constructions In Analysis

                                                                                      5057

 

 

                                            III

 

   How this occurs in the process of the analysis - the way in which a

conjecture of ours is transformed into the patient’s conviction - this is

hardly worth describing. All of it is familiar to every analyst from his

daily  experience  and  is  intelligible  without  difficulty.  Only  one  point

requires investigation and explanation. The path that starts from the

analyst’s construction ought to end in the patient’s recollection; but itdoes not always lead so far. Quite often we do not succeed in bringing

the patient to recollect what has been repressed. Instead of that, if the

analysis  is  carried  out  correctly,  we  produce  in  him  an  assured

conviction of the truth of the construction which achieves the same

therapeutic result as a recaptured memory. The problem of what the

circumstances are in which this occurs and of how it is possible that

what  appears  to  be  an  incomplete  substitute  should  nevertheless

produce a complete result - all of this is matter for a later enquiry.

   I shall conclude this brief paper with a few remarks which open up a

wider  perspective.  I  have  been  struck  by  the  manner  in  which,  in

certain analyses, the communication of an obviously apt construction

has evoked in the patients a surprising and at first incomprehensible

phenomenon. They have had lively recollections called up in them -

which they themselves have described as ‘ultra-clear’ - but what they

have recollected has not been the event that was the subject of the

construction  but  details  relating  to  that  subject.  For  instance,  they

have  recollected  with  abnormal  sharpness  the  faces  of  the  people

involved in the construction or the rooms in which something of the

sort might have happened, or, a step further away, the furniture in

such rooms - on the subject of which the construction had naturally no

possibility  of  any  knowledge.  This  has  occurred  both  in  dreams

immediately after the construction had been put forward and in waking

states  resembling  phantasies.  These  recollections  have  themselves

led to nothing further and it has seemed plausible to regard them as

the  product  of  a  compromise.  The  ‘upward  drive’  of  the  repressed,

stirred  into  activity  by  the  putting  forward  of  the  construction,  has

striven to carry the important memory-traces into consciousness; but a

resistance has succeeded, not, it is true, in stopping that movement,

but in displacing it on to adjacent objects of minor significance.

 


                                Constructions In Analysis

                                                                                      5058

 

   These recollections might have been described as hallucinations if a

belief in their actual presence had been added to their clearness. The

importance of this analogy seemed greater when I noticed that truehallucinations occasionally occurred in the case of other patients who

were certainly not psychotic. My line of thought proceeded as follows.

Perhaps it may be a general characteristic of hallucinations to which

sufficient attention has not hitherto been paid that in them something

that  has  been  experienced  in  infancy  and  then  forgotten  returns  -

something that the child has seen or heard at a time when he could

still  hardly  speak  and  that  now  forces  its  way  into  consciousness,

probably distorted and displaced owing to the operation of forces that

are opposed to this return. And, in view of the close relation between

hallucinations and particular forms of psychosis, our line of thought

may be carried still further. It may be that the delusions into which

these hallucinations are so constantly incorporated may themselves

be less independent of the upward drive of the unconscious and the

return of the repressed than we usually assume. In the mechanism of

a delusion we stress as a rule only two factors: the turning away from

the real world and its motive forces on the one hand, and the influence

exercised  by  wish-fulfilment  on  the  content  of  the  delusion  on  the

other. But may it not be that the dynamic process is rather that the

turning  away  from  reality  is  exploited  by  the  upward  drive  of  the

repressed in order to force its content into consciousness, while the

resistances stirred up by this process and the trend to wish-fulfilment

share the responsibility for the distortion and displacement of what is

recollected? This is after all the familiar mechanism of dreams, which

intuition has equated with madness from time immemorial.

   This view of delusions is not, I think, entirely new, but it nevertheless

emphasizes  a  point  of  view  which  is  not  usually  brought  into  the

foreground.  The  essence  of  it  is  that  there  is  not  only method  in

madness, as the poet has already perceived, but also a fragment of

historical truth; and it is plausible to suppose that the compulsive belief

attaching  to  delusions  derives  its  strength  precisely  from  infantile

sources of this kind. All that I can produce to-day in support of this

theory are reminiscences, not fresh impressions. It would probably be

worth  while  to  make  an  attempt  to  study  cases  of  the  disorder  in

question  on  the  basis  of  the  hypotheses  that  have  been  here  put

forward and also to carry out their treatment on those same lines. The

vain effort would be abandoned of convincing the patient of the error

of his delusion and of its contradiction of reality; and, on the contrary,the recognition of its kernel of truth would afford common ground upon

which the therapeutic work could develop. That work would consist in

liberating  the  fragment  of  historical  truth  from  its  distortions  and  its

attachments to the actual present day and in leading it back to the

point in the past to which it belongs. The transposing of material from

a forgotten past on to the present or on to an expectation of the future

is indeed a habitual occurrence in neurotics no less than in psychotics.

Often enough, when a neurotic is led by an anxiety-state to expect the

occurrence  of  some  terrible  event,  he  is  in  fact  merely  under  the

influence  of  a  repressed  memory  (which  is  seeking  to  enter

consciousness but cannot become conscious) that something which

was at that time terrifying did really happen. I believe that we should

gain a great deal of valuable knowledge from work of this kind upon

psychotics even if it led to no therapeutic success.

 


                                Constructions In Analysis

                                                                                      5059

 

   I am aware that it is of small service to handle so important a subject

in the cursory fashion that I have here employed. But none the less I

have  not  been  able  to  resist  the  seduction  of  an  analogy.  The

delusions  of  patients  appear  to  me  to  be  the  equivalents  of  the

constructions which we build up in the course of an analytic treatment

- attempts at explanation and cure, though it is true that these, under

the  conditions  of  a  psychosis,  can  do  no  more  than  replace  the

fragment of reality that is being disavowed in the present by another

fragment that had already been disavowed in the remote past. It will

be  the  task  of  each  individual  investigation  to  reveal  the  intimate

connections between the material of the present disavowal and that of

the  original  repression.  Just  as  our  construction  is  only  effective

because  it  recovers  a  fragment  of  lost  experience,  so  the  delusion

owes its convincing power to the element of historical truth which it

inserts in the place of the rejected reality. In this way a proposition

which  I  originally  asserted  only  of  hysteria  would  apply  also  to

delusions - namely, that those who are subject to them are suffering

from their own reminiscences. I never intended by this short formula todispute the complexity of the causation of the illness or to exclude the

operation of many other factors.

   If we consider mankind as a whole and substitute it for the single

human  individual,  we  discover  that  it  too  has  developed  delusions

which are inaccessible to logical criticism and which contradict reality.

If, in spite of this, they are able to exert an extraordinary power over

men, investigation leads us to the same explanation as in the case of

the single individual. They owe their power to the element of historical

truth which they have brought up from the repression of the forgotten

and primaeval past.

                                                                                       5060

 

        SPLITTING OF THE EGO IN THE PROCESS OF DEFENCE

                                        (1940)

 


                                                                                      5061

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      5062

 

        SPLITTING OF THE EGO IN THE PROCESS OF DEFENCE

 

I find myself for a moment in the interesting position of not knowing

whether what I have to say should be regarded as something long

familiar and obvious or as something entirely new and puzzling. But I

am inclined to think the latter.

   I have at last been struck by the fact that the ego of a person whom

we know as a patient in analysis must, dozens of years earlier, when it

was young, have behaved in a remarkable manner in certain particular

situations of pressure. We can assign in general and somewhat vague

terms the conditions under which this comes about, by saying that it

occurs under the influence of a psychical trauma. I prefer to select a

single sharply defined special case, though it certainly does not cover

all the possible modes of causation.

   Let us suppose, then, that a child’s ego is under the sway of a

powerful instinctual demand which it is accustomed to satisfy and that

it is suddenly frightened by an experience which teaches it that the

continuance of this satisfaction will result in an almost intolerable real

danger. It must now decide either to recognize the real danger, give

way to it and renounce the instinctual satisfaction, or to disavow reality

and make itself believe that there is no reason for fear, so that it may

be able to retain the satisfaction. Thus there is a conflict between the

demand by the instinct and the prohibition by reality. But in fact the

child  takes  neither  course,  or  rather  he  takes  both  simultaneously,which comes to the same thing. He replies to the conflict with two

contrary reactions, both of which are valid and effective. On the one

hand,  with  the  help  of  certain  mechanisms  he  rejects  reality  and

refuses  to  accept  any  prohibition;  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  same

breath he recognizes the danger of reality, takes over the fear of that

danger as a pathological symptom and tries subsequently to divest

himself of the fear. It must be confessed that this is a very ingenious

solution of the difficulty. Both of the parties to the dispute obtain their

share:  the  instinct  is  allowed  to  retain  its  satisfaction  and  proper

respect is shown to reality. But everything has to be paid for in one

way or another, and this success is achieved at the price of a rift in the

ego which never heals but which increases as time goes on. The two

contrary  reactions  to  the  conflict  persist  as  the  centre-point  of  a

splitting  of  the  ego.  The  whole  process  seems  so  strange  to  us

because we take for granted the synthetic nature of the processes of

the ego. But we are clearly at fault in this. The synthetic function of the

ego,  though  it  is  of  such  extraordinary  importance,  is  subject  to

particular conditions and is liable to a whole number of disturbances.

 


                Splitting Of The Ego In The Process Of Defence

                                                                                      5063

 

      It  will  assist  if  I  introduce  an  individual  case  history  into  this

schematic disquisition. A little boy, while he was between three and

four years of age, had become acquainted with the female genitals

through being seduced by an older girl. After these relations had been

broken off, he carried on the sexual stimulation set going in this way

by zealously practising manual masturbation; but he was soon caught

at it by his energetic nurse and was threatened with castration, the

carrying out of which was, as usual, ascribed to his father. There were

thus  present  in  this  case  conditions  calculated  to  produce  a

tremendous effect of fright. A threat of castration by itself need not

produce a great impression. A child will refuse to believe in it, for he

cannot easily imagine the possibility of losing such a highly prized part

of his body. His sight of the female genitals might have convinced our

child of that possibility. But he drew no such conclusion from it, sincehis disinclination to doing so was too great and there was no motive

present  which  could  compel  him  to.  On  the  contrary,  whatever

uneasiness he may have felt was calmed by the reflection that what

was missing would yet make its appearance: she would grow one (a

penis) later. Anyone who has observed enough small boys will be able

to recollect having come across some such remark at the sight of a

baby  sister’s  genitals.  But  it  is  different  if  both  factors  are  present

together. In that case the threat revives the memory of the perception

which  had  hitherto  been  regarded  as  harmless  and  finds  in  that

memory  a  dreaded  confirmation.  The  little  boy  now  thinks  he

understands why the girl’s genitals showed no sign of a penis and no

longer  ventures  to  doubt  that  his  own  genitals  may  meet  with  the

same fate. Thenceforward he cannot help believing in the reality of the

danger of castration.

 


                Splitting Of The Ego In The Process Of Defence

                                                                                      5064

 

   The usual result of the fright of castration, the result that passes as

the normal one, is that, either immediately or after some considerable

struggle, the boy gives way to the threat and obeys the prohibition

either  wholly  or  at  least  in  part  (that  is,  by  no  longer  touching  his

genitals with his hand). In other words, he gives up, in whole or in part,

the satisfaction of the instinct. We are prepared to hear, however, that

our present patient found another way out. He created a substitute for

the penis which he missed in females - that is to say, a fetish. In so

doing, it is true that he had disavowed reality, but he had saved his

own  penis.  So  long  as  he  was  not  obliged  to  acknowledge  that

females have lost their penis, there was no need for him to believe the

threat that had been made against him: he need have no fears for his

own penis, so he could proceed with his masturbation undisturbed.

This behaviour on the part of our patient strikes us forcibly as being a

turning  away  from  reality  -  a  procedure  which  we  should  prefer  to

reserve for psychoses. And it is in fact not very different. Yet we will

suspend our judgement, for upon closer inspection we shall discover a

not  unimportant  distinction.  The  boy  did  not  simply  contradict  hisperceptions and hallucinate a penis where there was none to be seen;

he effected no more than a displacement of value - he transferred the

importance of the penis to another part of the body, a procedure in

which he was assisted by the mechanism of regression (in a manner

which  need  not  here  be  explained).  This  displacement,  it  is  true,

related only to the female body; as regards his own penis nothing was

changed.

      This  way  of  dealing  with  reality,  which  almost  deserves  to  be

described  as  artful,  was  decisive  as  regards  the  boy’s  practical

behaviour. He continued with his masturbation as though it implied no

danger to his penis; but at the same time, in complete contradiction to

his apparent boldness or indifference, he developed a symptom which

showed that he nevertheless did recognize the danger. He had been

threatened  with  being  castrated  by  his  father,  and  immediately

afterwards,  simultaneously  with  the  creation  of  his  fetish,  he

developed  an  intense  fear  of  his  father  punishing  him,  which  it

required  the  whole  force  of  his  masculinity  to  master  and

overcompensate. This fear of his father, too, was silent on the subject

of castration: by the help of regression to an oral phase, it assumed

the  form  of  a  fear  of  being  eaten  by  his  father.  At  this  point  it  is

impossible to forget a primitive fragment of Greek mythology which

tells  how  Kronos,  the  old  Father  God,  swallowed  his  children  and

sought to swallow his youngest son Zeus like the rest, and how Zeus

was saved by the craft of his mother and later on castrated his father.

But we must return to our case history and add that the boy produced

yet  another  symptom,  though  it  was  a  slight  one,  which  he  has

retained to this day. This was an anxious susceptibility against either

of his little toes being touched, as though, in all the to and fro between

disavowal and acknowledgement, it was nevertheless castration that

found the clearer expression. . . .

 

                              *       *       *       *       *

                                                                                       5065

 

        SOME ELEMENTARY LESSONS IN PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

                                        (1940)

 


                                                                                      5066

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      5067

 

        SOME ELEMENTARY LESSONS IN PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

An author who sets out to introduce some branch of knowledge - or, to

put it more modestly, some branch of research - to an uninstructed

public  must  clearly  make  his  choice  between  two  methods  or

techniques.

   It is possible to start off from what every reader knows (or thinks he

knows)  and  regards  as  self-evident,  without  in  the  first  instance

contradicting  him.  An  opportunity  will  soon  occur  for  drawing  his

attention to facts in the same field, which, though they are known to

him, he has so far neglected or insufficiently appreciated. Beginning

from these, one can introduce further facts to him of which he has no

knowledge and so prepare him for the necessity of going beyond his

earlier judgements, of seeking new points of view and of taking new

hypotheses into consideration. In this way one can get him to take a

part in building up a new theory about the subject and one can deal

with his objections to it during the actual course of the joint work. A

method of this kind might well be called genetic. It follows the path

along which the investigator himself has travelled earlier. In spite of all

its advantages, it has the defect of not making a sufficiently striking

effect upon the learner. He will not be nearly so much impressed by

something which he has watched coming into existence and passing

through  a  slow  and  difficult  period  of  growth  as  he  would  be  by

something that is presented to him ready-made as an apparently self-contained whole.

   It is precisely this last effect which is produced by the alternative

method of presentation. This other method, the dogmatic one, begins

straight away by stating its conclusions. Its premisses make demands

upon the audience’s attention and belief and very little is adduced in

support of them. And there is then a danger that a critical hearer may

shake his head and say: ‘All this sounds most peculiar: where does

the fellow get it from?’

   In what follows I shall not rely exclusively upon either of the two

methods of presentation: I shall make use now of one and now of the

other. I am under no delusion about the difficulty of my task. Psycho-

analysis  has  little  prospect  of  becoming  liked  or  popular.  It  is  not

merely  that  much  of  what  it  has  to  say  offends  people’s  feelings.

Almost  as  much  difficulty  is  created  by  the  fact  that  our  science

involves  a  number  of  hypotheses  -  it  is  hard  to  say  whether  they

should be regarded as postulates or as products of our researches -

which are bound to seem very strange to ordinary modes of thought

and which fundamentally contradict current views. But there is no help

for  it.  We  must  begin  our  brief  study  with  two  of  these  hazardous

hypotheses.

 


                Some Elementary Lessons In Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      5068

 

                          THE NATURE OF THE PSYCHICAL

 

   Psycho-analysis is a part of the mental science of psychology. It is

also described as ‘depth psychology’ - we shall later discover why. If

someone asks what ‘the psychical’ really means, it is easy to reply by

enumerating  its  constituents:  our  perceptions,  ideas,  memories,

feelings and acts of volition - all these form part of what is psychical.

But if the questioner goes further and asks whether there is not some

common  quality  possessed  by  all  these  processes  which  makes  it

possible to get nearer to the nature, or, as people sometimes say, the

essence of the psychical, then it is harder to give an answer.

   If an analogous question had been put to a physicist (as to the

nature of electricity, for instance), his reply, until quite recently, wouldhave  been:  ‘For  the  purpose  of  explaining  certain  phenomena,  we

assume the existence of electrical forces which are present in things

and which emanate from them. We study these phenomena, discover

the laws that govern them and even put them to practical use. This

satisfies  us  provisionally.  We  do  not  know  the nature  of  electricity.

Perhaps we may discover it later, as our work goes on. It must be

admitted that what we are ignorant of is precisely the most important

and interesting part of the whole business, but for the moment that

does  not  worry  us.  It  is  simply  how  things  happen  in  the  natural

sciences.’

   Psychology, too, is a natural science. What else can it be? But its

case is different. Not everyone is bold enough to make judgements

about physical matters; but everyone - the philosopher and the man in

the  street  alike  -  has  his  opinion  on  psychological  questions  and

behaves  as  if  he  were  at  least  an amateur  psychologist.  And  now

comes the remarkable thing. Everyone - or almost everyone - was

agreed that what is psychical really has a common quality in which its

essence is expressed: namely the quality of being conscious - unique,

indescribable, but needing no description. All that is conscious, they

said, is psychical, and conversely all that is psychical is conscious:

that is self-evident and to contradict it is nonsense. It cannot be said

that this decision threw much light upon the nature of the psychical, for

consciousness  is  one  of  the  fundamental  facts  of  our  life  and  our

researches come up against it like a blank wall and can find no path

beyond  it.  Moreover  the  equation  of  what  is  mental  with  what  is

conscious had the unwelcome result of divorcing psychical processes

from the general context of events in the universe and of setting them

in complete contrast to all others. But this would not do, since the fact

could not long be overlooked that psychical phenomena are to a high

degree dependent upon somatic influences and on their side have the

most powerful effects upon somatic processes. If ever human thought

found  itself  in  an impasse  it  was  here.  To  find  a  way  out,  the

philosophers at least were obliged to assume that there were organic

processes parallel to the conscious psychical ones, related to them in

a manner that was hard to explain, which acted as intermediaries in

the reciprocal relations between ‘body and mind’, and which served to

re-insert  the  psychical  into  the  texture  of  life.  But  this  solutionremained unsatisfactory.

   Psycho-analysis escaped such difficulties as these by energetically

denying  the  equation  between  what  is  psychical  and  what  is

conscious.  No;  being  conscious  cannot  be  the  essence  of  what  is

psychical. It is only a quality of what is psychical, and an inconstant

quality  at  that  -  one  that  is  far  oftener  absent  than  present.  The

psychical,  whatever  its  nature  may  be,  is  in  itself  unconscious  and

probably similar in kind to all the other natural processes of which we

have obtained knowledge.

   Psycho-analysis bases this assertion on a number of facts, of which

I shall now proceed to give a selection.

   We know what is meant by ideas ‘occurring’ to one - thoughts that

suddenly come into consciousness without one’s being aware of the

steps that led up to them, though they, too, must have been psychical

acts. It can even happen that one arrives in this way at the solution of

some  difficult  intellectual  problem  which  has  previously  for  a  time

baffled  one’s  efforts.  All  the  complicated  processes  of  selection,

rejection  and  decision  which  occupied  the  interval  were  withdrawn

from consciousness. We shall not be putting forward any new theory

in saying that they were unconscious and perhaps, too, remained so.

 


                Some Elementary Lessons In Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      5069

 

   In the second place, I shall pick a single instance to represent an

immensely large class of phenomena.¹ The President of a public body

(the Lower House of the Austrian Parliament) on one occasion opened

a sitting with the following words: ‘I take notice that a full quorum of

members is present and herewith declare the sitting closed.’ It was a

slip of the tongue - for there can be no doubt that what the President

intended to say was ‘opened’. Why, then, did he say the opposite? We

shall  expect  to  be  told  it  was  an  accidental  mistake,  a  failure  in

carrying  out  an  intention  such  as  may  easily  happen  for  various

reasons:  it  had  no  meaning  -  and  in  any  case  contraries  are

particularly easily substituted for each other. If, however, we bear in

mind the situation in which the slip of the tongue occurred, we shall beinclined to prefer another explanation. Many of the previous sittings of

the  House  had  been  disagreeably  stormy  and  had  accomplished

nothing, so that it would be only too natural for the President to think

at the moment of making his opening statement: ’If only the sitting

that’s  just  beginning  were  finished!  I  would  much  rather  be  closing

then opening it!’ When he began to speak he was probably not aware

of this wish - it was not conscious to him - but it was certainly present

and it succeeded in making itself effective, against the speaker’s will,

in his apparent mistake. A single instance can scarcely enable us to

decide  between  two  such  different  explanations.  But  what  if  every

other instance of a slip of the tongue could be explained in the same

way, and similarly every slip of the pen, every case of mis-reading or

mis-hearing, and every faulty action? What if in all those instances

(one might actually say, without a single exception) it was possible to

demonstrate the presence of a psychical act - a thought, a wish or an

intention - which would account for the apparent mistake and which

was unconscious at the moment at which it became effective, even

though  it  may  have  been  conscious  previously?  If  that  were  so,  it

would really no longer be possible to dispute the fact that psychical

acts  which  are  unconscious  do  exist  and  that  they  are  even

sometimes active while they are unconscious and that in that case

they can even sometimes get the better of conscious intentions. The

person concerned in a mistake of this kind can react to it in various

ways. He may overlook it completely or he may notice it himself and

become  embarrassed  and  ashamed.  He  cannot  as  a  rule  find  the

explanation of it himself without outside help; and he often refuses to

accept the solution when it is put before him - for a time, at all events.

 

   ¹ Cf. The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901b)

 


                Some Elementary Lessons In Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      5070

 

   In the third place, finally, it is possible in the case of persons in a

state of hypnosis to prove experimentally that there are such things as

unconscious  psychical  acts  and  that  consciousness  is  not  an

indispensable condition of activity. Anyone who has witnessed suchan  experiment  will  receive  an  unforgettable  impression  and  a

conviction  that  can  never  be  shaken.  Here  is  more  or  less  what

happens. The doctor enters the hospital ward, puts his umbrella in the

corner, hypnotizes one of the patients and says to him: ‘I’m going out

now.  When  I  come  in  again,  you  will  come  to  meet  me  with  my

umbrella  open  and  hold  it  over  my  head.’  The  doctor  and  his

assistants  then  leave  the  ward.  As  soon  as  they  come  back,  the

patient,  who  is  no  longer  under  hypnosis,  carries  out  exactly  the

instructions that were given him while he was hypnotized. The doctor

questions him: ‘What’s this you’re doing? What’s the meaning of all

this?’  The  patient  is  clearly  embarrassed.  He  makes  some  lame

remark such as ‘I only thought, doctor, as it’s raining outside you’d

open your umbrella in the room before you went out.’ The explanation

is obviously quite inadequate and made up on the spur of the moment

to offer some sort of motive for his senseless behaviour. It is clear to

us spectators that he is in ignorance of his real motive. We, however,

know what it is, for we were present when the suggestion was made

to him which he is now carrying out, while he himself knows nothing of

the fact that it is at work in him.¹

 

   ¹ I am describing experiments made by Bernheim at Nancy in 1889 at which I myself

assisted. In these days there is no need for me to discuss any doubts as to the genuineness
of hypnotic phenomena of this kind.
 


                Some Elementary Lessons In Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      5071

 

   The question of the relation of the conscious to the psychical may

now  be  regarded  as  settled:  consciousness  is  only  a quality  or

attribute of what is psychical, and moreover an inconstant one. But

there is one further objection with which we have to deal. We are told

that,  in  spite  of  the  facts  that  have  been  mentioned,  there  is  no

necessity to abandon the identity between what is conscious and what

is psychical: the so-called unconscious psychical processes are the

organic  processes  which  have  long  been  recognized  as  running

parallel to the mental ones. This, of course, would reduce our problem

to  an  apparently  indifferent  matter  of  definition.  Our  reply  is  that  itwould be unjustifiable and inexpedient to make a breach in the unity of

mental life for the sake of propping up a definition, since it is clear in

any  case  that  consciousness  can  only  offer  us  an  incomplete  and

broken  chain  of  phenomena.  And  it  can  scarcely  be  a  matter  of

chance  that  it  was  not  until  the  change  had  been  made  in  the

definition  of  the  psychical  that  it  became  possible  to  construct  a

comprehensive and coherent theory of mental life.

   Nor need it be supposed that this alternative view of the psychical is

an  innovation  due  to  psycho-analysis.  A  German  philosopher,

Theodor  Lipps,  asserted  with  the  greatest  explicitness  that  the

psychical is in itself unconscious and that the unconscious is the truly

psychical. The concept of the unconscious has long been knocking at

the  gates  of  psychology  and  asking  to  be  let  in.  Philosophy  and

literature have often toyed with it, but science could find no use for it.

Psycho-analysis has seized upon the concept, has taken it seriously

and  has  given  it  a  fresh  content.  By  its  researches  it  has  led  to  a

knowledge of characteristics of the unconscious psychical which have

hitherto been unsuspected, and it has discovered some of the laws

which  govern  it.  But  none  of  this  implies  that  the  quality  of  being

conscious has lost its importance for us. It remains the one light which

illuminates our path and leads us through the darkness of mental life.

In  consequence  of  the  special  character  of  our  discoveries,  our

scientific  work  in  psychology  will  consist  in  translating  unconscious

processes  into  conscious  ones,  and  thus  filling  in  the  gaps  in

conscious perception. . . .

 

                              *       *       *       *       *

                                                                                       5072

 

                        A COMMENT ON ANTI-SEMITISM

                                        (1938)

 


                                                                                      5073

 

 Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      5074

 

                        A COMMENT ON ANTI-SEMITISM

 

In the course of examining the remarks in the press and in literature

provoked by the recent persecutions of the Jews, I came upon one

essay which struck me as so unusual that I made précis of it for my

own use. What its author wrote was approximately as follows:

   ‘By way of preface I must explain that I am not a Jew and therefore I

am not driven into making these observations by any egoistic concern.

Yet I have felt a lively interest in the anti-semitic excesses of to-day

and have directed my particular attention to the protests against them.

These protests come from two directions - ecclesiastical and secular -

the former in the name of religion, the latter appealing to the claims of

humanity. The former were scanty and came late; but they did come in

the end, and even His Holiness the Pope raised his voice. I confess

that there was something I missed in the demonstrations coming from

both sides - something at their beginning and something else at their

end. I will try now to supply it.

      ‘All  these  protests,  I  think,  might  be  preceded  by  a  particular

introduction, which would run: "Well, it’s true, I don’t like Jews either.

In some sort of way they seem strange to me and antipathetic. They

have many disagreeable qualities and great defects. I think, too, that

the  influence  they  have  had  on  us  and  our  affairs  has  been

predominantly  detrimental.  Their  race,  compared  with  our  own,  is

obviously an inferior one; all their activities argue in favour of that."And  after  this  what  these  protests  do  in  fact  contain  could  follow

without any discrepancy: "But we profess a religion of love. We ought

to love even our enemies as ourselves. We know that the Son of God

gave His life on earth to redeem all men from the burden of sin. He is

our model, and it is therefore sinning against His intention and against

the command of the Christian religion if we consent to Jews being

insulted,  ill-treated,  robbed  and  plunged  into  misery.  We  ought  to

protest against this, irrespectively of how much or how little the Jews

deserve  such  treatment."  The  secular  writers  who  believe  in  the

gospel of humanity, protest in similar terms.

 


                          A Comment On Anti-Semitism

                                                                                      5075

 

      ‘I  confess  that  I  have  not  been  satisfied  by  any  of  these

demonstrations. Apart from the religion of love and humanity there is

also a religion of truth, and it has come off badly in these protests. But

the truth is that for long centuries we have treated the Jewish people

unjustly and that we are continuing to do so by judging them unjustly.

Any one of us who does not start by admitting our guilt has not done

his  duty  in  this.  The  Jews  are  not  worse  than  we  are;  they  have

somewhat other characteristics and somewhat other faults, but on the

whole  we  have  no  right  to  look  down  on  them.  In  some  respects,

indeed, they are our superiors. They do not need so much alcohol as

we  do  in  order  to  make  life  tolerable;  crimes  of  brutality,  murder,

robbery and sexual violence are great rarities among them; they have

always set a high value on intellectual achievement and interests; their

family life is more intimate; they take better care of the poor; charity is

a sacred duty to them. Nor can we call them in any sense inferior.

Since we have allowed them to co-operate in our cultural tasks, they

have  acquired  merit  by  valuable  contributions  in  all  the  spheres  of

science, art and technology, and they have richly repaid our tolerance.

So let us cease at last to hand them out favours when they have a

claim to justice.’

   It was natural that such determined partisanship from some one who

was not a Jew should have made a deep impression on me. But now Ihave a remarkable confession to make. I am a very old man and my

memory is no more what it was. I can no longer recall where I read the

essay of which I made the précis nor who it was who was its author.

Perhaps one of the readers of this periodical will be able to come to

my help?

   A whisper has just reached my ears that what I probably had in mind

was  Count  Heinrich  Coudenhove-Kalergi’s  book Das  Wesen  des

Antisemitismus,  which  contains  precisely  what  the  author  I  am  in

search of missed in the recent protests, and more besides. I know that

book. It appeared first in 1901 and was re-issued by his son in 1929

with  an  admirable  introduction.  But  it  cannot  be  that.  What  I  am

thinking of is a shorter pronouncement and one of very recent date. Or

am I altogether at fault? Does nothing of the kind exist? And has the

work  of  the  two  Coudenhoves  had  no  influence  on  our

contemporaries?

                                                                            Sigm. Freud

                                                                                       5076

 

                              LOU ANDREAS-SALOMÉ

                                        (1937)

 

On February 5 of this year Frau Lou Andreas-Salomé died peacefully

in her little house at Göttingen, almost 76 years of age. For the last 25

years  of  her  life  this  remarkable  woman  was  attached  to  psycho-

analysis,  to  which  she  contributed  valuable  writings  and  which  she

practised as well. I am not saying too much if I acknowledge that we

all felt it as an honour when she joined the ranks of our collaborators

and comrades in arms, and at the same time as a fresh guarantee of

the truth of the theories of analysis.

   It was known that as a girl she had kept up an intense friendship

with Friedrich Nietzsche, founded upon her deep understanding of the

philosopher’s  bold  ideas.  This  relationship  came  to  an  abrupt  end

when she refused the proposal of marriage which he made her. It was

well known, too, that many years later she had acted alike as Muse

and protecting mother to Rainer Maria Rilke, the great poet, who was

a little helpless in facing life. But beyond this her personality remained

obscure. Her modesty and discretion were more than ordinary. She

never spoke of her own poetical and literary works. She clearly knew

where the true values in life are to be looked for. Those who were

closer to her had the strongest impression of the genuineness and

harmony of her nature and could discover with astonishment that all

feminine frailties, and perhaps most human frailties, were foreign to

her or had been conquered by her in the course of her life.

   It was in Vienna that long ago the most moving episode of her

feminine  fortunes  had  been  played  out.  In  1912  she  returned  to

Vienna in order to be initiated into psycho-analysis. My daughter, who

was her close friend, once heard her regret that she had not known

psycho-analysis in her youth. But, after all, in those days there was no

such thing.

                                                                            Sigm. Freud

February, 1937.

                                                                                       5077

 

                          FINDINGS, IDEAS, PROBLEMS

                                    (1941 [1938])

 

   London, June.

   June 16. - It is interesting that in connection with early experiences,

as contrasted with later experiences, all the various reactions to them

survive, of course including contradictory ones. Instead of a decision,

which would have been the outcome later. Explanation: weakness of

the power of synthesis, retention of the characteristic of the primary

processes.

 

     July 12.  -  As  a  substitute  for  penis-envy,  identification  with  the

clitoris: neatest expression of inferiority, source of all inhibitions. At the

same  time  disavowal  of  the  discovery  that  other  women  too  are

without a penis.

   ‘Having’ and ‘being’ in children. Children like expressing an object-

relation by an identification: ‘I am the object.’ ‘Having’ is the later of the

two;  after  loss  of  the  object  it  relapses  into  ‘being’.  Example:  the

breast. ‘The breast is a part of me, I am the breast.’ Only later: ‘I have

it’ - that is, ‘I am not it’ . . .

 

   July 12. - With neurotics it is as though we were in a prehistoric

landscape - for instance, in the Jurassic. The great saurians are still

running about; the horsetails grow as high as palms (?).

 

   July 20. - The hypothesis of there being inherited vestiges in the id

alters, so to say, our views about it.

 

   July 20. - The individual perishes from his internal conflicts, the

species perishes in its struggle with the external world to which it is no

longer adapted. - This deserves to be included in Moses.

 


                              Findings, Ideas, Problems

                                                                                      5078 

   August 3. - A sense of guilt also originates from unsatisfied love.

Like hate. In fact we have been obliged to derive every conceivable

thing from that material: like economically self-sufficient States with

their ‘Ersatz products’.

 

   August 3. - The ultimate ground of all intellectual inhibitions and all

inhibitions  of  work  seems  to  be  the  inhibition  of  masturbation  in

childhood. But perhaps it goes deeper; perhaps it is not its inhibition

by  external  influences  but  its  unsatisfying  nature  in  itself.  There  is

always something lacking for complete discharge and satisfaction - en

attendant  toujours  quelquechose  qui  ne  venait  point¹  -  and  this

missing part, the reaction of orgasm, manifests itself in equivalents in

other  spheres,  in absences,  outbreaks  of  laughing,  weeping,  and

perhaps other ways. - Once again infantile sexuality has fixed a model

in this.

 

   August 22. - Space may be the projection of the extension of the

psychical apparatus. No other derivation is probable. Instead of Kant’s

a priori determinants of our psychical apparatus. Psyche is extended;

knows nothing about it.

 

   August 22. - Mysticism is the obscure self-perception of the realm

outside the ego, of the id.

 

   ¹ [‘Always waiting for something which never came’]

 