what  has  been  described  as  a  ‘complemental  series’,  in  which  the

diminishing  intensity  of  one  factor  is  balanced  by  the  increasing

intensity  of  the  other;  there  is,  however,  no  reason  to  deny  the

existence of extreme cases at the two ends of the series.

   We shall be in even closer harmony with psycho-analytic research if

we  give  a  place  of  preference  among  the  accidental  factors  to  the

experiences of early childhood. The single aetiological series then falls

into two, which may be called the dispositional and the definitive. In

the first the constitution and the accidental experiences of childhood

interact in the same manner as do the disposition and later traumatic

experiences  in  the  second.  All  the  factors  that  impair  sexual

development  show  their  effects  by  bringing  about  a  regression,  a

return to an earlier phase of development.

 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1551

 

 

   Let us now resume our task of enumerating the factors which we

have found to exercise an influence on sexual development, whether

they are themselves operative forces or merely manifestations of such

forces.

 

PRECOCITY   One such factor is spontaneous sexual precocity, whose

presence at least can be

                      demonstrated with certainty in the aetiology of the

neuroses though, like other factors, it is not in itself a sufficient cause.

It is manifested in the interruption, abbreviation or bringing to an end

of the infantile period of latency; and it is a cause of disturbances by

occasioning sexual manifestations which, owing on the one hand to

the sexual inhibitions being incomplete and on the other hand to the

genital system being undeveloped, are bound to be in the nature of

perversions.  These  tendencies  to  perversion  may  thereafter  either

persist as such or, after repressions have set in, become the motive

forces  of  neurotic  symptoms.  In  any  case  sexual  precocity  makes

more  difficult  the  later  control  of  the  sexual  instinct  by  the  highermental agencies which is so desirable, and it increases the impulsive

quality  which,  quite  apart  from  this,  characterizes  the  psychical

representations  of  the  instinct.  Sexual  precocity  often  runs  parallel

with premature intellectual development and, linked in this way, is to

be found in the childhood history of persons of the greatest eminence

and capacity; under such conditions its effects do not seem to be so

pathogenic as when it appears in isolation.

 

TEMPORAL FACTORS   Other factors which, along with precocity, may be

classed as temporal

                                     also deserve attention. The order in which the

various  instinctual  impulses  come  into  activity  seems  to  be

phylogenetically determined; so, too, does the length of time during

which they are able to manifest themselves before they succumb to

the effects of some freshly emerging instinctual impulse or to some

typical  repression.  Variations,  however,  seem  to  occur  both  in

temporal  sequence  and  in  duration,  and  these  variations  must

exercise a determining influence upon the final result. It cannot be a

matter of indifference whether a given current makes its appearance

earlier or later than a current flowing in the opposite direction, for the

effect of a repression cannot be undone. Divergences in the temporal

sequence in which the components come together invariably produce

a difference in the outcome. On the other hand, instinctual impulses

which  emerge  with  special  intensity  often  run  a  surprisingly  short

course - as, for instance, the heterosexual attachment of persons who

later become manifest homosexuals. There is no justification for the

fear that trends which set in with the greatest violence in childhood will

permanently dominate the adult character; it is just as likely that they

will disappear and make way for an opposite tendency. (‘Gestrenge

Herren regieren nicht Lange.’)¹

   We are not in a position to give so much as hint as to the causes of

these  temporal  disturbances  of  the  process  of  development.  A

prospect  opens  before  us  at  this  point  upon  a  whole  phalanx  of

biological and perhaps, too, of historical problems of which we have

not even come within striking distance.

 

   ¹ [‘Harsh rulers have short reigns.’] 


                    Three Essays On The Theory Of Sexuality

                                                                                      1552

 

 

PERTINACITY OF EARLY IMPRESSIONS   The importance of all early sexual

manifestations is

                                                                increased by a psychical

factor of unknown origin, which at the moment, it must be admitted,

can only be brought forward as a provisional psychological concept. I

have in mind the fact that, in order to account for the situation, it is

necessary to assume that these early impressions of sexual life are

characterized by an increased pertinacity or susceptibility to fixation in

persons who are later to become neurotics or perverts. For the same

premature sexual manifestations, when they occur in other persons,

fail to make so deep an impression; they do not tend in a compulsive

manner towards repetition nor do they lay down the path to be taken

by the sexual instinct for a whole lifetime. Part of the explanation of

this  pertinacity  of  early  impressions  may  perhaps  lie  in  another

psychical factor which we must not overlook in the causation of the

neuroses,  namely  the  preponderance  attaching  in  mental  life  to

memory-traces in comparison with recent impressions. This factor is

clearly  dependent  on  intellectual  education  and  increases  in

proportion to the degree of individual culture. The savage has been

described in contrast as ‘das unglückselige Kind des Augenblickes’

[‘The hapless child of the moment.’].¹ In consequence of the inverse relation

holding between civilization and the free development of sexuality, of

which the consequences can be followed far into the structure of our

existences, the course taken by the sexual life of a child is just as

unimportant for later life where the cultural or social level is relatively

low as it is important where that level is relatively high.

 

FIXATION   The ground prepared by the psychical factors which have

just been enumerated

                   affords a favourable basis for such stimulations of infantile

sexuality  as  are  experienced  accidentally.  The  latter  (first  and

foremost,  seduction  by  other  children  or  by  adults)  provide  thematerial which, with the help of the former, can become fixated as a

permanent disorder. A good proportion of the deviations from normal

sexual life which are later observed both in neurotics and in perverts

are  thus  established  from  the  very  first  by  the  impressions  of

childhood - a period which is regarded as being devoid of sexuality.

The causation is shared between a compliant constitution, precocity,

the characteristic of increased pertinacity of early impressions and the

chance stimulation of the sexual instinct by extraneous influences.

 

   The unsatisfactory conclusion, however, that emerges from these

investigations of the disturbances of sexual life is that we know far too

little of the biological processes constituting the essence of sexuality

to  be  able  to  construct  from  our  fragmentary  information  a  theory

adequate  to  the  understanding  alike  of  normal  and  of  pathological

conditions.

 

   ¹ Increase in pertinacity may also possibly be the effect of an especially intense somatic

manifestation of sexuality in early years.

                                                                                       1553

 

                FREUD’S PSYCHO-ANALYTIC PROCEDURE

                                        (1904)

 


                                                                                      1554

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1555

 

                FREUD’S PSYCHO-ANALYTIC PROCEDURE

 

The  particular  psychotherapeutic  procedure  which  Freud  practises

and describes as ‘psycho-analysis’ is an outgrowth of what was known

as the ‘cathartic’ method and was discussed by him in collaboration

with Josef Breuer in their Studies on Hysteria (1895). This cathartic

therapy was a discovery of Breuer’s, and was first used by him some

ten years earlier in the successful treatment of a hysterical woman

patient,  in  the  course  of  which  he  obtained  an  insight  into  the

pathogenesis of her symptoms. As the result of a personal suggestion

from  Breuer,  Freud  revived  this  procedure  and  tested  it  on  a

considerable number of patients.

      The  cathartic  method  of  treatment  presupposed  that  the  patient

could  be  hypnotized,  and  was  based  on  the  widening  of

consciousness that occurs under hypnosis. Its aim was the removal of

the  pathological  symptoms,  and  it  achieved  this  by  inducing  the

patient  to  return  to  the  psychical  state  in  which  the  symptom  had

appeared for the first time. When this was done, there emerged in the

hypnotized  patient’s  mind  memories,  thoughts  and  impulses  which

had previously dropped out of his consciousness; and, as soon as he

had related these to the physician, to the accompaniment of intense

expressions of emotion, the symptom was overcome and its return

prevented. This experience, which could be regularly repeated, was

taken by the authors in their joint paper to signify that the symptomtakes  the  place  of  suppressed  processes  which  have  not  reached

consciousness,  that  is,  that  it  represents  a  transformation

(‘conversion’)  of  these  processes.  They  explained  the  therapeutic

effectiveness of their treatment as due to the discharge of what had

previously  been,  as  it  were,  ‘strangulated’  affect  attaching  to  the

suppressed  mental  acts  (  ‘abreaction’).  But  in  practice  the  simple

schematic  outline  of  the  therapeutic  operation  was  almost  always

complicated by the circumstance that it was not a single (‘traumatic’)

impression,  but  in  most  cases  a series  of  impressions  -  not  easily

scanned - which had participated in the creation of the symptom.

 


                        Freud's Psycho-Analytic Procedure

                                                                                      1556

 

   The main characteristic of the cathartic method, in contrast to all

other  methods  used  in  psychotherapy,  consists  in  the  fact  that  its

therapeutic efficacy does not lie in The expectation is rather that the

symptoms  will  disappear  automatically  as  soon  as  the  operation,

based  on  certain  hypotheses  concerning  the  psychical  mechanism,

succeeds  in  diverting  the  course  of  mental  processes  from  their

previous  channel,  which  found  an  outlet  in  the  formation  of  the

symptom.

   The changes which Freud introduced in Breuer’s cathartic method of

treatment were at first changes in technique; these, however, led to

new  findings  and  have  finally  necessitated  a  different  though  not

contradictory conception of the therapeutic process.

      The  cathartic  method  had  already  renounced  suggestion;  Freud

went a step further and gave up hypnosis as well. At the present time

he treats his patients as follows. Without exerting my other kind of

influence, he invites them to lie down in a comfortable attitude on a

sofa, while he himself sits on a chair behind them outside their field of

vision. He does not even ask them to close their eyes, and avoids

touching them in any way, as well as any other procedure which might

be  reminiscent  of  hypnosis.  The  session  thus  proceeds  like  a

conversation between two people equally awake, but one of whom is

spared  every  muscular  exertion  and  every  distracting  sensoryimpression  which  might  divert  his  attention  from  his  own  mental

activity.

   Since, as we all know, it depends upon the choice of the patient

whether he can be hypnotized or not, no matter what the skill of the

physician  may  be,  and  since  a  large  number  of  neurotic  patients

cannot be hypnotized by any means whatever, it followed that with the

abandonment  of  hypnosis  the  applicability  of  the  treatment  was

assured to an unlimited number of patients. On the other hand, the

widening  of  consciousness,  which  had  supplied  the  physician  with

precisely the psychical material of memories and images by the help

of which the transformation of the symptoms and the liberation of the

affects was accomplished, was now missing. Unless a substitute could

be produced for this missing element, any therapeutic effect was out

of the question.

 


                        Freud's Psycho-Analytic Procedure

                                                                                      1557

 

   Freud found such a substitute - and a completely satisfactory one -

in the ‘associations’ of his patients; that is, in the involuntary thoughts

(most  frequently  regarded  as  disturbing  elements  and  therefore

ordinarily pushed aside) which so often break across the continuity of

a consecutive narrative.

   In order to secure these ideas and associations he asks the patient

to ‘let himself go’ in what he says, ‘as you would do in a conversation

in which you were rambling on quite disconnectedly and at random’.

Before he asks them for a detailed account of their case history he

insists that they must include in it whatever comes into their heads,

even if they think it unimportant or irrelevant or nonsensical; he lays

special stress on their not omitting any thought or idea from their story

because to relate it would be embarrassing or distressing to them. In

the  course  of  collecting  this  material  of  otherwise  neglected  ideas

Freud made the observations which became the determining factor of

his entire theory. Gaps appear in the patient’s memory even while he

narrates his case: actual occurrences are forgotten, the chronological

order is confused, or causal connections are broken, with unintelligibleresults. No neurotic case history is without amnesia of some kind or

other. If the patient is urged to fill these gaps in his memory by an

increased application of attention, it is noticed that all the ideas which

occur  to  him  are  pushed  back  by  every  possible  critical  expedient,

until  at  last  he  feels  positive  discomfort  when  the  memory  really

returns. From this experience Freud concludes that the amnesias are

the result of a process which he calls ‘repression’ and the motive for

which he finds in feelings of unpleasure. The psychical forces which

have brought about this repression can also be detected, according to

him, in the ‘resistance’ which operates against the recovery of the lost

memories.

   The factor of resistance has become one of the corner-stones of his

theory. The ideas which are normally pushed aside on every sort of

excuse - such as those mentioned above - are regarded by him as

derivatives  of  the  repressed  psychical  phenomena  (thoughts  and

impulses), distorted owing to the resistance against their reproduction.

Ideas which are normally pushed aside on every sort of excuse - such

as those mentioned above - are regarded by him as derivatives of the

repressed  psychical  phenomena  (thoughts  and  impulses),  distorted

owing to the resistance against their reproduction.

 


                        Freud's Psycho-Analytic Procedure

                                                                                      1558

 

   The greater the resistance, the greater is the distortion. The value of

these unintentional thoughts for the purposes of therapeutic technique

lies in this relation of theirs to the repressed psychical material. If one

possesses  a  procedure  which  makes  it  possible  to  arrive  at  the

repressed  material  from  the  associations,  at  the  distorted  material

from the distortions, then what was formerly unconscious in mental life

can be made accessible to consciousness even without hypnosis.

   Freud has developed on this basis an art of interpretation which

takes  on  the  task  of,  as  it  were,  extracting  the  pure  metal  of  the

repressed thoughts from the ore of the unintentional ideas. This work

of interpretation is applied not only to the patient’s ideas but also to his

dreams, which open up the most direct approach to a knowledge ofthe  unconscious,  to  his  unintentional  as  well  as  to  his  purposeless

actions (symptomatic acts) and to the blunders he makes in everyday

life (slips of the tongue, bungled actions, and so on). The details of

this  technique  of  interpretation  or  translation  have  not  yet  been

published  by  Freud.  According  to  indications  he  has  given,  they

comprise  a  number  of  rules,  reached  empirically,  of  how  the

unconscious  material  may  be  reconstructed  from  the  associations,

directions  on  how  to  know  what  it  means  when  the  patient’s  ideas

cease  to  flow,  and  experiences  of  the  most  important  typical

resistances  that  arise  in  the  course  of  such  treatments.  A  bulky

volume called The  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  published  by  Freud  in

1900,  may  be  regarded  as  the  forerunner  of  an  initiation  into  his

technique.

   From these remarks on the technique of the psycho-analytic method

the  conclusion  might  be  drawn  that  its  inventor  has  given  himself

needless  trouble  and  has  made  a  mistake  in  abandoning  the  less

complicated hypnotic mode of procedure. However, in the first place,

the  technique  of  psycho-analysis  is  much  easier  in  practice,  when

once one has learnt it, than any description of it would indicate; and,

secondly, there is no other way which leads to the desired goal, so

that the hard road is still the shortest one to travel. The objection to

hypnosis  is  that  it  conceals  the  resistance  and  for  that  reason  has

obstructed  the  physician’s  insight  into  the  play  of  psychical  forces.

Hypnosis does not do away with the resistance but only evades it and

therefore yields only incomplete information and transitory therapeutic

success.

 


                        Freud's Psycho-Analytic Procedure

                                                                                      1559

 

   The task which the psycho-analytic method seeks to perform may

be formulated in different ways, which are, however, in their essence

equivalent.  It  may,  for  instance,  be  stated  thus:  the  task  of  the

treatment is to remove the amnesias. When all gaps in memory have

been filled in, all the enigmatic products of mental life elucidated, the

continuance and even a renewal of the morbid condition are madeimpossible.  Or  the  formula  may  be  expressed  in  this  fashion:  all

repressions must be undone. The mental condition is then the same

as one in which all amnesias have been removed. Another formulation

reaches  further:  the  task  consists  in  making  the  unconscious

accessible  to  consciousness,  which  is  done  by  overcoming  the

resistances. But it must be remembered that an ideal condition such

as this is not present even in the normal, and further that it is only

rarely possible to carry the treatment to a point approaching it. Just as

health and sickness are not different from each other in essence but

are only separated by a quantitative line of demarcation which can be

determined  in  practice,  so  the  aim  of  the  treatment  will  never  be

anything else but the practical recovery of the patient, the restoration

of his ability to lead an active life and of his capacity for enjoyment. In

a treatment which is incomplete or in which success is not perfect, one

may at any rate achieve a considerable improvement in the general

mental  condition,  while  the  symptoms  (though  now  of  smaller

importance to the patient) may continue to exist without stamping him

as a sick man.

      The  therapeutic  procedure  remains  the  same,  apart  from

insignificant modifications, for all the various clinical pictures that may

be presented in hysteria, and all forms of obsessional neurosis. This

does not imply, however, that it can have an unlimited application. The

nature of the psycho-analytic method involves indications and contra-

indications with respect to the person to be treated as well as with

respect  to  the  clinical  picture.  Chronic  cases  of  psychoneuroses

without  any  very  violent  or  dangerous  symptoms  are  the  most

favourable  ones  for  psycho-analysis:  thus  in  the  first  place  every

species of obsessional neurosis, obsessive thinking and acting, and

cases  of  hysteria  in  which  phobias  and  aboulias  play  the  most

important part; further, all somatic expressions of hysteria whenever

they do not, as in anorexia, require the physician to attend promptly to

the speedy removal of symptoms. In acute cases of hysteria it will be

necessary  to  wait  for  a  calmer  stage;  in  all  cases  where  nervous

exhaustion dominates the clinical picture a treatment which in itself

demands effort, brings only slow improvement and for a time cannot

take the persistence of the symptoms into account, will have to be

avoided. 


                        Freud's Psycho-Analytic Procedure

                                                                                      1560

 

      Various  qualifications  are  required  of  anyone  who  is  to  be

beneficially affected by psycho-analysis. To begin with, he must be

capable of a psychically normal condition; during periods of confusion

or  melancholic  depression  nothing  can  be  accomplished  even  in

cases  of  hysteria.  Furthermore,  a  certain  measure  of  natural

intelligence and ethical development are to be required of him; if the

physician has to deal with a worthless character, he soon loses the

interest which makes it possible for him to enter profoundly into the

patient’s mental life. Deep-rooted malformations of character, traits of

an  actually  degenerate  constitution,  show  themselves  during

treatment as sources of a resistance that can scarcely be overcome.

In this respect the constitution of the patient sets a general limit to the

curative  effect  of  psychotherapy.  If  the  patient’s  age  is  in  the

neighbourhood of the fifties the conditions for psycho-analysis become

unfavourable.  The  mass  of  psychical  material  is  then  no  longer

manageable; the time required for recovery is too long; and the ability

to undo psychical processes begins to grow weaker.

   In spite of all these limitations, the number of persons suitable for

psycho-analytic  treatment  is  extraordinarily  large  and  the  extension

which  has  come  to  our  therapeutic  powers  from  this  method  is,

according to Freud, very considerable. Freud requires long periods,

six months to three years, for an effective treatment; yet he informs us

that  up  to  the  present,  owing  to  various  circumstances  which  can

easily be guessed, he has for the most part been in a position to try

his treatment only on very severe cases: patients have come to him

after many years of illness, completely incapacitated for life, and, after

being disappointed by all kinds of treatments, have had recourse as a

last  resort  to  a  method  which  is  novel  and  has  been  greeted  with

many  doubts.  In  cases  of  less  severe  illness  the  duration  of  the

treatment might well be much shorter, and very great advantage in the

direction of future prevention might be achieved.

                                                                                       1561

 

                              ON PSYCHOTHERAPY

                                        (1905)

 


                                                                                      1562

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1563

 

                              ON PSYCHOTHERAPY

 

Gentlemen,  -  Some  eight  years  have  passed  since  I  had  the

opportunity,  on  the  invitation  of  your  much  respected  chairman,

Professor  von  Reder,  of  speaking  here  on  the  subject  of  hysteria.

Shortly before that occasion I had published, in 1895, in collaboration

with Dr. Josef Breuer, the Studies on Hysteria in which, on the basis of

the new knowledge which we owe to his researches, an attempt was

made to introduce a new method of treating the neuroses. I am glad to

be able to say that the efforts we made in our Studies have met with

success; the ideas expressed in them concerning the effects produced

by  psychical  traumas  owing  to  retention  of  affect,  as  well  as  the

conception  of  hysterical  symptoms  as  the  results  of  an  excitation

transposed from the sphere of the mental to the physical - ideas for

which we coined the terms ‘abreaction’ and ‘conversion’ - are to-day

generally  known  and  understood.  There  is,  at  least  in  German

speaking countries, no presentation of hysteria to-day that does not

take them to some extent into account, and we have no colleagues

who do not, for a short distance at least, follow the road pointed out by

us.  And  yet,  while  they  were  still  new,  these  theorems  and  this

terminology must have sounded not a little strange.

      I  cannot  say  the  same  of  the  therapeutic  procedure  which  was

introduced to our colleagues at the same time as our theory; it is still

struggling for recognition. There may be special reasons for this. Atthat time the technique of the method was as yet undeveloped; it was

impossible for me to give medical readers of the book the directions

necessary to enable them to carry through the treatment completely.

But causes of a general nature have certainly also played a part. To

many physicians, even to-day, psychotherapy seems to be a product

of  modern  mysticism  and,  compared  with  our  physico-chemical

remedies which are applied on the basis of physiological knowledge,

appears  positively  unscientific  and  unworthy  of  the  attention  of  a

serious  investigator.  Allow  me,  therefore,  to  defend  the  cause  of

psychotherapy  before  you,  and  to  point  out  to  you  what  may  be

described as unjust or mistaken in this condemnation of it.

 


                                  On Psychotherapy

                                                                                      1564

 

   In the first place, let me remind you that psychotherapy is in no way

a modern method of treatment. On the contrary, it is the most ancient

form of therapy in medicine. In Löwenfeld’s instructive Lehrbuch der

gesamten  Psychotherapie  many  of  the  methods  of  primitive  and

ancient medical science are described. The majority of them must be

classed under the head of psychotherapy; in order to effect a cure a

condition  of  ‘expectation  coloured  by  faith’  was  induced  in  sick

persons - a condition which answers a similar purpose for us to-day.

Even  since  physicians  have  come  upon  other  remedies,

psychotherapeutic  endeavours  of  one  kind  or  another  have  never

completely disappeared from medicine.

   Secondly, let me draw your attention to the fact that we physicians

cannot  discard  psychotherapy,  if  only  because  another  person

intimately concerned in the process of recovery - the patient - has no

intention of discarding it. You will know of the increase in knowledge

on  this  subject  that  we  owe  to  the  Nancy  school,  to  Liébeault  and

Bernheim.  A  factor  dependent  on  the  psychical  disposition  of  the

patient contributes, without any intention on our part, to the effect of

every therapeutic process initiated by a physician; most frequently it is

favourable  to  recovery,  but  often  it  acts  as  an  inhibition.  We  have

learned to use the word ‘suggestion’ for this phenomenon, and Möbiushas taught us that the unreliability which we deplore in so many of our

therapeutic measures may be traced back to the disturbing influence

of  this  very  powerful  factor.  All  physicians,  therefore,  yourselves

included,  are  continually  practising  psychotherapy,  even  when  you

have  no  intention  of  doing  so  and  are  not  aware  of  it;  it  is  a

disadvantage, however, to leave the mental factor in your treatment so

completely  in  the  patient’s  hands.  Thus  it  is  impossible  to  keep  a

check on it, to administer it in doses or to intensify it. Is it not then a

justifiable  endeavour  on  the  part  of  a  physician  to  seek  to  obtain

command of this factor, to use it with a purpose, and to direct and

strengthen it? This and nothing else is what scientific psychotherapy

proposes.

 


                                  On Psychotherapy

                                                                                      1565

 

   And, in the third place, Gentlemen, I would remind you of the well-

established  fact  that  certain  diseases,  in  particular  the

psychoneuroses, are far more readily accessible to mental influences

than to any other form of medication. It is not a modern dictum but an

old saying of physicians that these diseases are not cured by the drug

but  by  the  physician,  that  is,  by  the  personality  of  the  physician,

inasmuch as through it he exerts a mental influence. I am well aware

that you favour the view which Vischer, the professor of aesthetics,

expressed so well in his parody of Faust:

 

                                                                Ich weiß, das Physikalische
                                                                Wirkt öfters aufs Moralische¹

 

But would it not be more to the point to say - and is it not more often

the case - moral (that is, mental) means can influence a man’s moral

side?

   There are many ways and means of practising psychotherapy. All

that lead to recovery are good. Our usual word of comfort, which we

dispense so liberally to our patients - ‘You’ll soon be all right again’ -,

corresponds to one of these psychotherapeutic methods; but now that

we have deeper insight into the neuroses, we are no longer obliged toconfine  ourselves  to  the  word  of  comfort.  We  have  developed  the

technique  of  hypnotic  suggestion,  and  psychotherapy  by  mental

distraction,  by  exercise,  and  by  eliciting  suitable  affects.  I  despise

none  of  these  methods  and  would  use  them  all  in  appropriate

circumstances. If I have actually come to confine myself to one form of

treatment, to the method which Breuer called cathartic, but which I

myself prefer to call ‘analytic’, it is because I have allowed myself to

be influenced by purely subjective motives. Because of the part I have

played in founding this therapy, I feel a personal obligation to devote

myself  to  closer  investigation  of  it  and  to  the  development  of  its

technique. And I may say that the analytic method of psychotherapy is

the one that penetrates most deeply and carries farthest, the one by

means of which the most extensive transformations can be effected in

patients. Putting aside for a moment the therapeutic point of view, I

may also say of it that it is the most interesting method, the only one

which informs us at all about the origin and inter-relation of morbid

phenomena. Owing to the insight which we gain into mental illness by

this method, it alone should be capable of leading us beyond its own

limits  and  of  pointing  out  the  way  to  other  forms  of  therapeutic

influence.

 

   ¹ [I know that the physical

      Often influences the moral.]
 


                                  On Psychotherapy

                                                                                      1566

 

   Permit me now to correct a few mistakes that have been made in

regard to this cathartic or analytic method of psychotherapy, and to

give a few explanations on the subject.

 

   (a) I have observed that this method is very often confused with

hypnotic  treatment  by  suggestion;  I  have  noticed  this  because  it

happens  comparatively  often  that  colleagues  who  do  not  ordinarily

confide  their  cases  to  me  send  me  patients  refractory  patients,  of

course - with a request that I should hypnotize them. Now I have not

used hypnosis for therapeutic purposes for some eight years (exceptfor a few special experiments) so that I habitually send back these

cases with the recommendation that anyone who relies upon hypnosis

may  employ  it  himself.  There  is,  actually,  the  greatest  possible

antithesis  between  suggestive  and  analytic  technique  -  the  same

antithesis which, in regard to the fine arts, the great Leonardo da Vinci

summed up in the formulas: per via di porre and per via di levare.

Painting,  says  Leonardo,  works per  via  di  porre,  for  it  applies  a

substance - particles of colour - where there was no thing before, on

the colourless canvas; sculpture, however, proceeds per via di levare,

since it takes away from the block of stone all that hides the surface of

the statue contained in it. In a similar way, the technique of suggestion

aims at proceeding per via di porre; it is not concerned with the origin,

strength  and  meaning  of  the  morbid  symptoms,  but  instead,  it

superimposes something - a suggestion - in the expectation that it will

be  strong  enough  to  restrain  the  pathogenic  idea  from  coming  to

expression. Analytic therapy, on the other hand, does not seek to add

or to introduce anything new, but to take away something, to bring out

something;  and  to  this  end  concerns  itself  with  the  genesis  of  the

morbid symptoms and the psychical context of the pathogenic idea

which it seeks to remove. It is by the use of this mode of investigation

that analytic therapy has increased our knowledge so notably. I gave

up  the  suggestive  technique,  and  with  it  hypnosis,  so  early  in  my

practice  because  I  despaired  of  making  suggestion  powerful  and

enduring enough to effect permanent cures. In every severe case I

saw  the  suggestions  which  had  been  applied  crumble  away  again;

after which the disease or some substitute for it was back once more.

Besides all this I have another reproach to make against this method,

namely,  that  it  conceals  from  us  all  insight  into  the  play  of  mental

forces; it does not permit us, for example, to recognize the resistance

with  which  the  patient  clings  to  his  disease  and  thus  even  fights

against  his  own  recovery;  yet  it  is  this  phenomenon  of  resistance

which alone makes it possible to understand his behaviour in daily life.

 


                                  On Psychotherapy

                                                                                      1567

  

      (b)  It  seems  to  me  that  there  is  a  widespread  and  erroneous

impression among my colleagues that this technique of searching for

the origins of an illness and removing its manifestations by that means

is an easy one which can be practised off-hand, as it were. I conclude

this from the fact that not one of all the people who have shown an

interest  in  my  therapy  and  passed  definite  judgements  upon  it  has

ever  asked  me  how  I  actually  go  about  it.  There  can  be  only  one

reason for this: that they think there is nothing to enquire about, that

the  thing  is  perfectly  self-evident.  Again,  I  am  now  and  then

astonished to hear that in this or that department of a hospital a young

assistant has received an order from his chief to undertake a ‘psycho-

analysis’ of a hysterical patient. I am sure he would not be allowed to

examine an extirpated tumour unless he had convinced his chiefs that

he was conversant with histological technique. Similarly, reports reach

my ears that this or that colleague has arranged appointments with a

patient in order to undertake a mental treatment of the case, though I

am certain he knows nothing of the technique of any such therapy. His

expectation must be therefore that the patient will make him a present

of his secrets, or perhaps that he is looking for salvation in some sort

of confession or confidence. I should not be surprised if a patient were

injured rather than benefited by being treated in such a fashion. For it

is not so easy to play upon the instrument of the mind. I am reminded

on such occasions of the words of a world-famous neurotic - though it

is true that he was never treated by a physician but existed only in a

poet’s imagination - Hamlet, Prince of Denmark. The King has ordered

two courtiers, Rosenkranz and Guildenstern, to follow him, to question

him and drag the secret of his depression out of him. He wards them

off. Then some recorders are brought on the stage and Hamlet, taking

one of them, begs one of his tormentors to play upon it, telling him that

it is as easy as lying. The courtier excuses himself, for he knows no

touch of the instrument, and when he cannot be persuaded to try it,

Hamlet finally breaks out with these words: ‘Why, look you now, how

unworthy a thing you make of me! You would play upon me; . . . you

would pluck out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from

my lowest note to the top of my compass; and there is much music,

excellent  voice,  in  this  little  organ;  yet  you  cannot  make  it  speak.‘Sblood, do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe? Call me

what  instrument  you  will,  though  you  can  fret  me,  you  cannot  play

upon me.’ (Act III, Scene 2.)

 


                                  On Psychotherapy

                                                                                      1568

 

 

   (c) From certain of my remarks you will have gathered that there are

many  characteristics  in  the  analytic  method  which  prevent  it  from

being an ideal form of therapy. Tuto, cito, jucunde: investigation and

probing  do  not  indicate  speedy  results,  and  the  resistance  I  have

mentioned  would  prepare  you  to  expect  unpleasantness  of  various

kinds. Psycho-analytic treatment certainly makes great demands upon

the patient as well as upon the physician. From the patient it requires

perfect sincerity - a sacrifice in itself; it absorbs time and is therefore

also  costly;  for  the  physician  it  is  no  less  time-absorbing,  and  the

technique  which  he  must  study  and  practise  is  fairly  laborious.  I

consider it quite justifiable to resort to more convenient methods of

treatment as long as there is any prospect of achieving anything by

their  means.  That,  after  all,  is  the  only  point  at  issue.  If  the  more

difficult and lengthy method accomplishes considerably more than the

short and easy one, then, in spite of everything, the use of the former

is justified. Only consider, Gentlemen, how much more inconvenient

and  costly  is  the  Finsen  therapy  of  lupus  than  the  method  of

cauterizing and scraping previously employed; and yet the use of the

former  signifies  a  great  advance,  for  it  performs  a  radical  cure.

Although  I  do  not  wish  to  carry  this  comparison  to  extremes,  the

psycho-analytic method may claim a similar privilege. Actually, I have

been  able  to  elaborate  and  to  test  my  therapeutic  method  only  on

severe, indeed on the severest cases; at first my material consisted

entirely of patients who had tried everything else without success, and

had spent long years in sanatoria. I have scarcely been able to bring

together sufficient material to enable me to say how my method works

with those slighter, episodic cases which we see recovering under all

kinds of influences and even spontaneously. Psycho-analytic therapywas  created  through  and  for  the  treatment  of  patients  permanently

unfit  for  existence,  and  its  triumph  has  been  that  it  has  made  a

satisfactorily large number of these permanently fit for existence. In

the face of such an achievement all the effort expended seems trivial.

We cannot conceal from ourselves what, as physicians, we are in the

habit of denying to our patients, namely, that a severe neurosis is no

less serious for the sufferer than any cachexia or any of the dreaded

major diseases.

 


                                  On Psychotherapy

                                                                                      1569

 

 

   (d) The conditions under which this method is indicated, or contra-

indicated, can scarcely be definitely laid down as yet, because of the

many practical limitations to which my activities have been subjected.

Nevertheless, I will attempt to discuss a few of them here:

      (1)  One  should  look  beyond  the  patient’s  illness  and  form  an

estimate of his whole personality; those patients who do not possess a

reasonable degree of education and a fairly reliable character should

be refused. It must not be forgotten that there are healthy people as

well as unhealthy ones who are good for nothing in life, and that there

is a temptation to ascribe to their illness everything that incapacitates

them, if they show any sign of neurosis. In my opinion a neurosis is by

no  means  a  stamp  of  degeneracy,  though  it  may  often  enough  be

found in one person along with the signs of degeneracy. Now analytic

psychotherapy is not a process suited to the treatment of neuropathic

degeneracy;  on  the  contrary,  degeneracy  is  a  barrier  to  its

effectiveness.  Nor  is  the  method  applicable  to  people  who  are  not

driven to seek treatment by their own sufferings, but who submit to it

only  because  they  are  forced  to  by  the  authority  of  relatives.  The

qualification  which  is  the  determining  factor  of  fitness  for  psycho-

analytic treatment - that is, whether the patient is educable - must be

discussed further from another standpoint.

   (2) To be quite safe, one should limit one’s choice of patients to

those who possess a normal mental condition, since in the psycho-analytic method this is used as a foothold from which to obtain control

of  the  morbid  manifestations.  Psychoses,  states  of  confusion  and

deeply-rooted (I might say toxic) depression are therefore not suitable

for  psycho-analysis;  at  least  not  for  the  method  as  it  has  been

practised  up  to  the  present.  I  do  not  regard  it  as  by  any  means

impossible that by suitable changes in the method we may succeed in

overcoming  this  contraindication  -  and  so  be  able  to  initiate  a

psychotherapy of the psychoses.

   (3) The age of patients has this much importance in determining

their fitness for psycho-analytic treatment, that, on the one hand, near

or above the age of fifty the elasticity of the mental processes, on

which the treatment depends, is as a rule lacking - old people are no

longer educable - and, on the other hand, the mass of material to be

dealt with would prolong the duration of the treatment indefinitely. In

the other direction the age limit can be determined only individually;

youthful persons under the age of adolescence are often exceedingly

amenable to influence.

      (4)  Psycho-analysis  should  not  be  attempted  when  the  speedy

removal  of  dangerous  symptoms  is  required,  as,  for  example,  in  a

case of hysterical anorexia.

 


                                  On Psychotherapy

                                                                                      1570

 

 

   By this time you will have formed an impression that the field of

analytic psychotherapy is a very narrow one, since you have in fact

heard nothing from me except indications that point against it. There

remain, however, cases and types of disease enough on which this

therapy may be tested - as, for instance, all chronic forms of hysteria

with residual manifestations, the broad field of obsessive conditions,

aboulias, and the like.

      It  is  gratifying  that  precisely  the  most  valuable  and  most  highly

developed persons are best suited for this procedure; and one may

also safely claim that in cases where analytic psychotherapy has been

able to achieve but little, any other therapy would certainly not havebeen able to effect anything at all.

 

   (e) You will no doubt wish to enquire about the possibility of doing

harm by undertaking a psycho-analysis. In reply to this I may say that

if you are willing to judge impartially, if you will consider this procedure

in  the  same  spirit  of  critical  fairness  that  you  show  to  our  other

therapeutic methods, you will have to agree with me that no injury to

the  patient  is  to  be  feared  when  the  treatment  is  conducted  with

comprehension.  Anyone  who  is  accustomed,  like  the  lay  public,  to

blame  the  treatment  for  whatever  happens  during  an  illness  will

doubtless  judge  differently.  It  is  not  so  very  long  since  the  same

prejudice was directed against our hydropathic establishments. Many

patients who were advised to go into an establishment of that kind

hesitated  because  they  had  known  someone  who  had  entered  the

place as a nervous invalid and had become insane there. As you may

guess, these were cases of early general paralysis that could still in

their first stage be sent to a hydropathic establishment; once there,

they  had  run  their  inevitable  course  until  manifest  mental  disorder

supervened:  but  the  public  blamed  the  water  for  this  disastrous

change.  When  it  is  a  matter  of  new  kinds  of  therapeutic  treatment

even physicians are not always free from such errors of judgement. I

recall once making an attempt at psychotherapy with a woman who

had passed the greater part of her life in a state alternating between

mania and melancholia. I took on the case at the close of a period of

melancholia and for two weeks things seemed to go smoothly; in the

third  week  we  were  already  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  attack  of

mania.  This  was  undoubtedly  a  spontaneous  transformation  of  the

clinical  picture,  since  in  two  weeks  analytic  psychotherapy  cannot

accomplish anything. And yet the eminent physician (now deceased)

who  saw  the  case  with  me  could  not  refrain  from  the  remark  that

psychotherapy  was  probably  to  blame  for  this  ‘relapse’.  I  am  quite

convinced that in other circumstances he would have shown a more

critical judgement.

 


                                  On Psychotherapy

                                                                                      1571 

 

   (f) Finally, Gentlemen, I must confess that it is hardly fair to take up

your attention for so long on the subject of psycho-analytic therapy

without telling you in what this treatment consists and on what it is

based. Still, as I am forced to be brief, I can only hint at this: This

therapy, then, is based on the recognition that unconscious ideas - or

better,  the  unconsciousness  of  certain  mental  processes  -  are  the

direct cause of the morbid symptoms. We share this opinion with the

French  school  (Janet)  who,  by  the  way,  owing  to  excessive

schematization,  refer  the  cause  of  hysterical  symptoms  to  an

unconscious idée fixe. Now please do not be afraid that this is going to

land us in the depths of philosophical obscurities. Our unconscious is

not quite the same thing as that of philosophers and, moreover, the

majority  of  philosophers  will  hear  nothing  of  ‘unconscious  mental

processes’. If, however, you will look at the matter from our point of

view, you will understand that the transformation of this unconscious

material in the mind of the patient into conscious material must have

the result of correcting his deviation from normality and of lifting the

compulsion to which his mind has been subjected. For conscious will-

power governs only conscious mental processes, and every mental

compulsion is rooted in the unconscious. Nor need you ever fear that

the patient will be harmed by the shock accompanying the introduction

of  the  unconscious  into  consciousness,  for  you  can  convince

yourselves theoretically that the somatic and emotional effect of an

impulse that has become conscious can never be so powerful as that

of  an  unconscious  one.  It  is  only  by  the  application  of  our  highest

mental functions, which are bound up with consciousness, that we can

control all our impulses.

      There  is,  however,  another  angle  from  which  you  may  seek  to

understand  the  psycho-analytic  method.  The  uncovering  and

translating  of  the  unconscious  occurs  in  the  face  of  a  continuous

resistance  on  the  part  of  the  patient.  The  process  of  bringing  this

unconscious  material  to  light  is  associated  with  unpleasure,  and

because of this the patient rejects it again and again. It is for you then

to interpose in this conflict in the patient’s mental life. If you succeed in

persuading  him  to  accept,  by  virtue  of  a  better  understanding,something that up to now, in consequence of this automatic regulation

by  unpleasure,  he  has  rejected  (repressed),  you  will  have

accomplished  something  towards  his  education.  For  it  is  education

even to induce someone who dislikes getting up early to do so all the

same. Psycho-analytic treatment may in general be conceived of as

such a re-education in overcoming internal resistances. Re-education

of  this  kind  is,  however,  in  no  respect  more  necessary  to  nervous

patients than in regard to the mental element in their sexual life. For

nowhere else have civilization and education done so much harm as

in this field, and this is the point, as experience will show you, at which

to  look  for  those  aetiologies  of  the  neuroses  that  are  amenable  to

influence;  for  the  other  aetiological  factor,  the  constitutional

component, consists of something fixed and unalterable. And from this

it follows that one important qualification is required of the physician in

this work: not only must his own character be irreproachable - ‘As to

morals, that goes without saying’, as the hero of Vischer’s novel Auch

Einer was in the habit of declaring - but he must also have overcome

in  his  own  mind  that  mixture  of  prurience  and  prudery  with  which,

unfortunately, so many people habitually consider sexual problems.

 


                                  On Psychotherapy

                                                                                      1572

 

   At this juncture another remark is perhaps not out of place. I know

that the emphasis which I lay upon the part played by sexuality in

creating  the  psychoneuroses  has  become  generally  known.  But  I

know,  too,  that  qualifications  and  exact  particularization  are  of  little

use with the general public; there is very little room in the memory of

the multitude; it only retains the bare gist of any thesis and fabricates

an extreme version which is easy to remember. It may be, too, that

some physicians vaguely apprehend the content of my doctrine to be

that I regard sexual privation as the ultimate cause of the neuroses. In

the conditions of life in modern society there is certainly no lack of

sexual privation. On this basis, would it not be simpler to aim directly

at  recovery  by  recommending  sexual  activity  as  a  therapeutic

measure,  instead  of  pursuing  the  circuitous  and  laborious  path  ofmental  treatment?(I  know  of  nothing  which  could  impel  me  to

suppress such an inference if it were justified. The real state of things,

however,  is  otherwise.  Sexual  need  and  privation  are  merely  one

factor at work in the mechanism of neurosis; if there were no others

the  result  would  be  dissipation,  not  disease.  The  other,  no  less

essential,  factor,  which  is  all  too  readily  forgotten,  is  the  neurotic’s

aversion from sexuality, his incapacity for loving, that feature of the

mind  which  I  have  called  ‘repression’.  Not  until  there  is  a  conflict

between  the  two  tendencies  does  nervous  illness  break  out,  and

therefore  to  advise  sexual  activity  in  the  psychoneuroses  can  only

very rarely be described as good advice.

   Let me end upon this defensive note. And let us hope that your

interest  in  psychotherapy,  when  freed  from  every  hostile  prejudice,

may lend us support in our endeavour to achieve success in treating

even severe cases of psychoneurosis.

                                                                                       1573

 

            MY VIEWS ON THE PART PLAYED BY SEXUALITY

                  IN THE AETIOLOGY OF THE NEUROSES

                                        (1906)

 


                                                                                      1574

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1575

 

            MY VIEWS ON THE PART PLAYED BY SEXUALITY

                  IN THE AETIOLOGY OF THE NEUROSES

 

My theory of the aetiological importance of the sexual factor in the

neuroses  can  best  be  appreciated,  in  my  opinion,  by  following  the

history of its development. For I have no desire whatever to deny that

it has gone through a process of evolution and been modified in the

course of it. My professional colleagues may find a guarantee in this

admission  that  the  theory  is  nothing  other  than  the  product  of

continuous  and  ever  deeper-going  experience.  What  is  born  of

speculation,  on  the  contrary,  may  easily  spring  into  existence

complete and there after remain unchangeable.

   Originally my theory related only to the clinical pictures comprised

under the term ‘neurasthenia’, among which I was particularly struck

by  two,  which  occasionally  appear  as  pure  types  and  which  I

described as ‘neurasthenia proper’ and ‘anxiety neurosis’. It had, to be

sure, always been a matter of common knowledge that sexual factors

may play a part in the causation of these forms of illness; but those

factors were not regarded as invariably operative, nor was there any

idea of giving them precedence over other aetiological influences. I

was surprised to begin with at the frequency of gross disturbances in

the vita sexualis of nervous patients; the more I set about looking for

such disturbances - bearing in mind the fact that everyone hides thetruth in matters of sex - and the more skilful I became at pursuing my

enquiries in the face of a preliminary denial, the more regularly was I

able to discover pathogenic factors in sexual life, till little seemed to

stand in the way of my assuming their universal occurrence. It was

necessary,  however,  to  presuppose  from  the  start  that  sexual

irregularities  occurred  with  similar  frequency  in  our  ordinary  society

under the pressure of social conditions; and a doubt might remain as

to  the  degree  of  deviation  from  normal  sexual  functioning  which

should be regarded as pathogenic. I was therefore obliged to attach

less importance to the invariable evidence of sexual noxae than to a

second discovery which seemed to me less ambiguous. It emerged

that the form taken by the illness - neurasthenia or anxiety neurosis -

bore a constant relation to the nature of the sexual noxa involved. In

typical  cases  of  neurasthenia  a  history  of  regular  masturbation  or

persistent emissions was found; in anxiety neurosis factors appeared

such  as coitus  interruptus,  ‘unconsummated  excitation’,  and  other

conditions - in all of which there seemed to be the common element of

an insufficient discharge of the libido that had been produced. It was

only  after  this  discovery,  which  was  easy  to  make  and  could  be

confirmed as often as one liked, that I had the courage to claim a

preferential  position  for  sexual  influences  in  the  aetiology  of  the

neuroses.  Furthermore,  in  the  mixed  forms  of  neurasthenia  and

anxiety  neurosis  which  are  so  common  it  was  possible  to  trace  a

combination of the aetiologies which I had assumed for the two pure

forms. Moreover, this twofold form assumed by the neurosis seemed

to tally with the polar (i.e. the masculine and feminine)  character of

sexuality.

 


    My Views On The Part Played By Sexuality In The Aetiology Of

                                    The Neuroses

                                                                                      1576

 

   At the time at which I was attributing to sexuality this important part

in the production of the simple neuroses,¹ I was still faithful to a purely

psychological theory in regard to the psychoneuroses  - a theory in

which the sexual factor was regarded as no more significant than anyother emotional source of feeling. On the basis of some observations

made  by  Josef  Breuer  on  a  hysterical  patient  more  than  ten  years

earlier, I collaborated with him in a study of the mechanism of the

generation  of  hysterical  symptoms,  using  the  method  of  awakening

the  patient’s  memories  in  a  state  of  hypnosis;  and  we  reached

conclusions which enabled us to bridge the gap between Charcot’s

traumatic  hysteria  and  common  non-traumatic  hysteria  (Breuer  and

Freud,  1895).  We  were  led  to  the  assumption  that  hysterical

symptoms are the permanent results of psychical traumas, the sum of

affect attaching to which has, for particular reasons, been prevented

from  being  worked  over  consciously  and  has  therefore  found  an

abnormal  path  into  somatic  innervation.  The  terms  ‘strangulated

affect’, ‘conversion’ and ‘abreaction’ cover the distinctive features of

this hypothesis.

   But in view of the close connections between the psychoneuroses

and the simple neuroses, which go so far, indeed, that a differential

diagnosis is not always easy for inexperienced observers, it could not

be long before the knowledge arrived at in the one field was extended

to  the  other.  Moreover,  apart  from  this  consideration,  a  deeper

investigation of the psychical mechanism of hysterical symptoms led

to  the  same  result.  For  if  the  psychical  traumas  from  which  the

hysterical symptoms were derived were pursued further and further by

means  of  the  ‘cathartic’  procedure  initiated  by  Breuer  and  me,

experiences were eventually reached which belonged to the patient’s

childhood and related to his sexual life. And this was so, even in cases

in which the onset of the illness had been brought about by some

commonplace  emotion  of  a  non-sexual  kind.  Unless  these  sexual

traumas of childhood were taken into account it was impossible either

to elucidate the symptoms (to understand the way in which they were

determined)  or  to  prevent  their  recurrence.  In  this  way  the  unique

significance  of  sexual  experiences  in  the  aetiology  of  the

psychoneuroses seemed to be established beyond a doubt; and this

fact remains to this day one of the corner-stones of my theory.

 

   ¹ In my paper on anxiety neurosis (1895b).

     My Views On The Part Played By Sexuality In The Aetiology Of

                                    The Neuroses

                                                                                      1577

 

   This theory might be expressed by saying that the cause of life-long

hysterical neuroses lies in what are in themselves for the most part the

trivial sexual experiences of early childhood; and, put in this way, it

might  no  doubt  sound  strange.  But  if  we  take  the  historical

development of the theory into account, and see as its essence the

proposition that hysteria is the expression of a particular behaviour of

the individual’s sexual function and that this behaviour is decisively

determined by the first influences and experiences brought to bear in

childhood, we shall be a paradox the poorer but the richer by a motive

for  turning  our  attention  to  something  of  the  highest  importance

(though it has hitherto been grossly neglected) - the after-effects of the

impressions of childhood.

      I  will  postpone  until  later  in  this  paper  a  more  thorough  going

discussion  of  the  question  whether  we  are  to  regard  the  sexual

experiences of childhood as the causes of hysteria (and obsessional

neurosis), and I will now return to the form taken by the theory in some

of my shorter preliminary publications during the years 1895 and 1896

(Freud,  1896b  and  1896c).  By  laying  stress  on  the  supposed

aetiological  factors  it  was  possible  at  that  time  to  draw  a  contrast

between  the  common  neuroses  as  disorders  with  a contemporary

aetiology  and  psychoneuroses  whose  aetiology  was  chiefly  to  be

looked for in the sexual experiences of the remote past. The theory

culminated in this thesis: if the vita sexualis is normal, there can be no

neurosis.

 


    My Views On The Part Played By Sexuality In The Aetiology Of

                                    The Neuroses

                                                                                      1578

 

   Though even to-day I do not consider these assertions incorrect, it is

not to be wondered at that, in the course of ten years of continuous

effort at reaching an understanding of these phenomena, I have made

a  considerable  step  forward  from  the  views  I  then  held,  and  nowbelieve that I am in a position, on the basis of deeper experience, to

correct  the  insufficiencies,  the  displacements  and  the

misunderstandings under which my theory then laboured. At that time

my material was still scanty, and it happened by chance to include a

disproportionately large number of cases in which sexual seduction by

an adult or by older children played the chief part in the history of the

patient’s  childhood.  I  thus  over-estimated  the  frequency  of  such

events  (though  in  other  respects  they  were  not  open  to  doubt).

Moreover,  I  was  at  that  period  unable  to  distinguish  with  certainty

between  falsifications  made  by  hysterics  in  their  memories  of

childhood  and  traces  of  real  events.  Since  then  I  have  learned  to

explain a number of phantasies of seduction as attempts at fending off

memories of the subject’s own sexual activity ( infantile masturbation).

When  this  point  had  been  clarified,  the  ‘traumatic’  element  in  the

sexual experiences of childhood lost its importance and what was left

was the realization that infantile sexual activity (whether spontaneous

or provoked ) prescribes the direction that will be taken by later sexual

life after maturity. The same clarification (which corrected the most

important of my early mistakes) also made it necessary to modify my

view of the mechanism of hysterical symptoms. They were now no

longer to be regarded as direct derivatives of the repressed memories

of childhood experiences; but between the symptoms and the childish

impressions there were inserted the patient’s phantasies (or imaginary

memories), mostly produced during the years of puberty, which on the

one side were built up out of and over the childhood memories and on

the  other  side  were  transformed  directly  into  the  symptoms.  It  was

only after the introduction of this element of hysterical phantasies that

the texture of the neurosis and its relation to the patient’s life became

intelligible;  a  surprising  analogy  came  to  light,  too,  between  these

unconscious phantasies of hysterics and the imaginary creations of

paranoics which become conscious as delusions.

 


    My Views On The Part Played By Sexuality In The Aetiology Of

                                    The Neuroses

                                                                                      1579

    After I had made this correction, ‘infantile sexual traumas’ were in a

sense replaced by the ‘infantilism of sexuality’. A second modification

of  the  original  theory  lay  not  far  off.  Along  with  the  supposed

frequency of seduction in childhood, I ceased also to lay exaggerated

stress  on  the accidental  influencing  of  sexuality  on  to  which  I  had

sought to thrust the main responsibility for the causation of the illness,

though  I  had  not  on  that  account  denied  the  constitutional  and

hereditary factors. I had even hoped to solve the problem of choice of

neurosis (the decision to which form of psychoneurosis the patient is

to fall a victim) by reference to the details of the sexual experiences of

childhood. I believed at that time - though with reservations - that a

passive attitude in these scenes produced a predisposition to hysteria

and, on the other hand, an active one a predisposition to obsessional

neurosis. Later on I was obliged to abandon this view entirely, even

though some facts demand that in some way or other the supposed

correlation between passivity and hysteria and between activity and

obsessional  neurosis  shall  be  maintained.  Accidental  influences

derived from experience having thus receded into the background, the

factors of constitution and heredity necessarily gained the upper hand

once more; but there was this difference between my views and those

prevailing in other quarters, that on my theory the ‘sexual constitution’

took the place of a ‘general neuropathic disposition’. In my recently

published Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d ) I have

tried  to  give  a  picture  of  the  variegated  nature  of  this  sexual

constitution as well as of the composite character of the sexual instinct

in general and its derivation from contributory sources from different

parts of the organism.

 


    My Views On The Part Played By Sexuality In The Aetiology Of

                                    The Neuroses

                                                                                      1580

 

   As a further corollary to my modified view of  ‘sexual traumas in

childhood’, my theory now developed further in a direction which had

already been indicated in my publications between 1894 and 1896. At

that time, and even before sexuality had been given its rightful placeas an aetiological factor, I had maintained that no experience could

have a pathogenic effect unless it appeared intolerable to the subject’s

ego and gave rise to efforts at defence (Freud, 1894a). It was to this

defence that I traced back the split in the psyche (or, as we said in

those days, in consciousness) which occurs in hysteria. If the defence

was  successful,  the  intolerable  experience  with  its  affective

consequences was expelled from consciousness and from the ego’s

memory. In certain circumstances, however, what had been expelled

pursued  its  activities  in  what  was  now  an  unconscious  state,  and

found its way back into consciousness by means of symptoms and the

affects attaching to them, so that the illness corresponded to a failure

in defence. This view had the merit of entering into the interplay of the

psychical forces and of thus bringing the mental processes in hysteria

nearer  to  normal  ones,  instead  of  characterizing  the  neurosis  as

nothing  more  than  a  mysterious  disorder  insusceptible  to  further

analysis.

   Further information now became available relating to people who

had remained normal; and this led to the unexpected finding that the

sexual history of their childhood did not necessarily differ in essentials

from  that  of  neurotics,  and,  in  particular,  that  the  part  played  by

seduction was the same in both cases. As a consequence, accidental

influences receded still further into the background as compared with

‘repression’ (as I now began to say instead of ‘defence’). Thus it was

no longer a question of what sexual experiences a particular individual

had  had  in  his  childhood,  but  rather  of  his  reaction  to  those

experiences - of whether he had reacted to them by ‘repression’ or

not.  It  could  be  shown  how  in  the  course  of  development  a

spontaneous infantile sexual activity was often broken off by an act of

repression. Thus a mature neurotic individual was invariably pursued

by  a  certain  amount  of  ‘sexual  repression’  from  his  childhood;  this

found expression when he was faced by the demands of real life, and

the psycho-analyses of hysterics showed that they fell ill as a result of

the conflict between their libido and their sexual repression and that

their symptoms were in the nature of compromises between the two

mental currents.

     My Views On The Part Played By Sexuality In The Aetiology Of

                                    The Neuroses

                                                                                      1581

 

   I could not further elucidate this part of my theory without a detailed

discussion of my views on repression. It will be enough here to refer to

my Three Essays (1905d), in which I have attempted to throw some

light - if only a feeble one - on the somatic processes in which the

essential nature of sexuality is to be looked for. I have there shown

that the constitutional sexual disposition of children is incomparably

more variegated than might have been expected, that it deserves to

be described as ‘polymorphously perverse’ and that what is spoken of

as  the  normal  behaviour  of  the  sexual  function  emerges  from  this

disposition after certain of its components have been repressed. By

pointing out the infantile elements in sexuality I was able to establish a

simple correlation between health, perversion and neurosis. I showed

that normality  is  a  result  of  the  repression  of  certain  component

instincts  and  constituents  of  the  infantile  disposition  and  of  the

subordination of the remaining constituents under the primacy of the

genital zones in the service of the reproductive function. I showed that

perversions correspond to disturbances of this coalescence owing to

the  overpowering  and  compulsive  development  of  certain  of  the

component  instincts,  while neuroses  can  be  traced  back  to  an

excessive  repression  of  the  libidinal  trends.  Since  almost  all  the

perverse instincts of the infantile disposition can be recognized as the

forces concerned in the formation of symptoms in neuroses, though in

a state of repression, I was able to describe neurosis as being the

‘negative’ of perversion.

 


    My Views On The Part Played By Sexuality In The Aetiology Of

                                    The Neuroses

                                                                                      1582

 

   I think it is worth emphasizing the fact that, whatever modifications

my  views  on  the  aetiology  of  the  psychoneuroses  have  passed

through,  there  are  two  positions  which  I  have  never  repudiated  or

abandoned - the importance of sexuality and of infantilism. Apart fromthis, accidental influences have been replaced by constitutional factors

and ‘defence’ in the purely psychological sense has been replaced by

organic ‘sexual repression’. The question may, however, be raised of

where  convincing  evidence  is  to  be  found  in  favour  of  the  alleged

aetiological  importance  of  sexual  factors  in  the  psychoneuroses,  in

view of the fact that the onset of these illnesses may be observed in

response  to  the  most  commonplace  emotions  or  even  to  somatic

precipitating  causes,  and  since  I  have  had  to  abandon  a  specific

aetiology  depending  on  the  particular  form  of  the  childhood

experiences  concerned.  To  such  a  question  I  would  reply  that  the

psycho-analytic examination of neurotics is the source from which this

disputed  conviction  of  mine  is  derived.  If  we  make  use  of  that

irreplaceable  method  of  research,  we  discover  that the  patient’s

symptoms  constitute  his  sexual  activity  (whether  wholly  or  in  part),

which arises from the sources of the normal or perverse component

instincts of sexuality. Not only is a large part of the symptomatology of

hysteria derived directly from expressions of sexual excitement, not

only  do  a  number  of  erotogenic  zones  attain  the  significance  of

genitals  during  neuroses  owing  to  an  intensification  of  infantile

characteristics, but the most complicated symptoms are themselves

revealed as representing, by means of ‘conversion’, phantasies which

have a sexual situation as their subject-matter. Anyone who knows

how  to  interpret  the  language  of  hysteria  will  recognize  that  the

neurosis is concerned only with the patient’s repressed sexuality. The

sexual function must, however, be understood in its true extent, as it is

laid  down  by  disposition  in  infancy.  Wherever  some  commonplace

emotion must be included among the determinants of the onset of the

illness, analysis invariably shows that it is the sexual component of the

traumatic experience - a component that is never lacking which has

produced the pathogenic result.

      We  have  been  led  on  imperceptibly  from  the  question  of  the

causation  of  the  psychoneuroses  to  the  problem  of  their  essential

nature. If we are prepared to take into account what has been learnt

from  psycho-analysis,  we  can  only  say  that  the  essence  of  these

illnesses lies in disturbances of the sexual processes, the processes

which determine in the organism the formation and utilization of sexual

libido.  It  is  scarcely  possible  to  avoid  picturing  these  processes  asbeing  in  the  last  resort  of  a  chemical  nature;  so  that  in  what  are

termed the ‘actual’ neuroses we may recognize the somatic effects of

disturbances of the sexual metabolism, and in the psychoneuroses the

psychical effects of those disturbances as well. The similarity of the

neuroses to the phenomena of intoxication and abstinence after the

use of certain alkaloids, as well as to Graves’ disease and Addison’s

disease, is forced upon our notice clinically. And just as these last two

illnesses should no longer be described as ‘nervous diseases’, so also

the ‘neuroses’ proper, in spite of their name, may soon have to be

excluded from that category as well.

 


    My Views On The Part Played By Sexuality In The Aetiology Of

                                    The Neuroses

                                                                                      1583

 

      Accordingly,  the  aetiology  of  the  neuroses  comprises  everything

which can act in a detrimental manner upon the processes serving the

sexual  function.  In  the  forefront,  then,  are  to  be  ranked  the  noxae

which affect the sexual function itself - in so far as these are regarded

as injurious by the sexual constitution, varying as it does with different

degrees of culture and education. In the next place comes every other

kind of noxa and trauma which, by causing general damage to the

organism, may lead secondarily to injury to its sexual processes. It

should not, however, be forgotten that the aetiological problem in the

case  of  the  neuroses  is  at  least  as  complicated  as  the  causative

factors of any other illness. A single pathogenic influence is scarcely

ever sufficient; in the large majority of cases a number of aetiological

factors are required, which support one another and must therefore

not be regarded as being in mutual opposition. For this reason a state

of neurotic illness cannot be sharply differentiated from health. The

onset of the illness is the product of a summation and the necessary

total of aetiological determinants can be completed from any direction.

To look for the aetiology of the neuroses exclusively in heredity or in

the  constitution  would  be  just  as  one-sided  as  to  attribute  that

aetiology  solely  to  the  accidental  influences  brought  to  bear  upon

sexuality in the course of the subject’s life - whereas better insightshows that the essence of these illnesses lies solely in a disturbance

of the organism’s sexual processes.

 

VIENNA, June 1905.

                                                                                       1584

 

                    PSYCHICAL (OR MENTAL) TREATMENT

                                        (1890)

 


                                                                                      1585

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1586

 

                    PSYCHICAL (OR MENTAL) TREATMENT

 

‘Psyche’  is  a  Greek  word  which  may  be  translated  ‘mind’.  Thus

‘psychical  treatment’  means  ‘mental  treatment’.  The  term  might

accordingly  be  supposed  to  signify  ‘treatment  of  the  pathological

phenomena  of  mental  life’.  This,  however,  is not  its  meaning.

‘Psychical treatment’ denotes, rather, treatment taking its start in the

mind,  treatment  (whether  of  mental  or  physical  disorders)  by

measures which operate in the first instance and immediately upon

the human mind.

   Foremost among such measures is the use of words; and words are

the essential tool of mental treatment. A layman will no doubt find it

hard to understand how pathological disorders of the body and mind

can be eliminated by ‘mere’ words. He will feel that he is being asked

to believe in magic. And he will not be so very wrong, for the words

which we use in our everyday speech are nothing other than watered-

down magic. But we shall have to follow a roundabout path in order to

explain how science sets about restoring to words a part at least of

their former magical power.

   It is only comparatively recently, too, that physicians with a scientific

training have learnt to appreciate the value of mental treatment. And

we can easily see why this was so when we reflect on the evolution of

medicine  during  the  last  half-century.  After  a  somewhat  unfruitful

period during which it was dependent on what was known as ‘NaturalPhilosophy’, it came under the happy influence of the natural sciences

and has achieved the greatest advances alike as a science and as an

art: it has shown that the organism is built up from microscopically

small elements (the cells), it has learnt to understand the physics and

chemistry  of  the  various  vital  processes  (functions),  it  has

distinguished  the  visible  and  observable  modifications  which  are

brought about in the bodily organs by different morbid processes, and

has discovered, on the other hand, the signs that reveal the operation

of  deep-lying  morbid  processes  in  the  living  body;  moreover  it  has

identified a great number of the micro-organisms which cause illness

and, with the help of its newly acquired knowledge, it has reduced to a

quite extraordinary degree the dangers arising from severe surgical

operations. All of these advances and discoveries were related to the

physical side of man, and it followed, as a result of an incorrect though

easily  understandable  trend  of  thought,  that  physicians  came  to

restrict their interest to the physical side of things and were glad to

leave the mental field to be dealt with by the philosophers whom they

despised.

 


                          Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment

                                                                                      1587

 

   Modern medicine, it is true, had reason enough for studying the

indisputable connection between the body and the mind; but it never

ceased to represent mental events as determined by physical ones

and  dependent  on  them.  Thus  stress  was  laid  on  the  fact  that

intellectual  functioning  was  conditional  upon  the  presence  of  a

normally developed and sufficiently nourished brain, that any disease

of that organ led to disturbances of intellectual functioning, that the

introduction  of  toxic  substances  into  the  circulation  could  produce

certain states of mental illness, or - to descend to more trivial matters -

that  dreams  could  be  modified  by  stimuli  brought  to  bear  upon  a

sleeper for experimental purposes.

   The relation between body and mind (in animals no less than in

human beings) is a reciprocal one; but in earlier times the other side of

this relation, the effect of the mind upon the body, found little favour inthe eyes of physicians. They seemed to be afraid of granting mental

life any independence, for fear of that implying an abandonment of the

scientific ground on which they stood.

 

   This one-sided attitude of medicine towards the body has undergone

a  gradual  change  in  the  course  of  the  last  decade  and  a  half,  a

change brought about directly by clinical experience. There are a large

number  of  patients,  suffering  from  affections  of  greater  or  less

severity, whose disorders and complaints make great demands on the

skill of their physicians, but in whom no visible or observable signs of

a  pathological  process  can  be  discovered  either  during  their  life  or

after  their  death,  in  spite  of  all  the  advances  in  the  methods  of

investigation made by scientific medicine. One group of these patients

are distinguished by the copiousness and variety of their symptoms:

they  are  incapable  of  intellectual  work  because  of  headaches  or

inability to concentrate their attention, their eyes ache when they read,

their legs become fatigued when they walk, develop dull pains or go to

sleep,  their  digestion  is  disturbed  by  distressing  sensations,  by

eructations  or  gastric  spasms,  they  cannot  defaecate  without

aperients, they are subject to sleeplessness, and so on. They may

suffer  from  all  these  disorders  simultaneously  or  in  succession,  or

from only a selection of them; but in every case the illness is evidently

the  same.  Moreover,  its  signs  are  often  variable  and  replace  one

another. A patient who has hitherto been incapacitated by headaches

but has had a fairly good digestion may next day enjoy a clear head

but  may  thenceforward  be  unable  to  manage  most  kinds  of  food.

Again, his sufferings may suddenly cease if there is a marked change

in the circumstances of his existence. If he is travelling he may feel

perfectly well and be able to enjoy the most varied diet without any ill

effects, but when he gets home he may once more have to restrict

himself to sour milk. In a few cases the disorder - whether it is a pain

or a weakness resembling a paralysis - may suddenly pass from one

side of the body to the other: it may jump from his right side to the

corresponding part of the body on his left side. But in every instance it

is to be observed that the symptoms are very clearly influenced by

excitement, emotion, worry, etc., and also that they can disappear and

give place to perfect health without leaving any traces, even if theyhave persisted over a long period.

   Medical research has at last shown that people of this kind are not

to be looked upon as suffering from a disease of the stomach or of the

eyes or whatever it may be, but that it must be a question in their case

of an illness of the nervous system as a whole. Examination of the

brain and nerves of these patients has so far, however, revealed no

perceptible  changes;  and,  indeed,  some  of  the  features  of  their

symptomatology  prohibit  any  expectation  that  even  more  accurate

methods of investigation could ever discover changes of a sort that

would throw light upon the illness. This condition has been described

as  ‘nervousness’  (neurasthenia  or  hysteria)  and  has  been

characterized as a merely ‘functional’ disorder of the nervous system.¹

Incidentally, an exhaustive examination of the brain (after the patient’s

death)  has  been  equally  without  results  in  the  case  of  many  more

permanent nervous disorders, as well as in illnesses with exclusively

mental  symptoms,  such  as  what  are  known  as  obsessions  and

delusional insanity.

 

   ¹ See Volume II, Part X, Chapter 4 [of the work, Die Gesundheit, in which this paper of

Freud’s first appeared.]
 


                          Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment

                                                                                      1588

 

      Physicians  were  thus  faced  by  the  problem  of  investigating  the

nature and origin of the symptoms shown by these nervous or neurotic

patients. In the course of this investigation it was found that in some at

least of these patients the signs of their illness originate from nothing

other than a change in the action of their minds upon their bodies and

that the immediate cause of their disorder is to be looked for in their

minds.  What  may  be  the  remoter  causes  of  the  disturbance  which

affects their minds is another question, with which we need not now

concern ourselves. But medical science was here provided with an

opportunity for directing its full attention to what had previously been

the neglected side of the mutual relation between body and mind.

 

   It is not until we have studied pathological phenomena that we canget an insight into normal ones. Many things which had long been

known of the influence of the mind on the body were only now brought

into their true perspective. The commonest, everyday example of the

mind’s action on the body, and one that is to be observed in everyone,

is offered by what is known as the ‘expression of the emotions’. A

man’s states of mind are manifested, almost without exception, in the

tensions and relaxations of his facial muscles, in the adaptations of his

eyes,  in  the  amount  of  blood  in  the  vessels  of  his  skin,  in  the

modifications in his vocal apparatus and in the movements of his limbs

and in particular of his hands. These concomitant physical changes

are for the most part of no advantage to the person concerned; on the

contrary, they often stand in his way if he wishes to conceal his mental

processes from other people. But they serve these other people as

trustworthy  indications  from  which  his  mental  processes  can  be

inferred  and  in  which  more  confidence  can  be  placed  than  in  any

simultaneous verbal expressions that may be made deliberately. If we

are  able  to  submit  anyone  to  a  more  accurate  examination  during

certain  of  his  mental  activities,  we  come  upon  further  physical

consequences, in the shape of changes in his heart-action, alterations

in the distribution of blood in his body, and so on.

 


                          Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment

                                                                                      1589

 

   In certain mental states described as ‘affects’, the part played by the

body is so obvious and on so large a scale that some psychologists

have even adopted the view that the essence of these affects consists

only  in  their  physical  manifestations.  It  is  a  matter  of  common

knowledge that extraordinary changes occur in the facial expression,

in the circulation, in the excretions and in the state of tension of the

voluntary muscles under the influence of fear, of rage, of mental pain

and of sexual delight. What is less well known, though equally well

established, is the occurrence of other physical results of the affects

which  cannot  be  counted  as  their  expression.  Persistent  affective

states of a distressing or ‘depressive’ nature (as they are called), such

as sorrow, worry or grief, reduce the state of nourishment of the wholebody, cause the hair to turn white, the fat to disappear and the walls of

the  blood-vessels  to  undergo  morbid  changes.  On  the  other  hand,

under the influence of feelings of joy, of ‘happiness’, we find that the

whole body blossoms out and shows signs of a renewal of youth. The

major affects evidently have a large bearing on the capacity to resist

infectious illness; a good example of this is to be seen in the medical

observation  that  there  is  a  far  greater  liability  to  contract  such

diseases  as  typhus  and  dysentery  in  defeated  armies  than  in

victorious  ones.  The  affects,  moreover,  -  this  applies  almost

exclusively to depressive affects - are often sufficient in themselves to

bring  about  both  diseases  of  the  nervous  system  accompanied  by

manifest anatomical changes and also diseases of other organs. In

such  cases  it  must  be  assumed  that  the  patient  already  had  a

predisposition, though hitherto an inoperative one, to the disease in

question.

   States of illness that are already present can be very considerably

influenced by violent affects. Such changes are usually for the worse;

but there is no lack of instances in which a severe shock or a sudden

bereavement  brings  about  a  peculiar  alteration  in  the  tone  of  the

organism  which  may  have  a  favourable  influence  on  some  well-

established  pathological  condition  or  may  even  bring  it  to  an  end.

Finally,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  duration  of  life  can  be

appreciably shortened by depressive affects and that a violent shock,

or  a  deep  humiliation  or  disgrace,  may  put  a  sudden  end  to  life.

Strange to say, this same result may be found to follow too from the

unexpected impact of a great joy.

 


                          Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment

                                                                                      1590

 

   The affects in the narrower sense are, it is true, characterized by a

quite special connection with somatic processes; but, strictly speaking,

all mental states, including those that we usually regard as ‘processes

of thought’, are to some degree ‘affective’, and not one of them is

without its physical manifestations or is incapable of modifying somatic

processes. Even when a person is engaged in quietly thinking in astring  of  ‘ideas’,  there  are  a  constant  series  of  excitations,

corresponding to the content of these ideas, which are discharged into

the  smooth  or  striated  muscles.  These  excitations  can  be  made

apparent if they are appropriately reinforced, and certain striking and,

indeed, ostensibly ‘supernatural’ phenomena can be explained by this

means. Thus, what is known as ‘thought-reading’ [Gedanken erraten]

may be explained by small, involuntary muscular movements carried

out  by  the  ‘medium’  in  the  course  of  an  experiment  -  when,  for

instance,  he  has  to  make  someone  discover  a  hidden  object.  The

whole  phenomenon  might  more  suitably  be  described  as  ‘thought-

betraying’ [Gedanken verraten].

      The  processes  of  volition  and  attention  are  also  capable  of

exercising a profound effect on somatic processes and of playing a

large  part  in  promoting  or  hindering  physical  illnesses.  A  famous

English physician has reported that he can succeed in producing a

great variety of sensations and pains in any part of his body to which

he  may  choose  to  direct  his  attention,  and  the  majority  of  people

appear  to  behave  similarly.  It  is  in  general  true  that  in  forming  a

judgement  of  pains  (which  are  usually  regarded  as  physical

phenomena)  we  must  bear  in  mind  their  unmistakable  dependence

upon  mental  determinants.  Laymen,  who  like  to  sum  up  mental

influences of this kind under the name of ‘imagination’, are inclined to

have little respect for pains that are due to imagination as contrasted

with those caused by injury, illness or inflammation. But this is clearly

unjust. However pains may be caused - even by imagination - they

themselves are no less real and no less violent on that account.

 


                          Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment

                                                                                      1591

 

   Just as pains are produced or increased by having attention paid to

them, so, too, they disappear if attention is diverted from them. This

experience can always be employed as a means of soothing children;

adult soldiers do not feel the pain of a wound in the feverish heat of

battle;  martyrs  are  probably  quite  impervious  to  the  pain  of  their

tortures  in  the  over-excitement  of  their  religious  feeling  and  in  theconcentration  of  all  their  thoughts  upon  the  heavenly  reward  that

awaits them. It is not so easy to produce evidence of the influence of

volition on pathological somatic processes; but it is quite possible that

a determination to recover or a will to die may have an effect on the

outcome even of severe and precarious illnesses.

 

   Our interest is most particularly engaged by the mental state of

expectation, which puts in motion a number of mental forces that have

the  greatest  influence  on  the  onset  and  cure  of  physical  diseases.

Fearful expectation is certainly not without its effect on the result. It

would be of importance to know with certainty whether it has as great

a bearing as is supposed on falling ill; for instance, whether it is true

that during an epidemic those who are afraid of contracting the illness

are  in  the  greatest  danger.  The  contrary  state  of  mind,  in  which

expectation is coloured by hope and faith, is an effective force with

which  we  have  to  reckon,  strictly  speaking,  in all  our  attempts  at

treatment and cure. We could not otherwise account for the peculiar

results  which  we  find  produced  by  medicaments  and  therapeutic

procedures.

   The most noticeable effects of this kind of expectation coloured by

faith are to be found in the ‘miraculous’ cures which are brought about

even to-day under our own eyes without the help of any medical skill.

Miraculous cures properly so-called take place in the case of believers

under the influence of adjuncts calculated to intensify religious feelings

-  that  is  to  say,  in  places  where  a  miracle-working  image  is

worshipped, or where a holy or divine personage has revealed himself

to men and has promised them relief from their sufferings in return for

their  worship,  or  where  the  relics  of  a  saint  are  preserved  as  a

treasure.  Religious  faith  alone  does  not  seem  to  find  it  easy  to

suppress  illness  by  means  of  expectation;  for  as  a  rule  other

contrivances as well are brought into play in the case of miraculous

cures. The times and seasons at which divine mercy is sought must

be specially indicated; the patient must submit to physical toil, to the

trials and sacrifices of a pilgrimage, before he can become worthy of

this divine mercy.

                           Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment

                                                                                      1592

 

      It  would  be  convenient,  but  quite  wrong,  simply  to  refuse  all

credence  to  these  miraculous  cures  and  to  seek  to  explain  the

accounts  of  them  as  a  combination  of  pious  fraud  and  inaccurate

observation. Though an explanation of this kind may often be justified,

it is not enough to enable us to dismiss entirely the fact of miraculous

cures.  They  do  really  occur  and  have  occurred  at  every  period  of

history. And they concern not merely illnesses of mental origin - those,

that is, which are based on ‘imagination’ and are therefore likely to be

especially  affected  by  the  circumstances  of  a  pilgrimage  -  but  also

illnesses with an ‘organic’ basis which had previously resisted all the

efforts of physicians.

   There is no need, however, to bring forward anything other than

mental  forces  in  order  to  explain  miraculous  cures.  Even  under

conditions such as these, nothing happens that can be considered as

beyond our understanding. Everything proceeds naturally. Indeed, the

power of religious faith is reinforced in these cases by a number of

eminently  human  motive  forces.  The  individual’s  pious  belief  is

intensified by the enthusiasm of the crowd of people in whose midst

he  makes  his  way  as  a  rule  to  the  sacred  locality.  All  the  mental

impulses  of  an  individual  can  be  enormously  magnified  by  group

influence such as this. In cases in which someone proceeds to the

holy place by himself, the reputation of the place and the respect in

which it is held act as substitutes for the influence of the group, so that

in fact the power of a group is once more in operation. And there is yet

another way in which this influence makes itself felt. Since it is well

known that divine mercy is always shown only to a few of the many

who seek it, each of these is eager to be among the chosen few; the

ambition that lies hidden in everyone comes to the help of pious faith.

Where so many powerful forces converge, we need feel no surprise if

the goal is sometimes really reached.

   Even those who are without religious faith need not forgo miraculous

cures. In their case reputation and group-influence act as a complete

substitute  for  faith.  There  are  always  fashionable  treatments  and

fashionable physicians, and these play an especially dominant part inhigh society, where the most powerful psychological motive forces are

the  endeavour  to  excel  and  to  do  what  the  ‘best’  people  do.

Fashionable treatments of this kind produce therapeutic results which

are outside the scope of their actual power, and the same procedures

effect far more in the hands of a fashionable doctor (who, for instance,

may have become well-known as an attendant upon some prominent

personality) than in those of another physician. Thus there are human

as  well  as  divine  miracle-workers.  Such  men,  however,  who  have

reached  eminence  owing  to  the  favour  of  fashion  and  of  imitation,

soon lose their power, as is to be expected from the nature of the

forces which give it to them.

 


                          Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment

                                                                                      1593

 

   An intelligible dissatisfaction with the frequent inadequacy of the

help afforded by medical skill, and perhaps, too, an internal rebellion

against  the  duress  of  scientific  thought,  which  reflects  the

remorselessness of nature, have in all periods (and in our own once

more) imposed a strange condition on the therapeutic powers alike of

persons and of procedures. The necessary faith only emerges if the

practitioner is not a doctor, if he can boast of having no knowledge of

the  scientific  basis  of  therapeutics,  if  the  procedure  has  not  been

subjected to accurate testing but is recommended by some popular

prejudice.  Hence  it  is  that  we  find  a  swarm  of  ‘nature  cures’  and

‘nature healers’, who compete with physicians in the exercise of their

profession  and  of  whom  we  can  at  least  say  with  some  degree  of

certainty  that  they  do  far  more  harm  than  good.  If  this  gives  us

grounds  for  blaming  the  patients’  faith,  we  must  yet  not  be  so

ungrateful as to forget that the same force is constantly at work in

support of our own medical efforts. The results of every procedure laid

down by the physician and of every treatment that he undertakes are

probably  composed  of  two  portions.  And  one  of  these,  which  is

sometimes greater and sometimes less, but can never be completely

disregarded, is determined by the patient’s mental attitude. The faith

with  which  he  meets  the  immediate  effect  of  a  medical  proceduredepends  on  the  one  hand  on  the  amount  of  his  own  desire  to  be

cured, and on the other hand on his confidence that he has taken the

right steps in that direction - of his general respect, that is, for medical

skill - and, further, on the power which he attributes to his doctor’s

personality, and even on the purely human liking aroused in him by

the doctor. There are some physicians who have a greater capacity

than others for winning their patients’ confidence; a patient will often

feel better the very moment the doctor enters his room.

 


                          Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment

                                                                                      1594

 

 

   Physicians have practised mental treatment from the beginning of

time, and in early days to a far greater extent even than to-day. If by

mental  treatment  we  mean  an  endeavour  to  produce  such  mental

states and conditions in the patient as will be the most propitious for

his recovery, this kind of medical treatment is historically the oldest.

Psychical treatment was almost the only sort at the disposal of the

peoples  of  antiquity,  and  they  invariably  reinforced  the  effects  of

therapeutic  potions  and  other  therapeutic  measures  by  intensive

mental  treatment.  Such  familiar  procedures  as  the  use  of  magical

formulas and purificatory baths, or the elicitation of oracular dreams by

sleeping in the temple precincts, can only have had a curative effect

by psychical means. The physician’s personality acquired a reputation

derived directly from divine power, since in its beginnings the art of

healing lay in the hands of priests. So that then as now the physician’s

personality was one of the chief instruments for bringing the patient

into a state of mind favourable for his recovery.

   Now, too, we begin to understand the ‘magic’ of words. Words are

the  most  important  media  by  which  one  man  seeks  to  bring  his

influence to bear on another; words are a good method of producing

mental changes in the person to whom they are addressed. So that

there is no longer anything puzzling in the assertion that the magic of

words can remove the symptoms of illness, and especially such as are

themselves founded on mental states.      All  the  mental  influences  which  have  proved  effective  in  curing

illnesses  have  something  incalculable  about  them.  Affects,

concentration of the will, distracting the attention, expectation coloured

by faith - all of these forces, which occasionally remove an illness,

sometimes fail to do so without there being anything in the character

of the illness to account for the different result. What stands in the way

of  regularity  in  the  therapeutic  results  achieved  is  evidently  the

autocratic nature of the personalities of the subjects, with their variety

of  mental  differences.  Since  physicians  came  to  realize  clearly  the

important part played in recovery by the patient’s state of mind, the

idea naturally occurred to them of no longer leaving it to the patient to

decide  how  much  mental  compliance  he  should  show  but  of

deliberately imposing a propitious state of mind by suitable methods. It

is from this attempt that modern mental treatment has taken its start.

 


                          Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment

                                                                                      1595

 

 

   Quite a number of different methods of treatment have thus arisen,

some  of  them  simple  to  arrive  at  and  others  which  could  only  be

reached on the basis of complex hypotheses. It is easy to see, for

instance, that the physician, who can no longer command respect as a

priest  or  as  the  possessor  of  secret  knowledge,  should  use  his

personality in such a way as to gain his patient’s confidence and, to

some degree, his affection. He himself may succeed in doing this with

only a limited number of patients, whereas other patients, according to

their inclinations and degree of education, will be attracted to other

physicians. Such a distribution will serve a useful purpose; but if the

right of a patient to make a free choice of his doctor were suspended,

an  important  precondition  for  influencing  him  mentally  would  be

abolished.

      There  are  many  very  effective  mental  procedures  which  the

physician is obliged to renounce. He either has not the power or has

not  the  right  to  invoke  them.  This  applies  in  particular  to  the

provocation of strong affects - the most powerful of all the means bywhich the mind affects the body. The vicissitudes of life often cure

illnesses through the experience of great joy, through the satisfaction

of  needs  or  the  fulfilment  of  wishes.  The  physician,  who  is  often

impotent outside his profession, cannot compete along these lines. It

might  be  more  within  his  power  to  employ  fear  and  fright  for

therapeutic ends; but, except in the case of children, he must have the

gravest  doubts  about  the  use  of  such  double-edged  tools.  On  the

other hand, the physician must rule out any relations with his patient

that are bound up with tender feelings, owing to their implications in

practical  life.  Thus  from  the  first  his  power  to  bring  about  mental

changes  in  his  patients  seems  so  restricted  that  mental  treatment

conducted on a deliberate plan would seem to offer no advantages

over the earlier haphazard method.

   The physician can seek to direct his patient’s volition and attention,

and  he  has  good  grounds  for  doing  so  in  the  case  of  various

pathological  conditions.  He  may,  for  instance,  persistently  oblige  a

person who believes he is paralysed to carry out the movements of

which he professes himself incapable; or he may refuse to fall in with

the wishes of an anxious patient who insists on being examined for an

illness from which he is quite certainly not suffering. In these instances

the physician will be taking the right course, but such isolated cases

would scarcely justify us in setting up mental treatment as a special

therapeutic  procedure.  There  exists,  nevertheless,  a  queer  and

unforeseeable  method  which  offers  the  physician  a  possibility  of

exercising a profound, even though transitory, influence on the mental

life  of  his  patients  and  of  employing  that  influence  for  therapeutic

purposes.

 


                          Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment

                                                                                      1596

 

 

   It has long been known, though it has only been established beyond

all doubt during the last few decades, that it is possible, by certain

gentle means, to put people into a quite peculiar mental state very

similar  to  sleep  and  on  that  account  described  as  ‘hypnosis’.  Thevarious means by which hypnosis can be brought about have at first

sight little in common. It is possible to hypnotize someone by getting

him to stare fixedly at a bright object for some minutes, or by holding a

watch to his ear for a similar length of time, or by repeatedly passing

the open hands, at a short distance away, over his face and limbs. But

the same result can be brought about by describing the onset of the

state  of  hypnosis  and  its  characteristics  quietly  and  firmly  to  the

subject - that is, by ‘talking him into’ hypnosis. The two procedures

may also be combined. We may make the subject sit down, hold a

finger in front of his eyes, tell him to gaze at it fixedly and then say to

him: ‘You’re feeling tired. Your eyes are closing; you can’t hold them

open. Your limbs are heavy; you can’t move them any more. You’re

falling asleep---' and so on. It will be observed that all the procedures

have in common a fixing of the attention; in those first mentioned the

attention is fatigued by slight and monotonous sensory stimuli. It is not

yet satisfactorily explained, however, how it comes about that mere

talking  produces  exactly  the  same  state  as  the  other  procedures.

Experienced hypnotists assert that by these means a definite hypnotic

change  can  be  brought  about  in  some  eighty  per  cent  of  subjects.

There is no way of telling beforehand, however, which subjects are

hypnotizable and which are not. Illness is far from being one of the

necessary  preconditions  of  hypnosis:  normal  people  are  said  to  be

particularly  easy  to  hypnotize,  while  some  neurotics  can  only  be

hypnotized  with  great  difficulty  and  the  insane  are  completely

resistant. The hypnotic state exhibits a great variety of gradations. In

its lightest degree the hypnotic subject is aware only of something like

a slight insensibility, while the most extreme degree, which is marked

by special peculiarities, is known as ‘somnambulism’, on account of its

resemblance  to  the  natural  phenomenon  of  sleep-walking.  But

hypnosis is in no sense a sleep like our nocturnal sleep or like the

sleep produced by drugs. Changes occur in it and mental functions

are retained during it which are absent in normal sleep.

 


                          Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment

                                                                                      1597

    Some of the phenomena of hypnosis (for instance, alterations in

muscular activity) possess a merely scientific interest. But the most

significant indication of hypnosis, and the most important one from our

point of view, lies in the hypnotic subject’s attitude to his hypnotist.

While the subject behaves to the rest of the external world as though

he were asleep, that is, as though all his senses were diverted from it,

he is awake in his relation to the person who hypnotized him; he hears

and  sees  him  alone,  and  him  he  understands  and  answers.  This

phenomenon, which is described as rapport in the case of hypnosis,

finds a parallel in the way in which some people sleep - for instance, a

mother who is nursing her baby. It is so striking that it may well lead

us to an understanding of the relation between the hypnotic subject

and the hypnotist.

   But the fact that the subject’s universe is, so to say, confined to the

hypnotist  is  not  the  whole  story.  There  is  the  further  fact  of  the

former’s docility  in  relation  to  the  latter:  he  becomes  obedient  and

credulous  -  in  the  case  of  deep  hypnosis,  to  an  almost  unlimited

extent.  And  the  manner  in  which  this  obedience  and  credulity  are

carried out reveals a characteristic of the hypnotic state, namely that

in the hypnotized subject the influence of the mind over the body is

extraordinarily increased. If the hypnotist says ‘You can’t move your

arm’, the arm drops motionless; the subject obviously tries with all his

strength but is unable to move it. If the hypnotist says: ‘Your arm’s

moving of its own accord, you can’t stop it’, the arm moves and the

subject is seen making vain efforts to keep it still. The idea which the

hypnotist has given to the subject by his words has produced in him

precisely the mental-physical behaviour corresponding to the idea’s

content. This implies on the one hand obedience but on the other an

increase in the physical influence of an idea. Words have once more

regained their magic.

 


                          Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment

                                                                                      1598

 

   The same thing happens in the domain of sense perceptions. The

hypnotist  says:  ‘You  see  a  snake;  you’re  smelling  a  rose;  you’relistening to the loveliest music’, and the hypnotic subject sees, smells

and hears what is required of him by the idea that he has been given.

How  do  we  know  that  the  subject  really  has  these  perceptions?  It

might be thought that he is only pretending to have them. But after all

we have no reason for doubts on the point; for he behaves exactly as

though he had them, he expresses all the appropriate emotions, and

in  some  circumstances  he  can  even  describe  his  imaginary

perceptions and experiences after the hypnosis is at an end. We then

perceive that he has been seeing and hearing just as we see and hear

in dreams - he has been ‘hallucinating’. He was evidently so credulous

in relation to the hypnotist that he was convinced that there must be a

snake to be seen when the hypnotist told him so; and this conviction

had such a strong effect on his body that he really saw the snake - a

thing which, incidentally, can sometimes happen even to people who

have not been hypnotized.

   It may be remarked, by the way, that, outside hypnosis and in real

life, credulity such as the subject has in relation to his hypnotist is

shown  only  by  a  child  towards  his  beloved  parents,  and  that  an

attitude  of  similar  subjection  on  the  part  of  one  person  towards

another  has  only  one  parallel,  though  a  complete  one  -  namely  in

certain  love-relationships  where  there  is  extreme  devotion.  A

combination of exclusive attachment and credulous obedience is in

general among the characteristics of love.

 


                          Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment

                                                                                      1599

 

 

   Some further points may be mentioned in connection with the state

of  hypnosis.  The  words  spoken  by  the  hypnotist  which  have  the

magical results that I have described are known as a ‘suggestion’ and

it  has  become  customary  to  apply  the  term  as  well  where  there  is

merely  an  intention  to  produce  a  similar  effect.  Not  only  do  the

hypnotic subject’s movements and feelings obey suggestions, but all

his other mental activities; and he does not as a rule take any action

on his own initiative. Hypnotic obedience can be employed in makinga  number  of  highly  remarkable  experiments,  which  afford  a  deep

insight into the workings of the mind and produce in the observer an

ineradicable conviction of the unsuspected power of the mind over the

body. Just as a hypnotized subject can be obliged to see what is not

there, so he can be forbidden to see what is there and is seeking to

impress itself on his senses - some particular person, for instance.

(This is known as a ‘negative hallucination’.) The person in question

then finds it impossible to attract the subject’s attention by any kind of

stimulation;  he  is  treated  as  though  he  were  ‘thin  air’.  Again,  a

suggestion may be made to the subject to carry out some action a

certain  length  of  time  after  waking  from  hypnosis  (‘post-hypnotic

suggestion’); the subject keeps to the allotted time and performs the

suggested action in the middle of his waking state without being able

to give any reason for it. If he is asked why he has done what he has,

he  will  either  refer  to  an  obscure  impulse  which  he  was  unable  to

resist,  or  he  will  invent  some  half-satisfactory  excuse  without

remembering  the  real  explanation  -  namely  the  suggestion  he  has

been given.

   The state of hypnosis is brought to an end without any difficulty by

the hypnotist’s authority asserted in the words: ‘Wake up!’ After the

deepest hypnosis there is no recollection of anything that has been

experienced during it under the hypnotist’s influence. That portion of

the  subject’s  mental  life  remains  cut  off,  as  it  were,  from  the  rest.

Other subjects retain a dream-like memory, and yet others remember

everything but report that they have been under an irresistible mental

compulsion.

 


                          Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment

                                                                                      1600

 

 

   The scientific gain brought to physicians and psychologists by a

knowledge of the facts of hypnotism can scarcely be exaggerated. But

in order to gauge the practical importance of the new discoveries we

must put a physician in place of the hypnotist and a patient in place of

the hypnotic subject. Hypnosis would then seem pre-ordained to fulfilall the physician’s requirements, in so far as he seeks to act towards

the patient as a ‘mind-doctor’. Hypnosis endows the physician with an

authority such as was probably never possessed by the priest or the

miracle man, since it concentrates the subject’s whole interest upon

the figure of the physician; it does away with the autocratic power of

the patient’s mind which, as we have seen, interferes so capriciously

with the influence of the mind over the body; it automatically produces

an increase of the mind’s control over the body, such as is normally to

be observed only as an effect of the most powerful emotions; and,

owing to the possibility of arranging that the instructions given to the

patient during hypnosis shall only become manifest subsequently, in

his  normal  state  -  owing,  that  is,  to  post-hypnotic  suggestion  -,

hypnosis  enables  the  physician  to  use  the  great  power  he  wields

during hypnosis in order to bring about changes in the patient in his

waking condition. A simple pattern of procedure would thus seem to

emerge for the purposes of mental treatment: the physician puts the

patient into a state of hypnosis, he suggests to him (according to the

particular circumstances) that he is not ill and that after waking he will

not be aware of his symptoms. The physician then wakes the patient

up  and  may  feel  confident  that  the  suggestion  has  done  its  duty

against the illness. And if a single application of this procedure were

not sufficient, it could be repeated as many times as necessary.

   There is only one consideration that might discourage the physician

and  the  patient  from  making  use  of  such  a  promising  therapeutic

method:  the  possibility  that  the  advantages  of  hypnotism  might  be

balanced  by  some  damage  -  if,  for  instance,  it  left  behind  it  a

permanent disorder or weakness in the subject’s mind. But enough

experience has already been gained to set aside such doubts: single

hypnotic  treatments  are  completely  harmless  and  even  if  they  are

frequently repeated they are on the whole without bad effects. Only

one point is to be noticed: if circumstances demand a persistent use of

hypnotism, the patient falls into a habit of hypnosis and dependence

on  the  physician  which  cannot  be  among  the  purposes  of  the

therapeutic procedure.

 


                          Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment                                                                                      1601

 

   Thus hypnotic treatment really implies a great extension of medical

power and consequently an advance in therapy. Every sufferer may

be advised to entrust himself to it, so long as it is carried out by an

experienced and trustworthy physician. Hypnosis should, however, be

used in a manner different from what is usual to-day. As a rule this

method of treatment is only embarked upon after every other method

has failed and when the patient is already despondent and dejected.

He has then to leave his own doctor, who cannot or does not employ

hypnotism, and turn to a strange doctor, who as a rule does not or

cannot employ anything else. Both practices are disadvantageous to

the patient. The family doctor should himself be familiar with hypnotic

procedure and he should make use of it from the first, as soon as he

judges  the  illness  and  the  patient  appropriate  for  it.  Wherever

hypnotism  can  be  employed  it  should  be  on  a  par  with  other

therapeutic procedures and should not be regarded as a last resort or

even as a descent from science to quackery. But hypnotism can be

employed not only in all nervous conditions and in disorders due to the

‘imagination’,  as  well  as  for  breaking  morbid  habits  (such  as

alcoholism,  morphine  addiction,  or  sexual  aberrations),  but  also  in

many  organic  diseases,  even  of  an  inflammatory  nature,  in  which,

though the underlying disorder persists, there is a prospect of relieving

the symptoms (such as pains or impediments to movement) which are

troubling  the  patient.  The  selection  of  cases  for  hypnotic  treatment

must depend entirely on the judgement of the physician.

 

   The time has now come, however, to dissipate the notion that with

the  expedient  of  hypnosis  a  period  of  easy  miracle-working  has

dawned for the physician. A number of circumstances must be taken

into  account  which  are  calculated  to  lower  our  expectations  from

hypnotic  therapy  considerably,  and  to  reduce  to  their  proper

proportions the hopes that may have been raised in patients. First and

foremost,  one  of  the  basic  assumptions  turns  out  to  be  untenable:

namely,  that  hypnosis  makes  it  possible  to  deprive  patients  of  the

interfering autocratic element in their mental behaviour. In fact they

retain  it,  and  manifest  it  even  in  their  attitude  to  the  attempt  tohypnotize  them.  It  was  stated  above  that  some  eighty  per  cent  of

people  can  be  hypnotized;  but  that  high  figure  is  only  reached  by

including among the positive cases any that show the slightest sign of

being  influenced.  Really  deep  hypnoses,  with  complete  tractability,

such as are chosen as examples in describing the state, are actually

rare  or  at  all  events  not  as  frequent  as  one  would  wish  from  the

therapeutic  point  of  view.  The  impression  made  by  this  fact  can,

however, in turn be modified when it is borne in mind that depth of

hypnosis and tractability to suggestions do not go pari passu; so that

one often sees good suggestive results where there is no more than a

slight  hypnotic  insensibility.  But  even  if  we  consider  hypnotic

tractability independently, as being the more essential feature of the

condition,  it  has  to  be  admitted  that  different  people  show  their

idiosyncrasies by only letting themselves be influenced up to a certain

degree of tractability, at which point they come to a halt. Thus different

people  show  a  very  varying  degree  of  suitability  for  hypnotic

treatment.  If  it  were  possible  to  find  a  means  by  which  all  these

various grades of the hypnotic state could be intensified to the point of

complete  hypnosis,  the  idiosyncrasies  of  patients  would  once  more

have been eliminated and the ideal of mental treatment would have

been  attained.  But  this  advance  has  not  yet  been  made;  it  still

depends  far  more  on  the  patient  than  on  the  physician  with  what

degree of tractability a suggestion will be received - it depends once

more, that is, upon the patient’s choice.

 


                          Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment

                                                                                      1602

 

      And  there  is  another,  still  more  important  consideration.  In

describing the very remarkable results of suggestion, people are only

too ready to forget that here, as in all mental operations, relative size

and strength must be taken into account. If we put a healthy person

into deep hypnosis and then tell him to take a bite out of a potato

under  the  impression  that  it  is  a  pear,  or  if  we  tell  him  that  he  is

meeting one of his acquaintances and must greet him as such, he is

likely to prove completely tractable, because the hypnotized subjecthas no serious reason for resisting the suggestion. But in the case of

other instructions - if, for instance, we ask a naturally modest girl to

uncover herself or if we ask an honest man to steal some valuable

object - we may already find the subject putting up a resistance, which

may even go to the length of his refusing to obey the suggestion. This

teaches  us  that  even  in  the  best  hypnosis  suggestion  does  not

exercise unlimited power but only power of a definite strength. The

hypnotic subject will make small sacrifices, but, just as though he were

awake, he hesitates before making great ones. If, then, we are dealing

with a patient, and urge him by suggestion to give up his illness, we

perceive that this means a great sacrifice to him and not a small one.

Here the power of suggestion is contending against the force which

created the symptom, and maintains them, and experience shows that

that  force  is  of  quite  a  different  order  of  strength  from  hypnotic

influences.  The  same  patient  who  is  perfectly  tractable  in  putting

himself into any dream-situation one may suggest to him (if it is not

actually objectionable) may remain completely recalcitrant towards a

suggestion  which  denies  the  reality  of,  let  us  say,  an  imaginary

paralysis. There is the further fact, moreover, that precisely neurotic

patients  are  for  the  most  part  bad  hypnotic  subjects,  so  that  the

struggle against the powerful forces by which the illness is rooted in

the  patient’s  mind  has  to  be  waged  not  by  a  complete  hypnotic

influence but only by a fragment of it.

 


                          Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment

                                                                                      1603

 

   Thus suggestion is not certain as a matter of course of defeating the

illness as soon as hypnosis (even deep hypnosis) has been achieved.

A  further  battle  has  to  be  fought,  and  its  outcome  is  very  often

uncertain. A single hypnotic treatment will accordingly effect nothing

against severe disturbances of mental origin. If, however, hypnosis is

repeated, it loses some of the miraculous effect which the patient may

perhaps have anticipated. A succession of hypnoses may eventually

bring  about  by  degrees  the  influence  over  the  illness  which  was

lacking at first, till in the end a satisfactory result is achieved. But ahypnotic treatment such as this may be just as tedious and wearisome

as a treatment of any other kind.

      There  is  yet  another  way  in  which  the  relative  weakness  of

suggestion  is  betrayed  as  compared  with  the  illnesses  it  has  to

combat. It is true that suggestion can bring about a cessation of the

symptoms of an illness - but only for a short time. At the end of this

time  they  return  and  have  to  be  repelled  once  again  by  renewed

hypnosis and suggestion. If this course of events is repeated often

enough, it usually exhausts the patience both of the patient and the

physician and ends in the abandonment of hypnotic treatment. These,

too, are the cases in which the patient becomes dependent on the

physician and a kind of addiction to hypnosis is established.

 


                          Psychical (Or Mental) Treatment

                                                                                      1604

 

   It is a good thing for patients to be aware of these weaknesses in

hypnotic therapy and of the possibilities of disappointment in its use.

The curative power of hypnotic suggestion is something real and it

needs no exaggerated recommendation. On the other hand, it is not

surprising  that  physicians,  to  whom  hypnotic  mental  treatment

promised so much more than it could give, are indefatigable in their

search for other procedures, which would make possible a deeper, or

at  least  a  less  unpredictable,  influence  on  a  patient’s  mind.  It  may

safely be anticipated that systematic modern mental treatment, which

is a quite recent revival of ancient therapeutic methods, will provide

physicians with far more powerful weapons for the fight against illness.

A deeper insight into the processes of mental life, the beginnings of

which are based precisely on hypnotic experience, will point out the

ways and means to this end.

                                                                                       1605

 

              PSYCHOPATHIC CHARACTERS ON THE STAGE

                              (1942 [1905 or 1906])

 


                                                                                      1606

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1607

 

              PSYCHOPATHIC CHARACTERS ON THE STAGE

 

If, as has been assumed since the time of Aristotle, the purpose of

drama is to arouse ‘terror and pity’ and so ‘to purge the emotions’, we

can describe that purpose in rather more detail by saying that it is a

question  of  opening  up  sources  of  pleasure  or  enjoyment  in  our

emotional life, just as, in the case of intellectual activity, joking or fun

open  up  similar  sources,  many  of  which  that  activity  had  made

inaccessible. In this connection the prime factor is unquestionably the

process of getting rid of one’s own emotions by ‘blowing off steam’;

and the consequent enjoyment corresponds on the one hand to the

relief produced by a thorough discharge and on the other hand, no

doubt, to an accompanying sexual excitation; for the latter, as we may

suppose, appears as a by-product whenever an affect is aroused, and

gives people the sense, which they so much desire, of a raising of the

potential  of  their  psychical  state.  Being  present  as  an  interested

spectator at a spectacle or play does for adults what play does for

children,  whose  hesitant  hopes  of  being  able  to  do  what  grown-up

people do are in that way gratified. The spectator is a person who

experiences too little, who feels that he is a ‘poor wretch to whom

nothing  of  importance  can  happen’,  who  has  long  been  obliged  to

damp  down,  or  rather  displace,  his  ambition  to  stand  in  his  own

person at the hub of world affairs; he longs to feel and to act and to

arrange things according to his desires - in short, to be a hero. Andthe  playwright  and  actor  enable  him  to  do  this  by  allowing  him to

identify himself with a hero. They spare him something, too. For the

spectator  knows  quite  well  that  actual  heroic  conduct  such  as  this

would be impossible for him without pains and sufferings and acute

fears,  which  would  almost  cancel  out  the  enjoyment.  He  knows,

moreover, that he has only one life and that he might perhaps perish

even  in  a single  such  struggle  against  adversity.  Accordingly,  his

enjoyment  is  based  on  an  illusion;  that  is  to  say,  his  suffering  is

mitigated by the certainty that, firstly, it is someone other than himself

who is acting and suffering on the stage, and, secondly, that after all it

is  only  a  game,  which  can  threaten  no  damage  to  his  personal

security. In these circumstances he can allow himself to enjoy being a

‘great man’, to give way without a qualm to such suppressed impulses

as  a  craving  for  freedom  in  religious,  political,  social  and  sexual

matters, and to ‘blow off steam’ in every direction in the various grand

scenes that form part of the life represented on the stage.

 


                      Psychopathic Characters On The Stage

                                                                                      1608

 

   Several other forms of creative writing, however, are equally subject

to these same preconditions for enjoyment. Lyric poetry serves the

purpose,  more  than  anything,  of  giving  vent  to  intense  feelings  of

many  sorts  -  just  as  was  at  one  time  the  case  with  dancing.  Epic

poetry aims chiefly at making it possible to feel the enjoyment of a

great  heroic  character  in  his  hour  of  triumph.  But  drama  seeks  to

explore emotional possibilities more deeply and to give an enjoyable

shape even to forebodings of misfortune; for this reason it depicts the

hero in his struggles, or rather (with masochistic satisfaction) in defeat.

This  relation  to  suffering  and  misfortune  might  be  taken  as

characteristic of drama, whether, as happens in serious plays, it is

only concern that is aroused, and afterwards allayed, or whether, as

happens in tragedies, the suffering is actually realized. The fact that

drama  originated  out  of  sacrificial  rites  (cf.  the  goat  and  the

scapegoat) in the cult of the gods cannot be unrelated to this meaning

of drama. It appeases, as it were, a rising rebellion against the divineregulation of the universe, which is responsible for the existence of

suffering. Heroes are first and foremost rebels against God or against

something  divine;  and  pleasure  is  derived,  as  it  seems,  from  the

affliction of a weaker being in the face of divine might - a pleasure due

to  masochistic  satisfaction  as  well  as  to  direct  enjoyment  of  a

character  whose  greatness  is  insisted  upon  in  spite  of  everything.

Here  we  have  a  mood  like  that  of  Prometheus,  but  alloyed  with  a

paltry  readiness  to  let  oneself  be  soothed  for  the  moment  by  a

temporary satisfaction.

 


                      Psychopathic Characters On The Stage

                                                                                      1609

 

   Suffering of every kind is thus the subject-matter of drama, and from

this  suffering  it  promises  to  give  the  audience  pleasure.  Thus  we

arrive at a first precondition of this form of art: that it should not cause

suffering to the audience, that it should know how to compensate, by

means  of  the  possible  satisfactions  involved,  for  the  sympathetic

suffering  which  is  aroused.  (Modern  writers  have  particularly  often

failed  to  obey  this  rule.)  But  the  suffering  represented  is  soon

restricted to mental suffering; for no one wants physical suffering who

knows how quickly all mental enjoyment is brought to an end by the

changes in somatic feeling that physical suffering brings about. If we

are sick we have one wish only: to be well again and to be quit of our

present state. We call for the doctor and medicine, and for the removal

of the inhibition on the play of phantasy which has pampered us into

deriving enjoyment even from our own sufferings. If a spectator puts

himself in the place of someone who is physically ill he finds himself

without any capacity for enjoyment or psychical activity. Consequently

a person who is physically ill can only figure on the stage as a piece of

stage  property  and  not  as  a  hero,  unless,  indeed,  some  peculiar

physical aspects of his illness make psychical activity possible - such,

for instance, as the sick man’s forlorn state in the Philoctetes or the

hopelessness of the sufferers in the class of plays that centre round

consumptives.

   People are acquainted with mental suffering principally in connectionwith the circumstances in which it is acquired; accordingly, dramas

dealing with it require some event out of which the illness shall arise

and they open with an exposition of this event. It is only an apparent

exception  that  some  plays,  such  as  the Ajax  and  the Philoctetes,

introduce the mental illness as already fully established; for in Greek

tragedies, owing to the familiarity of the material, the curtain rises, as

one  might  say,  in  the  middle  of  the  play.  It  is  easy  to  give  an

exhaustive  account  of  the  preconditions  governing  an  event  of  the

kind that is here in question. It must be an event involving conflict and

it  must  include  an  effort  of  will  together  with  resistance.  This

precondition found its first and grandest fulfilment in a struggle against

divinity.  I  have  already  said  that  a  tragedy  of  this  kind  is  one  of

rebellion, in which the dramatist and the audience take the side of the

rebel. The less belief there comes to be in divinity, the more important

becomes the human  regulation  of  affairs;  and  it  is  this  which,  with

increasing insight, comes to be held responsible for suffering. Thus

the hero’s next struggle is against human society, and here we have

the class of social tragedies. Yet another fulfilment of the necessary

precondition is to be found in a struggle between individual men. Such

are  tragedies  of character,  which  exhibit  all  the  excitement  of  an

‘agon’, and which are best played out between outstanding characters

who  have  freed  themselves  from  the  bond  of  human  institutions  -

which, in fact, must have two heroes. Fusions between these two last

classes,  with  a  hero  struggling  against  institutions  embodied  in

powerful characters, are of course admissible without question. Pure

tragedies of character lack the rebellious source of enjoyment, but this

emerges once again no less forcibly in social dramas (in Ibsen for

instance)  than  it  did  in  the  historical  plays  of  the  Greek  classical

tragedians.

 


                      Psychopathic Characters On The Stage

                                                                                      1610

 

   Thus religious drama, social drama and drama of character differ

essentially in the terrain on which the action that leads to the suffering

is fought out. And we can now follow the course of drama on to yetanother  terrain,  where  it  becomes psychological  drama.  Here  the

struggle that causes the suffering is fought out in the hero’s mind itself

- a struggle between different impulses, and one which must have its

end in the extinction, not of the hero, but of one of his impulses; it

must end, that is to say, in a renunciation. Combinations of any kind

between  this  precondition  and  the  earlier  types  are,  of  course,

possible; thus institutions, for instance, can themselves be the cause

of internal conflicts. And this is where we have tragedies of love; for

the suppression of love by social culture, by human conventions, or

the  struggle  between  ‘love  and  duty’,  which  is  so  familiar  to  us  in

opera, are the starting-point of almost endless varieties of situations of

conflict: just as endless, in fact, as the erotic day-dreams of men.

   But the series of possibilities grows wider; and psychological drama

turns into psychopathological drama when the source of the suffering

in which we take part and from which we are meant to derive pleasure

is no longer a conflict between two almost equally conscious impulses

but  between  a  conscious  impulse  and  a  repressed  one.  Here  the

precondition of enjoyment is that the spectator should himself be a

neurotic, for it is only such people who can derive pleasure instead of

simple aversion from the revelation and the more or less conscious

recognition of a repressed impulse. In anyone who is not neurotic this

recognition will meet only with aversion and will call up a readiness to

repeat  the  act  of  repression  which  has  earlier  been  successfully

brought  to  bear  on  the  impulse:  for  in  such  people  a  single

expenditure  of  repression  has  been  enough  to  hold  the  repressed

impulse completely in check. But in neurotics the repression is on the

brink  of  failing;  it  is  unstable  and  needs  a  constant  renewal  of

expenditure,  and  this  expenditure  is  spared  if  recognition  of  the

impulse is brought about. Thus it is only in neurotics that a struggle

can occur of a kind which can be made the subject of a drama; but

even in them the dramatist will provoke not merely an enjoyment of

the liberation but a resistance to it as well.

 


                      Psychopathic Characters On The Stage

                                                                                      1611

    The first of these modern dramas is Hamlet. It has as its subject the

way in which a man who has so far been normal becomes neurotic

owing to the peculiar nature of the task by which he is faced, a man,

that  is,  in  whom  an  impulse  that  has  hitherto  been  successfully

suppressed  endeavours  to  make  its  way  into  action. Hamlet  is

distinguished  by  three  characteristics  which  seem  important  in

connection  with  our  present  discussion.  (1)  The  hero  is  not

psychopathic,  but  only becomes  psychopathic  in  the  course  of  the

action of the play. (2) The repressed impulse is one of those which are

similarly repressed in all of us, and the repression of which is part and

parcel of the foundations of our personal evolution. It is this repression

which is shaken up by the situation in the play. As a result of these

two characteristics it is easy for us to recognize ourselves in the hero:

we are susceptible to the same conflict as he is, since ‘a person who

does not lose his reason under certain conditions can have no reason

to lose’. (3) It appears as a necessary precondition of this form of art

that the impulse that is struggling into consciousness, however clearly

it  is  recognizable,  is  never  given  a  definite  name;  so  that  in  the

spectator too the process is carried through with his attention averted,

and he is in the grip of his emotions instead of taking stock of what is

happening. A certain amount of resistance is no doubt saved in this

way,  just  as,  in  an  analytic  treatment,  we  find  derivatives  of  the

repressed  material  reaching  consciousness,  owing  to  a  lower

resistance, while the repressed material itself is unable to do so. After

all, the conflict in Hamlet is so effectively concealed that it was left to

me to unearth it.

 


                      Psychopathic Characters On The Stage

                                                                                      1612

 

   It may be in consequence of disregarding these three preconditions

that so many other psychopathic characters are as unserviceable on

the  stage  as  they  are  in  real  life.  For  the  victim  of  a  neurosis  is

someone into whose conflict we can gain no insight if we first meet it

in a fully established state. But, per contra, if we recognize the conflict,

we forget that he is a sick man, just as, if he himself recognizes it, heceases to be ill. It would seem to be the dramatist’s business to induce

the same illness in us; and this can best be achieved if we are made

to follow the development of the illness along with the sufferer. This

will be especially necessary where the repression does not already

exist in us but has first to be set up; and this represents a step further

than Hamlet in the use of neurosis on the stage. If we are faced by an

unfamiliar and fully established neurosis, we shall be inclined to send

for the doctor (just as we do in real life) and pronounce the character

inadmissible to the stage.

   This last mistake seems to occur in Bahr’s Die Andere, apart from a

second one which is implicit in the problem presented in the play -

namely, that it is impossible for us to put ourselves with conviction into

the position of believing that one particular person has a prescriptive

right to give the girl complete satisfaction. So that her case cannot

become ours. Moreover, there remains a third mistake: namely that

there is nothing left for us to discover and that our entire resistance is

mobilized  against  this  predetermined  condition  of  love  which  is  so

unacceptable to us. Of the three formal preconditions that I have been

discussing, the most important seems to be that of the diversion of

attention.

   In general, it may perhaps be said that the neurotic instability of the

public  and  the  dramatist’s  skill  in  avoiding  resistances  and  offering

fore-pleasures  can  alone  determine  the  limits  set  upon  the

employment of abnormal characters on the stage.

                                                                                       1613

 

        JOKES AND THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS

                                        (1905)

 


                                                                                      1614

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1615

 

        JOKES AND THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS

 

                              A.  ANALYTIC PART

 

                                            I

 

                                    INTRODUCTION

 

Anyone  who  has  at  any  time  had  occasion  to  enquire  from  the

literature of aesthetics and psychology what light can be thrown on the

nature of jokes and on the position they occupy will probably have to

admit  that  jokes  have  not  received  nearly  as  much  philosophical

consideration  as  they  deserve  in  view  of  the  part  they  play  in  our

mental life. Only a small number of thinkers can be named who have

entered at all deeply into the problems of jokes. Among those who

have discussed jokes, however, are such famous names as those of

the  novelist  Jean  Paul  (Richter)  and  of  the  philosophers  Theodor

Vischer, Kuno Fischer and Theodor Lipps. But even with these writers

the subject of jokes lies in the background, while the main interest of

their  enquiry  is  turned  to  the  more  comprehensive  and  attractive

problem of the comic.

   The first impression one derives from the literature is that it is quite

impracticable to deal with jokes otherwise than in connection with the

comic.   According to Lipps (1898),¹ a joke is ‘something comic which is

entirely  subjective’  -  that  is,  something  comic  ‘which we  produce,

which is attached to action of ours as such, to which we invariably

stand  in  the  relation  of  subject  and  never  of  object,  not  even  of

voluntary object’ (ibid., 80). This is explained further by a remark to the

effect that in general we call a joke ‘any conscious and successful

evocation of what is comic, whether the comic of observation or of

situation’ (ibid., 78).

 

   ¹ It is this book that has given me the courage to undertake this attempt as well as the

possibility of doing so.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1616

 

   Fischer (1889) illustrates the relation of jokes to the comic with the

help of caricature, which in his account he places between them. The

comic is concerned with the ugly in one of its manifestations: ‘If it is

concealed,  it  must  be  uncovered  in  the  light  of  the  comic  way  of

looking at things; if it is noticed only a little or scarcely at all, it must be

brought forward and made obvious, so that it lies clear and open to

the light of day . . . In this way caricature comes about.’ (Ibid., 45.)  -

’Our whole spiritual world, the intellectual kingdom of our thoughts and

ideas, does not unfold itself before the gaze of external observation, it

cannot  be  directly  imagined  pictorially  and  visibly;  and  yet  it  too

contains its inhibitions, its weaknesses and its deformities - a wealth of

ridiculous and comic contrasts. In order to emphasize these and make

them accessible to aesthetic consideration, a force is necessary which

is able not merely to imagine objects directly but itself to reflect on

these images and to clarify them: a force that can illuminate thoughts.

The  only  such  force  is judgement.  A  joke  is  a  judgement  which

produces  a  comic  contrast;  it  has  already  played  a  silent  part  in

caricature, but only in judgement does it attain its peculiar form and

the free sphere of its unfolding.’ (Ibid., 49-50.)

   It will be seen that the characteristic which distinguishes the joke

within the class of the comic is attributed by Lipps to action, to the

active  behaviour  of  the  subject,  but  by  Fischer  to  its  relation  to  itsobject, which he considers is the concealed ugliness of the world of

thoughts. It is impossible to test the validity of these definitions of the

joke  -  indeed,  they  are  scarcely  intelligible  -  unless  they  are

considered in the context from which they have been torn. It would

therefore be necessary to work through these authors’ accounts of the

comic before anything could be learnt from them about jokes. Other

passages,  however,  show  us  that  these  same  authors  are  able  to

describe  essential  and  generally  valid  characteristics  of  the  joke

without any regard to its connection with the comic.

   The characterization of jokes which seems best to satisfy Fischer

himself is as follows: ‘A joke is a playful judgement.’ (Ibid., 51.) By way

of  illustration  of  this,  we  are  given  an  analogy:  ‘just  as  aesthetic

freedom  lies  in  the  playful  contemplation  of  things’  (ibid.,  50).

Elsewhere  (ibid.,  20)  the  aesthetic  attitude  towards  an  object  is

characterized  by  the  condition  that  we  do  not  ask  anything  of  the

object,  especially  no  satisfaction  of  our  serious  needs,  but  content

ourselves  with  the  enjoyment  of  contemplating  it.  The  aesthetic

attitude is playful in contrast to work. - ‘It might be that from aesthetic

freedom  there  might  spring  too  a  sort  of  judging  released  from  its

usual rules and regulations, which, on account of its origin, I will call a

"playful  judgement",  and  that  in  this  concept  is  contained  the  first

determinant,  if  not  the  whole  formula,  that  will  solve  our  problem.

"Freedom  produces  jokes  and  jokes  produce  freedom",  wrote  Jean

Paul. "Joking is merely playing with ideas."' (Ibid., 24.)

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1617

 

      A  favourite  definition  of  joking  has  long  been  the  ability  to  find

similarity between dissimilar things - that is, hidden similarities. Jean

Paul has expressed this thought itself in a joking form: ‘Joking is the

disguised priest who weds every couple.’ Vischer carries this further:

‘He likes best to wed couples whose union their relatives frown upon.’

Vischer  objects,  however,  that  there  are  jokes  where  there  is  no

question of comparing - no question, therefore, of finding a similarity.

So he, slightly diverging from Jean Paul, defines joking as the ability tobind into a unity, with surprising rapidity, several ideas which are in

fact alien to one another both in their internal content and in the nexus

to which they belong. Fischer, again, stresses the fact that in a large

number of joking judgements differences rather than similarities are

found, and Lipps points out that these definitions relate to joking as an

ability possessed by the joker and not to the jokes which he makes.

   Other more or less interrelated ideas which have been brought up

as  defining  or  describing  jokes  are:  ‘a  contrast  of  ideas’,  ‘sense  in

nonsense’, ‘bewilderment and illumination’.

   Definitions such as that of Kraepelin lay stress on contrasting ideas.

A joke is ‘the arbitrary connecting or linking, usually by means of a

verbal association, of two ideas which in some way contrast with each

other’.  A  critic  like  Lipps  had  no  difficulty  in  showing  the  total

inadequacy of this formula; but he does not himself exclude the factor

of contrast, but merely displaces it elsewhere. ‘The contrast remains,

but it is not some contrast between the ideas attached to the words,

but  a  contrast  or  contradiction  between  the  meaning  and  the

meaninglessness of the words.’ (Lipps, 1898, 87.) He gives examples

to  show  how  this  is  to  be  understood.  ‘A  contrast  arises  only

because  .  .  .  we  grant  its  words  a  meaning  which,  again,  we

nevertheless cannot grant them.’ (Ibid., 90.)

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1618

 

   If this last point is developed further, the contrast between ‘sense

and  nonsense’  becomes  significant.  ‘What  at  one  moment  has

seemed  to  us  to  have  a  meaning,  we  now  see  is  completely

meaningless. That is what, in this case, constitutes the comic process

. . . A remark seems to us to be a joke, if we attribute a significance to

it that has psychological necessity and, as soon as we have done so,

deny it again. Various things can be understood by this "significance".

We attach sense to a remark and know that logically it cannot have

any. We discover truth in it, which nevertheless, according to the laws

of experience or our general habits of thought, we cannot find in it. We

grant it logical or practical consequences in excess of its true content,only  to  deny  these  consequences  as  soon  as  we  have  clearly

recognized  the  nature  of  the  remark.  In  every  instance,  the

psychological process which the joking remark provokes in us, and on

which  the  feeling  of  the  comic  rests,  consists  in  the  immediate

transition, from this attaching of sense, from this discovering of truth,

and  from  this  granting  of  consequences,  to  the  consciousness  or

impression of relative nothingness.’ (Ibid., 85.)

   However penetrating this discussion may sound the question may

be raised here whether the contrast between what has meaning and

what is meaningless, on which the feeling of the comic is said to rest,

also contributes to defining the concept of the joke in so far as it differs

from that of the comic.

   The factor of ‘bewilderment and illumination’, too, leads us deep into

the problem of the relation of the joke to the comic. Kant says of the

comic in general that it has the remarkable characteristic of being able

to deceive us only for a moment. Heymans (1896) explains how the

effect of a joke comes about through bewilderment being succeeded

by illumination. He illustrates his meaning by a brilliant joke of Heine’s,

who makes one of his characters, Hirsch-Hyacinth, the poor lottery-

agent, boast that the great Baron Rothschild had treated him quite as

his equal - quite ‘famillionairely’. Here the word that is the vehicle of

the  joke  appears  at  first  simply  to  be  a  wrongly  constructed  word,

something  unintelligible,  incomprehensible,  puzzling.  It  accordingly

bewilders.  The  comic  effect  is  produced  by  the  solution  of  this

bewilderment, by understanding the word. Lipps (1898, 95) adds to

this that this first stage of enlightenment - that the bewildering word

means this or that  - is followed by a second stage, in which we realize

that this meaningless word has bewildered us and has then shown us

its true meaning. It is only this second illumination, this discovery that

a  word  which  is  meaningless  by  normal  linguistic  usage  has  been

responsible for the whole thing - this resolution of the problem into

nothing - it is only this second illumination that produces the comic

effect.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1619 

   Whether the one or the other of these two views seems to us to

throw more light on the question, the discussion of bewilderment and

enlightenment  brings  us  closer  to  a  particular  discovery.  For  if  the

comic effect of Heine’s ‘famillionairely’ depends on the solution of the

apparently meaningless word, the ‘joke’ must no doubt be ascribed to

the formation of that word and to the characteristics of the word thus

formed.

   Another peculiarity of jokes, quite unrelated to what we have just

been considering, is recognized by all the authorities as essential to

them. ‘Brevity is the body and the soul of wit, it is its very self,’ says

Jean Paul (1804, Part II, Paragraph 42), merely modifying what the

old chatterbox Polonius says in Shakespeare’s Hamlet (II, 2):

 

                                                ‘Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit
                                                And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
                                                I will be brief.’

 

In this connection the account given by Lipps (1898, 90) of the brevity

of jokes is significant: ‘A joke says what it has to say, not always in

few words, but in too few words - that is, in words that are insufficient

by strict logic or by common modes of thought and speech. It may

even actually say what it has to say by not saying it.’

   We have already learnt from the connection of jokes with caricature

that they ‘must bring forward something that is concealed or hidden’

(Fischer,  1889,  51).  I  lay  stress  on  this  determinant  once  more,

because it too has more to do with the nature of jokes than with their

being part of the comic.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1620

 

 

   I am well aware that these scanty extracts from the works of writers

upon jokes cannot do them justice. In view of the difficulties standing

in  the  way  of  my  giving  an  unmistakably  correct  account  of  such

complicated  and  subtle  trains  of  thought,  I  cannot  spare  curiousenquirers the labour of obtaining the information they desire from the

original  sources.  But  I  am  not  sure  that  they  will  come  back  fully

satisfied. The criteria and characteristics of jokes brought up by these

authors and collected above - activity, relation to the content of our

thoughts,  the  characteristic  of  playful  judgement,  the  coupling  of

dissimilar  things,  contrasting  ideas,  ‘sense  in  nonsense’,  the

succession of bewilderment and enlightenment, the bringing forward

of what is hidden, and the peculiar brevity of wit - all this, it is true,

seems  to  us  at  first  sight  so  very  much  to  the  point  and  so  easily

confirmed by instances that we cannot be in any danger of underrating

such views. But they are dijecta membra, which we should like to see

combined  into  an  organic  whole.  When  all  is  said  and  done,  they

contribute to our knowledge of jokes no more than would a series of

anecdotes to the description of some personality of whom we have a

right to ask for a biography. We are entirely without insight into the

connection that presumably exists between the separate determinants

-  what,  for  instance,  the  brevity  of  a  joke  can  have  to  do  with  its

characteristic  of  being  a  playful  judgement.  We  need  to  be  told,

further, whether a joke must satisfy all these determinants in order to

be a proper joke, or need only satisfy some, and if so which can be

replaced by others and which are indispensable. We should also wish

to  have  a  grouping  and  classification  of  jokes  on  the  basis  of  the

characteristics considered essential. The classification that we find in

the  literature  rests  on  the  one  hand  on  the  technical  methods

employed in them (e.g. punning or play upon words) and on the other

hand  on  the  use  made  of  them  in  speech  (e.g.  jokes  used  for  the

purposes of caricature or of characterization, or joking snubs).

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1621

 

   We should thus find no difficulty in indicating the aims of any new

attempt to throw light on jokes. To be able to count on success, we

should  have  either  to  approach  the  work  from  new  angles  or  to

endeavour  to  penetrate  further  by  increased  attention  and  deeper

interest. We can resolve that we will at least not fail in this last respect.It is striking with what a small number of instances of jokes recognized

as such the authorities are satisfied for the purposes of their enquiries,

and  how  each  of  them  takes  the  same  ones  over  from  his

predecessors.  We  must  not  shirk  the  duty  of  analysing  the  same

instances that have already served the classical authorities on jokes.

But it is our intention to turn besides to fresh material so as to obtain a

broader  foundation  for  our  conclusions.  It  is  natural  then  that  we

should choose as the subjects of our investigation examples of jokes

by which we ourselves have been most struck in the course of our

lives and which have made us laugh the most.

   Is the subject of jokes worth so much trouble? There can, I think, be

no doubt of it. Leaving on one side the personal motives which make

me wish to gain an insight into the problems of jokes and which will

come to light in the course of these studies, I can appeal to the fact

that there is an intimate connection between all mental happenings - a

fact which guarantees that a psychological discovery even in a remote

field will be of an unpredictable value in other fields. We may also bear

in mind the peculiar and even fascinating charm exercised by jokes in

our society. A new joke acts almost like an event of universal interest;

it is passed from one person to another like the news of the latest

victory. Even men of eminence who have thought it worth while to tell

the story of their origins, of the cities and countries they have visited,

and of the important people with whom they have associated, are not

ashamed in their autobiographies to report their having heard some

excellent joke.¹

 

   ¹ Von Falke’s Memoirs, 1897.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1622

 

                                            II

 

                        THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES

 

Let us follow up a lead presented to us by chance and consider the

first example of a joke that we came across in the preceding chapter.   In the part of his Reisebilder entitled ‘Die Bäder von Lucca’ Heine

introduces  the  delightful  figure  of  the  lottery-agent  and  extractor  of

corns,  Hirsch-Hyacinth  of  Hamburg,  who  boasts  to  the  poet  of  his

relations with the wealthy Baron Rothschild, and finally say: ‘And, as

true  as  God  shall  grant  me  all  good  things,  Doctor,  I  sat  beside

Salomon  Rothschild  and  he  treated  me  quite  as  his  equal  -  quite

famillionairely.’

   Heymans and Lipps used this joke (which is admittedly an excellent

and most amusing one) to illustrate their view that the comic effect of

jokes is derived from ‘bewilderment and illumination’ (see above). We,

however, will leave that question on one side and ask another: ‘What

is it that makes Hirsch-Hyacinth’s remark into a joke?’ There can be

only  two  possible  answers:  either  the  thought  expressed  in  the

sentence possesses in itself the character of being a joke or the joke

resides  in  the  expression  which  the  thought  has  been  given  in  the

sentence. In whichever of these directions the character of being a

joke may lie, we will pursue it further and try to lay hands on it.

   A thought can in general be expressed in various linguistic forms - in

various  words,  that  is  -  which  can  represent  it  with  equal  aptness.

Hirsch-Hyacinth’s remark presents his thought in a particular form of

expression and, as it seems to us, a specially odd form and not the

one which is most easily intelligible. Let us try to express the same

thought as accurately as possible in other words. Lipps has already

done  so,  and  in  that  way  has  to  some  extent  explained  the  poet’s

intention. He writes (1898, 87): ‘Heine, as we understand it, means to

say that his reception was on familiar terms - of the not uncommon

kind, which does not as a rule gain in agreeableness from having a

flavour of millionairedom about it.’ We shall not be altering the sense

of this if we give it another shape which perhaps fits better into Hirsch-

Hyacinth’s speech: ‘Rothschild treated me quite as his equal, quite

familiarly  that  is,  so  far  as  a  millionaire  can.’  ‘A  rich  man’s

condescension’, we should add, ‘always involves something not quite

pleasant for whoever experiences it.’¹

 

   ¹ We shall return to this same joke later on; and we shall then have occasion to make a

correction  in  the  translation  of  it  given  by  Lipps  which  our  own  version  has  taken  as  its
starting-point. This, however, will not affect the discussion that follows here.
                 Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1623

 

   Whether, now, we keep to the one or the other of the two equally

valid  texts  of  the  thought,  we  can  see  that  the  question  we  asked

ourselves is already decided. In this example the character of being a

joke does not reside in the thought. What Heine has put into Hirsch-

Hyacinth’s mouth is a correct and acute observation, an observation of

unmistakable bitterness, which is understandable in a poor man faced

by such great wealth; but we should not venture to describe it as in the

nature of a joke. If anyone is unable in considering the translation to

get away from his recollection of the shape given to the thought by the

poet, and thus feels that nevertheless the thought in itself is also in the

nature of a joke, we can point to a sure criterion of the joking character

having been lost in the translation. Hirsch-Hyacinth’s remark made us

laugh  aloud,  whereas  its  accurate  translation  by  Lipps  or  our  own

version of it, though it may please us and make us reflect, cannot

possibly raise a laugh.

   But if what makes our example a joke is not anything that resides in

its thought, we must look for it in the form, in the wording in which it is

expressed.  We  have  only  to  study  the  peculiarity  of  its  form  of

expression  to  grasp  what  may  be  termed  the  verbal  or  expressive

technique  of  this  joke,  something  which  must  stand  in  an  intimate

relation  with  the  essence  of  the  joke,  since,  if  it  is  replaced  by

something  else,  the  character  and  effect  of  the  joke  disappear.

Moreover,  in  attributing  so  much  importance  to  the  verbal  form  of

jokes we are in complete agreement with the authorities. Thus Fischer

(1889, 72) writes: ‘It is in the first place its sheer form that makes a

judgement into a joke, and we are reminded of a saying of Jean Paul’s

which,  in  a  single  aphorism,  explains  and  exemplifies  this  precise

characteristic of jokes - "Such is the victorious power of sheer position,

whether among warriors or words.”’

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1624

    In what, then, does the ‘technique’ of this joke consist? What has

happened to the thought, as expressed, for instance, in our version, in

order to turn it into a joke that made us laugh so heartily? Two things -

as we learn by comparing our version with the poet’s text. First, a

considerable abbreviation has occurred. In order to express fully the

thought contained in the joke, we were obliged to add to the words ‘R.

treated  me  quite  as  his  equal,  quite  familiarly’  a  postscript  which,

reduced to its shortest terms, ran ‘that is, so far as a millionaire can’.

And even so we felt the need for a further explanatory sentence.¹ The

poet puts it far more shortly: ‘R. treated me quite as his equal - quite

famillionairely.’ In the joke, the whole limitation added by the second

sentence  to  the  first,  which  reports  the  familiar  treatment,  has

disappeared.

      But  not  quite  without  leaving  a  substitute  from  which  we  can

reconstruct it. For a second change has also been made. The word

‘familiär [familiarly]’ in the unjoking expression of the thought has been

transformed in the text of the joke into ‘famillionär [famillionairly]’; and

there can be no doubt that it is precisely on this verbal structure that

the joke’s character as a joke and its power to cause a laugh depend.

The newly constructed word coincides in its earlier portion with the

‘familiär’  of  the  first  sentence,  and  in  its  final  syllables  with  the

‘Millionär  '  of  the  second  sentence.  It  stands,  as  it  were,  for  the

‘Millionär’  portion  of  the  second  sentence  and  thus  for  the whole

second  sentence,  and  so  puts  us  in  a  position  to  infer  the  second

sentence  that  has  been  omitted  in  the  text  of  the  joke.  It  can  be

described as a ‘composite structure’ made up of the two components

‘familiär’  and  ‘Millionär’,  and  it  is  tempting  to  give  a  diagrammatic

picture of the way in which it is derived from those two words:²

 

                                                F A M I L I        Ä R

                                                      M I L I O N Ä R

                                                F A M I L I  ON Ä R

 

   ¹ This is equally true of Lipps’s translation.

   ² The two words are printed one in Roman and the other in Italic type, and the syllables

common to them both are printed in thick type. The second ‘l’, which is scarcely pronounced,
could of course be left out of account. It seems probable that the fact of the two words having
several  syllables  in  common  offered  the  joke-technique  the  occasion  for  constructing  thecomposite word.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1625

 

   The process which has converted the thought into a joke can then

be represented in the following manner, which may at first sight seem

fantastic,  but  nevertheless  produces  precisely  the  outcome  that  is

really before us:

 

                                    ‘R. treated me quite familiär,

                                         that is, so far as a Millionär can.’

 

Let us now imagine that a compressing force is brought to bear on

these  sentences  and  that  for  some  reason  the  second  is  the  less

resistant  one.  It  is  thereupon  made  to  disappear,  while  its  most

important  constituent,  the  word  ‘Millionär’,  which  has  succeeded  in

rebelling against being suppressed, is, as it were, pushed up against

the first sentence, and fused with the element of that sentence which

is so much like it - ‘familiär’. And the chance possibility, which thus

arises, of saving the essential part of the second sentence actually

favours the dissolution of its other, less important, constituents. The

joke is thus generated:

 

                                    ‘R. treated me quite famili  on  är.’

                                                                            /   \

                                                                        (mili)  (är)

 

      If  we  leave  out  of  account  any  such  compressing  force,  which

indeed is unknown to us, the process by which the joke is formed -

that  is,  the  joke-technique  -  in  this  instance  might  be  described  as

‘condensation accompanied by the formation of a substitute’; and in

the  present  example  the  formation  of  the  substitute  consists  in  the

making of a ‘composite word’. This composite word ‘famillionär’, which

is unintelligible in itself but is immediately understood in its context

and recognized as being full of meaning, is the vehicle of the joke’s

laughter compelling effect - the mechanism of which, however, is notmade in any way clearer by our discovery of the joke-technique. In

what way can a linguistic process of condensation, accompanied by

the formation of a substitute by means of a composite word, give us

pleasure and make us laugh?  This is evidently a different problem,

whose  treatment  we  may  postpone  till  we  have  found  a  way  of

approaching it. For the present we will keep to the technique of jokes.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1626

 

   Our expectation that the technique of jokes cannot be a matter of

indifference from the point of view of discovering their essence leads

us  at  once  to  enquire  whether  there  are  other  examples  of  jokes

constructed like Heine’s ‘famillionär’. There are not very many of them,

but  nevertheless  enough  to  make  up  a  small  group  which  are

characterized by the formation of composite words. Heine himself has

derived a second joke from the word ‘Millionär’ - copying from himself,

as it were. In Chapter XIV of his ‘Ideen’ he speaks of a ‘Millionarr’,

which is an obvious combination of ‘Millionär’ and ‘Narr’¹ and, just as

in the first example, brings out a suppressed subsidiary thought.

   Here are some other examples I have come upon. - There is a

certain fountain [Brunnen] in Berlin, the erection of which brought the

Chief Burgomaster Forckenbeck into much disfavour. The Berliners

call  it  the  ‘Forckenbecken’,  and  there  is  certainly  a  joke  in  this

description,  even  though  it  was  necessary  to  replace  the  word

‘Brunnen’ by its obsolete equivalent ‘Becken’ in order to combine it

into a whole with the name of the Burgomaster. - The voice of Europe

once  made  the  cruel  joke  of  changing  a  potentate’s  name  from

Leopold to Cleopold, on account of the relations he had at one time

with  a  lady  with  the  first  name  of  Cleo.  This  undoubted  product  of

condensation keeps alive an annoying allusion at the cost of a single

letter.  -  Proper  names  in  general  fall  easy  victims  to  this  kind  of

treatment by the joke-technique. There were in Vienna two brothers

named Salinger, one of whom was a Börsensensal. This provided a

handle for calling him ‘Sensalinger’, while his brother, to distinguish

him,  was  given  the  unflattering  name  of  ‘Scheusalinger’²  This  wasconvenient, and certainly a joke; I cannot say whether it was justified.

But jokes do not as a rule enquire much into that.

 

   ¹ [The German for ‘fool’.]

   ² [‘Scheusal’ means ‘monstrous creature’.]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1627

 

   I have been told the following condensation joke. A young man who

had  hitherto  led  a  gay  life  abroad  paid  a  call,  after  a  considerable

absence, on a friend living here. The latter was surprised to see an

Ehering  [wedding-ring]  on  his  visitor’s  hand,  ‘What?’  he  exclaimed,

‘are you married?’ ‘Yes’, was the reply, ‘Trauring but true.’¹ The joke is

an  excellent  one.  The  word  ‘Trauring’  combines  both  components:

‘Ehering’ changed into ‘Trauring’ and the sentence ‘traurig, aber wahr

[sad but true]’. The effect of the joke is not interfered with by the fact

that here the composite word is not, like ‘famillionär’, an unintelligible

and otherwise non-existent structure, but one which coincides entirely

with one of the two elements represented.

   In the course of conversation I myself once unintentionally provided

the  material  for  a  joke  that  is  once  again  quite  analogous  to

‘famillionär’. I was talking to a lady about the great services that had

been  rendered  by  a  man  of  science  who  I  considered  had  been

unjustly neglected. ‘Why,’ she said, ‘the man deserves a monument.’

‘Perhaps he will get one some day,’ I replied, ‘but momentan he has

very little success.’ ‘Monument’ and ‘momentan’ are opposites. The

lady proceeded to unite them: ‘Well, let us wish him a monumentan²

success.’

 

   ¹ [‘Traurig’ would have meant ‘sad’. ‘Trauring’ is a synonym for ‘Ehering.’]

   ² [A non-existing word. ‘Monumental’ (as in English) would have been expected.]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1628

    I owe a few examples in foreign languages, which show the same

mechanism  of  condensation  as  our  ‘famillionär’,  to  an  excellent

discussion of the same subject in English by A. A. Brill (1911).

   The English author De Quincey, Brill tells us, somewhere remarked

that old people are inclined to fall into their ‘anecdotage’. This word is

a fusion of the partly overlapping words

 

                                    ANECDOTE

and                                        DOTAGE.

 

   In an anonymous short story Brill once found the Christmas season

described as ‘the alcoholidays’ - a similar fusing of

 

                                    ALCOHOL

and                                        HOLIDAYS.

 

   After Flaubert had published his celebrated novel Salammbô, the

scene of which is laid in ancient Carthage, Sainte-Beuve laughed at it,

on account of its elaboration of detail, as being ‘Carthaginoiserie’;

 

                                    CARTHAGINOIS

                                                CHINOISERIE.

 

   But the best example of a joke of this group originated from one of

the leading men in Austria, who, after important scientific and public

work, now fills one of the highest offices in the State. I have ventured

to make use of the jokes which are ascribed to him, and all of which in

fact bear the same impress, as material for these researches,¹ above

all because it would have been hard to find any better.

   Herr N.’s attention was drawn one day to the figure of a writer who

had become well-known from a series of undeniably boring essays

which he had contributed to a Vienna daily paper. All of these essays

dealt with small episodes in the relations of the first Napoleon with

Austria. The author had red hair. As soon as Herr N. heard his name

mentioned he asked: ‘Is not that the roter Fadian² that runs through

the story of the Napoleonids?’

    ¹ Have I the right to do so? At least I have not obtained my knowledge of these jokes

through an indiscretion. They are generally known in this city (Vienna) and are to be found in
everyone’s mouth. A number of them have been given publicity by Eduard Hanslick in the
Neue Freie Presse and in his autobiography. As regards the others, I must offer my apologies
for any possible distortions, which, in the case of oral tradition, are scarcely to be avoided.

    ² [‘Roter’  means  ‘red’,  ‘scarlet’.  ‘Fadian’  means  ‘dull  fellow’.  The  termination  ‘-ian’  is

occasionally added to an adjective, giving the somewhat contemptuous sense of ‘fellow’. Thus
‘grob’  means  ‘coarse’,  ‘Grobian’  means  ‘coarse  fellow:  ‘dumm’  means  ‘stupid’,  ‘Dummian’
means ‘stupid fellow’. The adjective ‘fade’ or ‘fad’ means (like its French equivalent) ‘insipid’,
‘dull’. Finally, ‘Faden’ means ‘thread’.]
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1629

 

   In order to discover the technique of this joke, we must apply to it

the process of reduction which gets rid of the joke by changing the

mode  of  expression  and  instead  introducing  the  original  complete

meaning, which can be inferred with certainty from a good joke. Herr

N.’s joke about the ‘roter Fadian’ proceeds from two components - a

depreciatory  judgement  upon  the  writer  and  a  recollection  of  the

famous  simile  with  which  Goethe  introduces  the  extracts  ‘From

Ottilie’s  Diary’  in  the Wahlverwandtschaften.¹  The  ill-tempered

criticism may have run: ‘So this is the person who is for ever and ever

writing nothing but boring stories about Napoleon in Austria!’ Now this

remark is not in the least a joke. Nor is Goethe’s pretty analogy a joke,

and it is certainly not calculated to make us laugh. It is only when the

two are brought into connection with each other and submitted to the

peculiar process of condensation and fusion that a joke emerges - and

a joke of the first order.²

 

   ¹ ‘We hear of a peculiar practice in the English Navy. Every rope in the king’s fleet, from the

strongest to the weakest, is woven in such a way that a roter Faden [scarlet thread] runs
through its whole length. It cannot be extracted without undoing the whole rope, and it proves
that even the smallest piece is crown property. In just the same way a thread of affection and
dependence runs through Ottilie’s diary, binding it all together and characterizing the whole of
it.’ Goethe, Sophienausgabe, 20, 212.)

   ² I need hardly point out how little this observation, which can invariably be made, fits in

with the assertion that a joke is a playful judgement.
                 Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1630

 

   The linking of the disparaging judgement upon the boring historian

with the pretty analogy in the Wahlverwandtschaften must have taken

place (for reasons which I cannot yet make intelligible) in a less simple

manner than in many similar cases. I shall try to represent what was

probably  the  actual  course  of  events  by  the  following  construction.

First, the element of the constant recurrence of the same theme in the

stories may have awoken a faint recollection in Herr N. of the familiar

passage  in  the Wahlverwandtschaften,  which  is  as  a  rule  wrongly

quoted: ‘it runs like a roter Faden [scarlet thread].’ The ‘roter Faden’ of

the analogy now exercised a modifying influence of the expression of

the  first  sentence,  as  a  result  of  the  chance  circumstance  that  the

person insulted was also rot [red] - that is to say had red hair. It may

then have run: ‘So it is that red person who writes the boring stories

about Napoleon!’ And now the process began which brought about the

condensation of the two pieces. Under its pressure, which had found

its first fulcrum in the sameness of the element ‘rot’, the ‘boring’ was

assimilated to the ‘Faden [thread]’ and was changed into ‘fad [dull]’;

after  this  the  two  components  were  able  to  fuse  together  into  the

actual text of the joke, in which, in this case, the quotation has an

almost  greater  share  than  the  derogatory  judgement,  which  was

undoubtedly present alone to begin with.

 

‘So it is that red person who writes this fade stuff about N[apoleon].

 The             red                                  Faden that runs through

everything.’

          —————————————————————————————————-

‘Is  not  that  the red  Fadian  that  runs  through  the  story  of  the

N[apoleonids]?’

 

   In a later chapter I shall add a justification, but also a correction, to

this account, when I come to analyse this joke from points of view

other than purely formal ones. But whatever else about it may be in

doubt, there can be no question that a condensation has taken place.

The  result  of  the  condensation  is,  on  the  one  hand,  once  again  aconsiderable  abbreviation;  but  on  the  other  hand,  instead  of  the

formation of a striking composite word, there is an interpenetration of

the constituents of the two components. It is true that ‘roter Faden’

would  be  capable  of  existing  as  a  mere  term  of  abuse;  but  in  our

instance it is certainly a product of condensation.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1631

 

   If at this point a reader should become indignant at a method of

approach which threatens to ruin his enjoyment of jokes without being

able to throw any light on the source of that enjoyment, I would beg

him to be patient for the moment. At present we are only dealing with

the technique of jokes; and the investigation even of this promises

results, if we pursue it sufficiently far.

   The analysis of the last example has prepared us to find that, if we

meet  with  the  process  of  condensation  in  still  other  examples,  the

substitute for what is suppressed may be not a composite structure,

but some other alteration of the form of expression. We can learn what

this other form of substitute may be from another of Herr N.’s jokes.

      ‘I  drove  with  him tête-à-bête.’  Nothing  can  be  easier  than  the

reduction of this joke. Clearly it can only mean: ‘I drove with X tête-à-

tête, and X is a stupid ass.’

   Neither of these sentences is a joke. They could be put together: ‘I

drove with that stupid ass X tête-à-tête’, and that is not a joke either.

The joke only arises if the ‘stupid ass’ is left out, and, as a substitute

for it, the ‘t’ in one ‘tête’ is turned into a ‘b’. With this slight modification

the suppressed ‘ass’ has nevertheless once more found expression.

The  technique  of  this  group  of  jokes  can  be  described  as

‘condensation  accompanied  by  slight  modification’,  and  it  may  be

suspected that the slighter the modification the better will be the joke.

      The  technique  of  another  joke  is  similar,  though  not  without  its

complication. In the course of a conversation about someone in whom

there  was  much  to  praise,  but  much  to  find  fault  with,  Herr  N.

remarked: ‘Yes, vanity is one of his four Achilles heels.’¹ In this case

the  slight  modification  consists  in  the  fact  that,  instead  of  the oneAchilles heel which the hero himself must have possessed, four are

here in question. Four heels - but only an ass has four heels. Thus the

two  thoughts  that  are  condensed  in  the  joke  ran:  ‘Apart  from  his

vanity, Y is an eminent man; all the same I don’t like him - he’s an ass

rather than a man.’²

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1912:] It seems that this joke was applied earlier by Heine to Alfred de

Musset.

    ² One  of  the  complications  in  the  technique  of  this  example  lies  in  the  fact  that  the

modification by which the omitted insult is replaced must be described as an allusion to the
latter, since it only leads to it by a process of inference. For another factor that complicates
the technique here, see below.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1632

 

   I happened to hear another similar, but much simpler, joke in statu

nascendi  in  a  family  circle.  Of  two  brothers  at  school,  one  was  an

excellent and the other a most indifferent scholar. Now it happened

once that the exemplary boy too came to grief at school; and their

mother  referred  to  this  while  expressing  her  concern  that  it  might

mean  the  beginning  of  a  lasting  deterioration.  The  boy  who  had

hitherto  been  overshadowed  by  his  brother  readily  grasped  the

opportunity. ‘Yes’, he said, ‘Karl’s going backwards on all fours.’

   The modification here consists in a short addition to the assurance

that  he  too  was  of  the  opinion  that  the  other  boy  was  going

backwards.  But  this  modification  represented  and  replaced  a

passionate plea on his own behalf: ‘You mustn’t think he’s so much

cleverer than I am simply because he’s more successful at school.

After all he’s only a stupid ass - that’s to say, much stupider than I

am.’

   Another, very well-known joke of Herr N.’s offers a neat example of

condensation with slight modification. He remarked of a personage in

public life: ‘he has a great future behind him.’ The man to whom this

joke referred was comparatively young, and he had seemed destined

by his birth, education and personal qualities to succeed in the future

to the leadership of a great political party and to enter the government

at its head. But times changed; the party became inadmissible as agovernment,  and  it  could  be  foreseen  that  the  man  who  had  been

predestined  to  be  its  leader  would  come  to  nothing  as  well.  The

shortest reduced version by which this joke could be replaced would

run: ‘The man has had a great future before him, but he has it no

longer.’ Instead of the ‘had’ and the second clause, there was merely

the small change made in the principal clause of replacing ‘before’ by

its contrary, ‘behind’.¹

 

   ¹ There is another factor operating in the technique of this joke which I reserve for later

discussion. It concerns the actual nature of the modification (representation by the opposite or
by something absurd). There is nothing to prevent the joke-technique from simultaneously
employing several methods; but these we can only get to know one by one.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1633

 

   Herr N. made use of almost the same modification in the case of a

gentleman  who  became  Minister  for  Agriculture  with  the  sole

qualification of being himself a farmer. Public opinion had occasion to

recognize that he was the least gifted holder of the office that there

had ever been. When he had resigned his office and retired to his

farming interests, Herr N. said of him, ‘Like Cincinnatus, he has gone

back to his place before the plough.’

   The Roman, however, who had also been called away to office from

the plough, returned to his place behind the plough. What went before

the plough, both then and to-day, was only - an ox.¹

   Karl Kraus was responsible for another successful condensation

with slight modification. He wrote of a certain yellow-press journalist

that  he  had  travelled  to  one  of  the  Balkan  States  by

‘Orienterpresszug’.² There is no doubt that this word combines two

others:  ‘Orientexpresszug  [Orient  Express]’  and  ‘Erpressung

[blackmail]’. Owing to the context, the element ‘Erpressung’ emerges

only as a modification of the ‘Orientexpresszug’ - a word called for by

the verb [‘travelled’]. This joke, which presents itself in the guise of a

misprint, has yet another claim on our interest.

   This series of examples could easily be further increased; but I do

not think we require any fresh instances to enable us to grasp clearlythe  characteristics  of  the  technique  in  this  second  group  -

condensation with modification. If we compare the second group with

the  first,  whose  technique  consisted  in  condensation  with  the

formation of composite words, we shall easily see that the difference

between them is not an essential one and that the transitions between

them  are  fluid.  Both  the  formation  of  composite  words  and

modification can be subsumed under the concept of the formation of

substitutes; and, if we care to, we can also describe the formation of a

composite  word  as  a  modification  of  the  basic  word  by  a  second

element.

 

   ¹ [‘Ochs’ in German has much the same meaning as ‘ass’ in English.]

   ² [A non-existent word.]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1634

 

 

   But here we may make a first stop and ask ourselves with what

factor known to us from the literature of the subject this first finding of

ours coincides, wholly or in part. Evidently with the factor of brevity,

which Jean Paul describes as ‘the soul of wit’ (p. 1619 above). But

brevity does not in itself constitute a joke, or otherwise every laconic

remark would be one. The joke’s brevity must be of a particular kind. It

will be recalled that Lipps has tried to describe this particular brevity of

jokes  more  precisely  (p.  1619).  Here  our  investigation  contributes

something and shows that the brevity of jokes is often the outcome of

a particular process which has left behind in the wording of the joke a

second trace - the formation of a substitute. By making use of the

procedure of reduction, which seeks to undo the peculiar process of

condensation, we also find, however, that the joke depends entirely on

its verbal expression as established by the process of condensation.

Our whole interest now turns, of course, to this strange process, which

has  hitherto  scarcely  been  examined.  Nor  can  we  in  the  least

understand how all that is valuable in a joke, the yield of pleasure that

the joke brings us, can originate from that process.

   Are processes similar to those which we have described here as thetechnique of jokes known already in any other field of mental events?

They are - in a single field, and an apparently very remote one. In

1900  I  published  a  book  which,  as  its  title  (The  Interpretation  of

Dreams)  indicates,  attempted  to  throw  light  on  what  is  puzzling  in

dreams  and  to  establish  them  as  derivatives  of  our  normal  mental

functioning. I found occasion there to contrast the manifest, and often

strange, content  of  the  dream  with  the latent,  but  perfectly  logical,

dream-thoughts from which the dream is derived; and I entered into an

investigation of the processes which make the dream out of the latent

dream-thoughts, as well as of the psychical forces which are involved

in that transformation. To the totality of these transforming processes I

gave the name of the ‘dream-work’; and I have described as a part of

this dream-work a process of condensation which shows the greatest

similarity to the one found in the technique of jokes - which, like it,

leads to abbreviation, and creates substitute-formations of the same

character.  Everyone  will  be  familiar,  from  a  recollection  of  his  own

dreams, with the composite structures both of people and of things

which emerge in dreams. Indeed, dreams even construct them out of

words,  and  they  can  then  be  dissected  in  analysis.  (For  instance,

‘Autodidasker’ = ‘Autodidakt’ + ‘Lasker’.) On other occasions - much

more  often,  in  fact  -  what  the  work  of  condensation  in  dreams

produces  is  not  composite  structures  but  pictures  which  exactly

resemble one thing or one person except for an addition or alteration

derived from another source - modifications, that is, just like those in

Herr N.’s jokes. We cannot doubt that in both cases we are faced by

the  same  psychical  process,  which  we  may  recognize  from  its

identical results. Such a far-reaching analogy between the technique

of jokes and the dream-work will undoubtedly increase our interest in

the former and raise an expectation in us that a comparison between

jokes and dreams may help to throw light on jokes. But we will refrain

from entering upon this task, for we must reflect that so far we have

investigated the technique of only a very small number of jokes, so

that we cannot tell whether the analogy by which we are proposing to

be guided will in fact hold good. We will therefore turn away from the

comparison  with  dreams  and  go  back  to  the  technique  of  jokes,

though at this point we shall, as it were, be leaving a loose end to our

enquiry,  which  at  some  later  stage  we  may  perhaps  pick  up  oncemore.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1635

 

 

      The  first  thing  that  we  want  to  learn  is  whether  the  process  of

condensation  with  substitute-formation  is  to  be  discovered  in  every

joke, and can therefore be regarded as a universal characteristic of

the technique of jokes.

   Here I recall a joke which has remained in my memory owing to the

special circumstances in which I heard it. One of the great teachers of

my young days, whom we thought incapable of appreciating a joke

and from whom we had never heard a joke of his own, came into the

Institute one day laughing, and, more readily than usual, explained to

us what it was that had caused his cheerful mood. ‘I have just read an

excellent joke’, he said. ‘A young man was introduced into a Paris

salon, who was a relative of the great Jean-Jacques Rousseau and

bore  his  name.  Moreover  he  was  red-haired.  But  he  behaved  so

awkwardly that the hostess remarked critically to the gentleman who

had introduced him: "Vous m’avez fait connaître un jeune homme roux

et sot, mais non pas un Rousseau."'¹ And he laughed again.

   By the nomenclature of the authorities this would be classed as a

‘Klangwitz’,² and one of an inferior sort, with a play upon a proper

name  -  not  unlike  the  joke,  for  instance,  in  the  Capuchin  monk’s

sermon in Wallensteins Lager, which, as is well known, is modelled on

the style of Abraham a Santa Clara:

 

                                                                Lässt sich nennen den Wallenstein,
                                                                ja freilich ist er uns allen ein Stein

                                                                des Anstosses und Ärgernisses.³

 

   But what is the technique of this joke? We see at once that the

characteristic  that  we  may  have  hoped  to  be  able  to  prove  was  a

universal one is absent on the very first fresh occasion. There is no

omission here, and scarcely an abbreviation. The lady herself says

straight out in the joke almost everything that we can attribute to herthoughts. ‘You had raised my expectations about a relative of Jean-

Jacques Rousseau - perhaps a spiritual relative - and here he is: a

red-haired silly young man, a roux et sot.’ It is true that I have been

able to make an interpolation; but this attempt at a reduction has not

got rid of the joke. It remains, and is attached to the identity of sound

of the words

ROSSEAU

—————

ROUX SOT                                                                      

It  thus  proved  that  condensation  with  substitute-formation  has  no

share in the production of this joke.

 

   ¹ [‘You have made me acquainted with a young man who is roux (red-haired) and sot (silly),

but not a Rousseau.’ ‘Roux-sot’ would be pronounced exactly like ‘Rousseau’.]

   ² [‘Sound-joke.’]

   ³ [Literally: ‘He gets himself called Wallenstein, and indeed he is for allen (all) of us a Stein

(stone)  of  offence  and  trouble.’]  -  Nevertheless,  as  a  result  of  another  factor,  this  joke
deserves to be more highly thought of. But this can only be indicated later on.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1636

 

   What besides? Fresh attempts at reduction can teach me that the

joke  remains  resistant  until  the  name  ‘Rousseau’  is  replaced  by

another. If, for instance, I put ‘Racine’ instead of it, the lady’s criticism,

which remains just as possible as before, loses every trace of being a

joke. I now know where I have to look for the technique of this joke,

though  I  may  still  hesitate  over  formulating  it.  I  will  try  this:  the

technique of the joke lies in the fact that one and the same word - the

name - appears in it used in two ways, once as a whole, and again cut

up into its separate syllables like a charade.

   I can bring up a few examples which have an identical technique.

   An Italian lady is said to have revenged herself for a tactless remark

of the first Napoleon’s with a joke having this same technique of the

double use of a word. At a court ball, he said to her, pointing to her

fellow countrymen: ‘Tutti gli Italiani danzano si male.’ To which she

made the quick repartee: ‘Non tutti, ma buona parte.’¹ (Brill, 1911.)      Once  when  the Antigone  was  produced  in  Berlin,  the  critics

complained that the production was lacking in the proper character of

antiquity. Berlin wit made the criticism its own in the following words:

‘Antik? Oh, nee.’² (Vischer, 1846-57, 1, 429, and Fischer, 1889.)

   An analogous dividing-up joke is at home in medical circles. If one

enquires from a youthful patient whether he has ever had anything to

do with masturbation, the answer is sure to be: ‘O na, nie!’³

 

   ¹ [‘All Italians dance so badly!’ ‘Not all, but buona parte (a good part)' - the original, Italian

version of Napoleon’s surname.]

     ² [‘Antique?  Oh,  no.’  The  words,  in  Berlin  dialect,  approximate  in  pronunciation  to

‘Antigone’.]

   ³ [‘Oh, no, never!’ ‘Onanie (onanism)' is the common German word for ‘masturbation’.]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1637

 

   In all three of these examples, which should suffice for this species,

we see the same joke-technique: in each of them a name is used

twice,  once  as  a  whole  and  again  divided  up  into  its  separate

syllables, which, when they are thus separated, give another sense.¹

   The multiple use of the same word, once as a whole and again in

the  syllables  into  which  it  falls,  is  the  first  instance  we  have  come

across  of  a  technique  differing  from  that  of  condensation.  But  the

profusion of examples that have met us must convince us after a little

reflection that the newly-discovered technique can scarcely be limited

to this one method. There are a number of possible ways - how many

it is as yet quite impossible to guess - in which the same word or the

same verbal material can be put to multiple uses in one sentence. Are

all these possibilities to be regarded as technical methods of making

jokes? It seems to be so. And the examples of jokes which follow will

prove it.

 

   ¹ The goodness of these jokes depends on the fact that another technical method of a far

higher order is simultaneously brought into use (see below). - At this point I may also draw
attention to a connection between jokes and riddles. The philosopher Brentano composed a
kind of riddle in which a small number of syllables had to be guessed which when they were
put together into words gave a different sense according as they were grouped in one way oranother.  For  instance:  ‘.  .  .  liess  mich  das  Platanenblatt  ahnen’  [‘the  plane-tree  leaf
(Platanenblatt) led me to think (ahnen)', where ‘Platanen’ and ‘blatt ahnen’ sound almost the
same]. Or: ‘wie du dem Inder hast verschrieben, in der Hast verschrieben’ [‘when you wrote a
prescription for the Indian, in your haste you made a slip of the pen’, where ‘Inder hast (have
to the Indian)' and ‘in der hast (in your haste)' sound the same.]
   The syllables to be guessed were inserted into the appropriate place in the sentence under
the disguise of the repeated sound ‘dal’. [Thus the English example would be stated: ‘he said
he would daldaldaldal daldaldaldal.’] A colleague of the philosopher’s took a witty revenge on
him  when  he  heard  of  the  elderly  man’s  engagement.  He  asked:  ‘Daldaldal  daldaldal?’  -
‘Brentano brennt-a-no?’ [‘Brentano - does he still burn?’]
   What is the difference between these daldal riddles and the jokes in the text above? In the
former the technique is given as a precondition and the wording has to be guessed; while in
the jokes the wording is given and the technique is disguised.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1638

 

   In the first place, one can take the same verbal material and merely

make some alteration in its arrangement. The slighter the alteration -

the more one has the impression of something different being said in

the same words - the better is the joke technically.

   ‘Mr. and Mrs. X live in fairly grand style. Some people think that the

husband has earned a lot and so has been able to lay by a bit [sich

etwas zurückgelegt]; others again think that the wife has lain back a

bit [sich etwas zurückgelegt] and so has been able to earn a lot.’¹

      A  really  diabolically  ingenious  joke!  And  achieved  with  such  an

economy  of  means!  ‘Earned  a  lot  -  lay  by  a  bit  [sich  etwas

zurückgelegt]; lain back a bit [sich etwas zurückgelegt] - earned a lot.’

It is merely the inversion of these two phrases that distinguishes what

is said about the husband from what is hinted about the wife. Here

again, by the way, this is not the whole technique of the joke.²

   A wide field of play lies open to the technique of jokes if we extend

the ‘multiple use of the same material’ to cover cases in which the

word (or words) in which the joke resides may occur once unaltered

but the second time with a slight modification. Here, for instance, is

another of Herr N.’s jokes:

   He heard a gentleman who was himself born a Jew make a spiteful

remark  about  the  Jewish  character.  ‘Herr  Hofrat’,  he  said,  ‘your

antesemitism was well-known to me; your anti-semitism is new to me.’

      Here  only  a  single  letter  is  altered,  whose  modification  couldscarcely be noticed in careless speech. The example reminds us of

Herr N.’s other modification jokes (on p. 1631 ff.), but the difference is

that here there is no condensation; everything that has to be said is

said in the joke itself: ‘I know that earlier you were yourself a Jew; so I

am surprised that you should speak ill of Jews.’

 

   ¹ Daniel Spitzer, 1912, 1, 280.

   ² [Footnote added 1912:] This is also true of the excellent joke reported by Brill from Oliver

Wendell Holmes: ‘Put not your trust in money, but put your money in trust.’ Here there is
promise of an antithesis but it does not materialize. The second part of the sentence cancels
the antithesis. Incidentally, this is a good instance of the untranslatability of jokes with this
technique.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1639

 

   An admirable example of a modification joke of this kind is the well-

known cry: ‘Traduttore - Traditore!’¹ The similarity, amounting almost

to  identity,  of  the  two  words  represents  most  impressively  the

necessity which forces a translator into crimes against his original.²

   The variety of possible slight modifications in such jokes is so great

that none of them exactly resembles another.

   Here is a joke that is said to have been made during an examination

in  jurisprudence.  The  candidate  had  to  translate  a  passage  in  the

Corpus Juris: ‘"Labeo ait" . . . I fall, says he.’ ‘You fail, say I’, replied

the  examiner,  and  the  examination  was  at  an  end.  Anyone  who

mistakes the name of the great jurist for a verbal form, and moreover

one  wrongly  recalled,  no  doubt  deserves  nothing  better.  But  the

technique of the joke lies in the fact that almost the same words which

proved the ignorance of the candidate were used to pronounce his

punishment by the examiner. The joke is, moreover, an example of

‘ready repartee’, the technique of which, as we shall see, does not

differ greatly from what we are illustrating here.

   Words are a plastic material with which one can do all kinds of

things.  There  are  words  which,  when  used  in  certain  connections,

have  lost  their  original  full  meaning,  but  which  regain  it  in  other

connections.  A  joke  of  Lichtenberg’s  carefully  singles  out

circumstances in which the watered-down words are bound to regaintheir full meaning:

   ‘"How are you getting along?"³ the blind man asked the lame man.

"As you see", the lame man replied to the blind man.’

   There are, too, words in German that can be taken, according as

they are ‘full’ or ‘empty’, in a different sense, and, indeed, in more than

one. For there can be two different derivatives from the same stem,

one of which has developed into a word with a full meaning and the

other  into  a  watered-down  final  syllable  or  suffix,  both  of  which,

however,  are  pronounced  exactly  the  same.  The  identity  of  sound

between  a  full  word  and  a  watered-down  syllable  may  also  be  a

chance one. In both cases the joke-technique can take advantage of

the conditions thus prevailing in the linguistic material.

 

   ¹ [‘Translator - traitor!’]

    ² [Footnote  added  1912:]  Brill  quotes  a  quite  analogous  modification  joke: Amantes

amentes (lovers are fools).

   ³ [‘Wie geht’s?’ Literally, ‘how do you walk?’]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1640

 

   A joke, for instance, which is attributed to Schleiermacher, is of

importance to us as being an almost pure example of these technical

methods: ‘Eifersucht [jealousy] is a Leidenschaft [passion] which mit

Eifer sucht [with eagerness seeks] what Leiden schafft [causes pain].’

   This is undeniably in the nature of a joke, though not particularly

effective as one. A quantity of factors are absent here which might

mislead us in analysing other jokes so long as we examined each of

those  factors  separately.  The  thought  expressed  in  the  wording  is

worthless; the definition it gives of jealousy is in any case thoroughly

unsatisfactory. There is not a trace of ‘sense in nonsense’, of ‘hidden

meaning’ or of ‘bewilderment and illumination’. No efforts will reveal a

‘contrast of ideas’: a contrast between the words and what they mean

can be found only with great difficulty. There is no sign of abbreviation;

on the contrary, the wording gives an impression of prolixity. And yet it

is  a  joke,  and  even  a  very  perfect  one.  At  the  same  time,  its  only

striking  characteristic  is  the  one  in  the  absence  of  which  the  jokedisappears: the fact that here the same words are put to multiple uses.

We can then choose whether to include this joke in the sub-class of

those in which words are used first as a whole and then divided up

(e.g. Rousseau or Antigone) or in the other sub-class in which the

multiplicity is produced by the full or the watered-down meaning of the

verbal constituents. Apart from this, only one other factor deserves

notice from the point of view of the technique of jokes. We find here an

unusual state of things established: a kind of ‘unification’ has taken

place,  since  ‘Eifersucht  [jealousy]’  is  defined  by  means  of  its  own

name - by means of itself, as it were. This, as we shall see, is also a

technique of jokes. These two factors, therefore, must in themselves

be sufficient to give a remark the character of a joke.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1641

 

   If now we enter still further into the variety of forms of the ‘multiple

use’ of the same word, we suddenly notice that we have before us

examples of ‘double meaning’ or ‘play upon words’ - forms which have

long been generally known and recognized as a technique of jokes.

Why have we taken the trouble to discover afresh what we might have

gathered from the most superficial essay on jokes? To begin with, we

can  only  plead  in  our  own  justification  that  we  have  nevertheless

brought  out  another  aspect  of  the  same  phenomenon  of  linguistic

expression. What is supposed by the authorities to show the character

of jokes as a kind of ‘play’ has been classified by us under the heading

of ‘multiple use’.

      The  further  cases  of  multiple  use,  which  can  also  be  brought

together under the title of ‘double meaning’ as a new, third group, can

easily  be  divided  into  sub-classes,  which,  it  is  true,  cannot  be

separated from one another by essential distinctions any more than

can the third group as a whole from the second. We find:

   (a) Cases of the double meaning of a name and of a thing denoted

by  it.  For  instance:  ‘Discharge  thyself  of  our  company,  Pistol!‘

(Shakespeare.)

   ‘More Hof than Freiung ' said a witty Viennese about a number ofpretty girls who had been admired for many years but had never found

a  husband.  ‘Hof’  and  ‘Freiung’  are  the  names  of  two  neighbouring

squares in the centre of Vienna.

      ‘Vile  Macbeth  does  not  rule  here  in  Hamburg:  the  ruler  here  is

Banko.’ (Heine.)

   Where the name cannot be used (we should perhaps say ‘misused’)

unaltered, a double meaning can be got out of it by one of the slight

modifications we are familiar with:

   ‘Why’, it was asked, in times that are now past, ‘have the French

rejected Lohengrin?’ ‘On Elsa’s (Elsass [Alsace]) account.’

      (b)  Double  meaning  arising  from  the  literal  and  metaphorical

meanings of a word. This is one of the most fertile sources for the

technique of jokes. I will quote only one example:

      A  medical  friend  well-known  for  his  jokes  once  said  to  Arthur

Schnitzler the dramatist: ‘I’m not surprised that you’ve become a great

writer. After all your father held a mirror up to his contemporaries.’ The

mirror which was handled by the dramatist’s father, the famous Dr.

Schnitzler, was the laryngoscope. A well-known remark of Hamlet’s

tells us that the purpose of a play, and so also of the dramatist who

creates it, is ‘to hold, as ‘twere, the mirror up to nature; to show virtue

her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of

the time his form and pressure.’ (III, 2.)

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1642

 

      (c)  Double  meaning  proper,  or  play  upon  words.  This  may  be

described as the ideal case of ‘multiple use’. Here no violence is done

to the word; it is not cut up into its separate syllables, it does not need

to be subjected to any modification, it does not have to be transferred

from  the  sphere  it  belongs  to  (the  sphere  of  proper  names,  for

instance)  to  another  one.  Exactly  as  it  is  and  as  it  stands  in  the

sentence,  it  is  able,  thanks  to  certain  favourable  circumstances,  to

express two different meanings.

   Examples of this are at our disposal in plenty:

   One of Napoleon III’s first acts when he assumed power was toseize the property of the House of Orleans. This excellent play upon

words was current at the time: ‘C’est le premier vol de l’aigle.’ [‘It is the

eagle’s  first vol.’]  ‘Vol’  means  ‘flight’  but  also  ‘theft’.  (Quoted  by

Fischer, 1889.)

   Louis XV wanted to test the wit of one of his courtiers, of whose

talent he had been told. At the first opportunity he commanded the

gentleman to make a joke of which he, the king, should be the ‘sujet '.

The courtier at once made the clever reply: ‘Le roi n’est pas sujet.’

[‘The King is not a subject.’]

      A  doctor,  as  he  came  away  from  a  lady’s  bedside,  said  to  her

husband with a shake of his head: ‘I don’t like her looks.’ ‘I’ve not liked

her looks for a long time’, the husband hastened to agree.

   The doctor was of course referring to the lady’s condition; but he

expressed his anxiety about the patient in words which the husband

could interpret as a confirmation of his own marital aversion.

   Heine said of a satirical comedy: ‘This satire would not have been so

biting if its author had had more to bite.’ This joke is more an example

of metaphorical and literal double meaning than of a play upon words

proper. But what is to be gained by drawing a sharp distinction here?

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1643

 

   Another good example of play upon words is told by the authorities

(Heymans and Lipps) in a form which makes it unintelligible. Not long

ago I came upon the correct version and setting of the anecdote in a

collection of jokes which has not proved of much use apart from this.¹

   ‘One day Saphir and Rothschild met each other. After they had

chatted  for  a  little  while,  Saphir  said:  "Listen,  Rothschild,  my  funds

have got low, you might lend me a hundred ducats." "Oh well!", said

Rothschild, "that’ll suit me all right - but only on condition that you

make  a  joke."  "That’ll  suit  me  all  right  too",  replied  Saphir.  "Good.

Then come to my office tomorrow." Saphir appeared punctually. "Ah!",

said Rothschild, when he saw him come in, "Sie kommen um Ihre 100

Dukaten." "No", answered Saphir, "Sie kommen um Ihre 100 Dukaten

because  I  shan’t  dream  of  paying  you  back  before  the  Day  ofJudgement.’²

 

   ¹ Hermann, 1904.

   ² [‘Sie kommen um  . . .’ may mean equally ‘You are coming about’ or ‘You are losing’.]

-’"Saphir", so Heymans tells us, "was asked by a rich creditor whom he had come to visit: ‘Sie
kommen wohl um die 300 Gulden? [No doubt you’ve come about the 300 florins?]’ and he
replied: ‘Nein, Sie kommen um die 300 Gulden [No, you’re going to lose the 300 florins].’ In
giving this answer he was expressing his meaning in a perfectly correct and by no means
unusual form." That is in fact the case. Saphir’s answer, considered in itself, is in perfect
order. We understand, too, what he means to say - namely that he has no intention of paying
his debt. Rut Saphir makes use of the same words that had previously been used by his
creditor. We therefore cannot avoid also taking them in the sense in which they had been
used by the latter. And in that case Saphir’s answer no longer has any meaning whatever.
The creditor is not "coming" at all. Nor can he be coming "about the 300 florins" - that is, he
cannot be coming to bring 300 florins. Moreover, as a creditor, it is not his business to bring
but to demand. Since Saphir’s words are in this way recognized as being at once sense and
nonsense, a comic situation arises.’ (Lipps, 1898, 97.)
   The version which I have given in full in the text above for the sake of clarity shows that the
technique of the joke is far simpler than Lipps supposes. Saphir does not come to bring the
300 florins but to fetch them from the rich man. Accordingly the discussions of ‘sense and
nonsense’ in this joke become irrelevant.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1644

 

   ‘What do these statues vorstellen [represent or put forward]?’ asked

a  stranger  to  Berlin  of  a  native  Berliner,  looking  at  a  row  of

monuments in a public square. ‘Oh, well,’ was the reply: ‘either their

right leg or their left leg.’

   ‘At this moment I cannot recall all the students’ names, and of the

professors  there  are  some  who  still  have  no  name  at  all.’  (Heine,

Harzreise.)

      We  shall  be  giving  ourselves  practice,  perhaps,  in  diagnostic

differentiation if at this point we insert another well-known joke about

professors. ’The distinction between Professors Ordinary [ordentlich]

and  Professors  Extraordinary  [ausserordentlich]  is  that  the  ordinary

ones do nothing extraordinary and the extraordinary ones do nothing

properly [ordentlich].’ This, of course, is a play on the two meanings of

the  words  ‘ordentlich’  and  ‘ausserordentlich’:  viz.  on  the  one  hand

‘inside’ and ‘outside’ the ‘ordo (the Establishment)' and on the other

hand ‘efficient’ and ‘outstanding’. But the conformity between this jokeand  some  others  we  have  already  met  reminds  us  that  here  the

‘multiple  use’  is  far  more  noticeable  than  the  ‘double  meaning’.  All

through  the  sentence  we  hear  nothing  but  a  constantly  recurring

‘ordentlich’,  sometimes  in  that  form  and  sometimes  modified  in  a

negative sense. (Cf. p. 1639.) Moreover, the feat is again achieved

here  of  defining  a  concept  by  means  of  its  own  wording  (cf.  the

example of ‘Eifersucht’, p. 1640), or, more precisely, of defining (even

if only negatively) two correlative concepts by means of one another,

which  produces  an  ingenious  interlacement.  Finally,  the  aspect  of

‘unification’ can also be stressed here - the eliciting of a more intimate

connection between the elements of the statement than one would

have had a right to expect from their nature.

   ‘The beadle¹ Sch[äfer] greeted me quite as a colleague, for he too is

a writer, and has often mentioned me in his half-yearly writings; and

apart from that, he has often cited ²) me, and if he did not find me at

home he was always kind enough to write the citation in chalk on my

study door.’ (Heine, Harzreise.)

 

   ¹ [A university officer (at Göttingen) in charge of undergraduate discipline.]

   ² [For breaches of discipline.]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1645

 

      Daniel  Spitzer,  in Wiener  Spaziergänge,  produced  a  laconic

biographical  description,  which  is  certainly  also  a  good  joke,  of  a

social type which flourished at the time of the outbreak of speculation:

‘Iron front - iron cash-box - Iron Crown.’ (This last was an order which

carried  noble  rank  with  it.)  A  striking  example  of  ‘unification’  -

everything,  as  it  were,  made  of  iron!  The  various,  but  not  very

markedly  contrasting,  meanings  of  the  epithet  ‘iron’  make  these

‘multiple uses’ possible.

   Another example of a play upon words may make the transition to a

fresh  sub-species  of  the  technique  of  double  meaning  easier.  The

joking medical colleague already mentioned above (on p. 1640) was

responsible  for  this  joke  at  the  time  of  the  Dreyfus  case:  ‘This  girl

reminds me of Dreyfus. The army doesn’t believe in her innocence.’   The word ‘innocence’, on the double meaning of which the joke is

constructed, has in the one context its usual meaning, with ‘fault’ or

‘crime’  as  its  opposite;  but  in  the  other  context  it  has  a sexual

meaning, of which the opposite is ‘sexual experience’. Now there are

a very large number of similar examples of double meaning, in all of

which  the  effect  of  the  joke  depends  quite  specially  on  the  sexual

meaning. For this group we may reserve the name of ‘double entendre

[Zweideutigkeit]’.

   An excellent example of a double entendre of this kind is Spitzer’s

joke which has already been recorded on p. 1639: ‘Some people think

that the husband has earned a lot and so has been able to lay by a bit

[sich etwas zurückgelegt];  others  again  think  that  the  wife  has  lain

back a bit [sich etwas zurückgelegt] and so has been able to earn a

lot.’

   But if we compare this example of double meaning accompanied by

double entendre with other examples, a distinction becomes evident

which is not without its interest from the point of view of technique. In

the ‘innocence’ joke, the one meaning of the word was just as obvious

as the other; it would really be hard to decide whether its sexual or

non-sexual  meaning  was  the  more  usual  and  familiar.  But  it  is

otherwise with Spitzer’: example. In this the commonplace meaning of

the  words  ‘sich  etwas  zurückgelegt’  is  by  far  the  more  prominent,

whereas their sexual meaning is, as it were, covered and hidden and

might even escape the notice of an unsuspecting person altogether.

By  way  of  a  sharp  contrast  let  us  take  another  example  of  double

meaning, in which no attempt is made at thus concealing the sexual

meaning:  for  instance,  Heine’s  description  of  the  character  of  a

complaisant  lady:  ‘She  could abschlagen¹  nothing  except  her  own

water.’  This  sounds  like  a  piece  of  obscenity  and  hardly  gives  the

impression of a joke.² This peculiarity, however, where in a case of

double meaning the two meanings are not equally obvious, can also

occur  in  jokes  with  no  sexual  reference  -  whether  because  one

meaning is more usual than the other or because it is brought to the

front by a connection with the other parts of the sentence. (Cf., for

instance, ‘C’est le premier vol de l’aigle’.) I propose to describe all

these as ‘double meaning with an allusion.’

    ¹ [‘To refuse’; vulgarly ‘to urinate’.]

   ² Cf. on this Fischer (1889, 86). He gives the name of ‘Zweideutigkeit’, which I have applied

differently in the text, to jokes with a double meaning in which the two meanings are not
equally prominent but in which one lies behind the other. Nomenclature of this kind is a matter
of convention; linguistic usage has arrived at no firm decision.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1646

 

 

   We have already made the acquaintance of such a large number of

different joke-techniques that I fear there is some danger of losing our

grasp of them. Let us therefore try to summarize them:

 

    I.   Condensation:

          (a) with formation of composite word,

          (b) with modification.

 

    II. Multiple use of the same material:

          (c) as a whole and in parts,

          (d) in a different order,

          (e) with slight modification,

          (f) of the same words full and empty.

 

   III. Double meaning:

          (g) Meaning as a name and as a thing,

          (h) metaphorical and literal meanings,

          (i) double meaning proper (play upon words),

          (j) double entendre,

          (k) double meaning with an allusion.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1647

 

   This variety and number of techniques has a confusing effect. It

might  make  us  feel  annoyed  at  having  devoted  ourselves  to  a

consideration of the technical methods of jokes, and might make ussuspect  that  after  all  we  have  exaggerated  their  importance  as  a

means  for  discovering  the  essential  nature  of  jokes.  If  only  this

convenient suspicion were not contradicted by the one incontestable

fact that the joke invariably disappears as soon as we eliminate the

operation of these techniques from its form of expression! So, in spite

of  everything,  we  are  led  to  look  for  the  unity  in  this  multiplicity.  It

ought  to  be  possible  to  bring  all  these  techniques  under  a  single

heading. As we have already said, it is not difficult to unite the second

and third groups. Double meaning (play upon words) is indeed only

the ideal case of the multiple use of the same material. Of these the

latter is evidently the more inclusive concept. The examples of dividing

up, of re-arrangement of the same material and of multiple use with

slight modification (c, d and e) might - though only with some difficulty

- be brought under the concept of double meaning. But what is there

in  common  between  the  technique  of  the  first  group  (condensation

with substitute formation) and that of the two others (multiple use of

the same material)?

   Well, something very simple and obvious, I should have thought.

The multiple use of the same material is, after all, only a special case

of  condensation;  play  upon  words  is  nothing  other  than  a

condensation without substitute-formation; condensation remains the

wider category. All these techniques are dominated by a tendency to

compression,  or  rather  to  saving.  It  all  seems  to  be  a  question  of

economy. In Hamlet’s words: ‘Thrift, thrift, Horatio!’

   Let us test this economy on the different examples. ‘C’est le premier

vol de l’aigle.’ It is the eagle’s first flight. Yes, but it is a thieving flight.

Luckily for the existence of this joke, ‘vol ' means not only ‘flight’ but

‘theft’ as well. Has no condensation and economy been made? Most

certainly. There has been a saving of the whole of the second thought

and  it  has  been  dropped  without  leaving  a  substitute.  The  double

meaning of the word ‘vol ' has made such a substitute unnecessary; or

it  would  be  equally  true  to  say  that  the  word  ‘vol  '  contains  the

substitute for the suppressed thought without any addition of change

having to be made to the first one. That is the advantage of a double

meaning.

                 Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1648

 

   Another example: ‘Iron front - iron cash-box - Iron Crown’. What an

extraordinary  saving  compared  with  an  expression  of  the  same

thought in which ‘iron’ finds no place: ‘With the help of the necessary

boldness and lack of conscience it is not difficult to amass a large

fortune,  and  for  such  services  a  title  will  of  course  be  a  suitable

reward.’

   Condensation, and therefore economy, is indeed quite unmistakably

present in these examples. But it should be present in every example.

Where is the economy hidden in such jokes as ‘Rousseau - roux et

sot’ or ‘Antigone - antik? oh nee’, in which we first noticed the absence

of  condensation  and  which  were  our  principal  motive  for  putting

forward the technique of the repeated use of the same material? It is

true that here we should not find that condensation would meet the

case;  but  if  instead  of  it  we  take  the  more  inclusive  concept  of

economy, we can manage without difficulty. It is easy to point out what

we save in the case of Rousseau, Antigone, etc. We save having to

express a criticism or give shape to a judgement; both are already

there in the name itself. In the example of ‘Leidenschaft - Eifersucht

[passion-jealousy]’  we  save  ourselves  the  trouble  of  laboriously

constructing  a  definition:  ‘Eifersucht,  Leidenschaft  -  ‘Eifer  sucht

[‘eagerness seeks’], ‘Leidenschafft’ [‘causes pain’]. We have only to

add the linking words and there we have our definition ready made.

The case is similar in all the other examples that have so far been

analysed. Where there is least saving, as in Saphir’s play upon words

‘Sie kommen um Ihre 100 Dukaten’, there is at any rate a saving of

the necessity for framing a new wording for the reply; the wording of

the question is sufficient for the answer. The saving is not much, but in

it the joke lies. The multiple use of the same words for question and

answer  is  certainly  an  ‘economy’.  Like  Hamlet’s  view  of  the  rapid

sequence of his father’s death and his mother’s marriage:

 

                                                                                The funeral baked-meats
                                                Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
                 Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1649

 

   But before we accept the ‘tendency to economy’ as the most general

characteristic  of  the  technique  of  jokes  and  ask  such  questions  as

where  it  comes  from,  what  it  signifies  and  how  the  joke’s  yield  of

pleasure arises from it, we must find space for a doubt which has a

right  to  be  heard.  It  may  be  that  every  joke  technique  shows  the

tendency  to  save  something  in  expression:  but  the  relation  is  not

reversible. Not every economy of expression, not every abbreviation,

is on that account a joke as well. We reached this point once before,

when we were still hoping to find the process of condensation in every

joke, and raised the justifiable objection that a laconic remark is not

enough to constitute a joke. There must therefore be some peculiar

kind of abbreviation and economy on which the characteristic of being

a joke depends; and until we know the nature of that peculiarity our

discovery of the common element in the techniques of jokes brings us

no nearer to a solution of our problem. And let us, further, have the

courage to admit that the economies made by the joke-technique do

not greatly impress us. They may remind us, perhaps, of the way in

which some housewives economize when they spend time and money

on a journey to a distant market because vegetables are to be had

there  a  few  farthings  cheaper.  What  does  a  joke  save  by  its

technique?  The  putting  together  of  a  few  new  words,  which  would

mostly have emerged without any trouble. Instead of that, it has to

take  the  trouble  to  search  out  the  one  word  which  covers  the  two

thoughts. Indeed, it must often first transform one of the thoughts into

an unusual form which will provide a basis for its combination with the

second thought. Would it not have been simpler, easier, and, in fact,

more  economical  to  have  expressed  the  two  thoughts  as  they

happened  to  come,  even  if  this  involved  no  common  form  of

expression?  Is not the economy in words uttered more than balanced

by the expenditure on intellectual effort? And who saves by that? Who

gains by it?

   We can evade these doubts provisionally if we transpose them to

another place. Have we really already discovered all the kinds of joke-

technique? It will certainly be more prudent to collect fresh examplesand subject them to analysis.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1650

 

 

      We  have  in  fact  not  yet  considered  a  large  -  perhaps  the  most

numerous - group of jokes, influenced, perhaps, by the contempt with

which they are regarded. They are the kind which are generally known

as ‘Kalauer’ (‘calembourgs’)  [‘puns’]  and  which  pass  as  the  lowest

form of verbal joke, probably because they are the ‘cheapest’ - can be

made  with  the  least  trouble.  And  they  do  in  fact  make  the  least

demand on the technique of expression, just as the play upon words

proper makes the highest. While in the latter the two meanings should

find  their  expression  in  identically  the  same  word,  which  on  that

account is usually said only once, it is enough for a pun if the two

words expressing the two meanings recall each other by some vague

similarity,  whether  they  have  a  general  similarity  of  structure  or  a

rhyming assonance, or whether they share the same first few letters,

and  so  on.  A  quantity  of  examples  like  this  of  what  are  not  very

appropriately  described  as  ‘Klangwitze  [sound-jokes]’  occur  in  the

Capuchin monk’s sermon in Wallensteins Lager:

 

                                                Kümmert sich mehr um den Krug als den Krieg,
                                                Wetzt lieber den Schnabel als den Sabel
                                                                                . . . . . . . .
                                                Frisst den Ochsen lieber als den Oxenstirn’,
                                                                                . . . . . . . .
                                                Der Rheinstrom ist worden zu einem Peinstrom,
                                                Die Klöster sind ausgenommene Nester,
                                                Die Bistümer sind verwandelt in Wüsttümer.
                                                                                . . . . . . . .
                                                Und alle die gesegneten deutschen Länder

                                                Sind verkehrt worden in Elender.¹

 

   ¹ [Literally:-

                He cares more for the bottle than the battle,
                Would rather whet his nose than his sword
                                   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
                Would rather eat oxen than Oxenstirn’,                                   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
                The Rhine stream has become a pain stream,
                The monastries are robbed bird’s nests,
                The bishoprics are transformed into desertrics.
                                   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
                And all the blessed German lands
                Have been turned into wretched places.]
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1651

 

   Jokes are particularly apt to change one of the vowels in a word.

Thus Hevesi (1888, 87) writes of an anti-Imperial Italian poet who was

nevertheless  obliged  later  to  eulogize  a  German  emperor  in

hexameters: ‘Since he could not exterminate the Cäsaren [Caesars],

he at least eliminated the Cäsuren [caesuras].

   Out of the profusion of puns at our disposal, it will perhaps be of

special interest to bring up a really bad example, of which Heine is

guilty. Having for a long time represented himself to his lady as an

‘Indian  prince’,  he  throws  off  the  mask  and  confesses:  ‘Madame,  I

have deceived you . . . I have no more ever been in Kalkutta [Calcutta]

than the Kalkuttenbraten [roast Calcutta fowl] that I ate for luncheon

yesterday.’ The mistake in this joke clearly lies in the fact that the two

similar words in it are not merely similar but actually identical. The bird

which  he  had  eaten  roast  is  so  called,  because  it  comes,  or  is

supposed to come, from the same Calcutta.

   Fischer (1889, 78) has devoted much attention to these forms of

joke, and tries to distinguish them sharply from ‘play upon words’. ‘A

pun is a bad play upon words, since it plays upon the word not as a

word but as a sound.’ The play upon words, however, ‘passes from

the  sound  of  the  word  to  the  word  ‘itself.’  On  the  other  hand,  he

classes  such  jokes  as famillionär,  Antigone  (antik?  oh  nee),  etc.

among the ‘sound jokes’. I see no necessity for following him in this. In

a play upon words, in our view, the word is also only a sound-image,

to which one meaning or another is attached. But here, too, linguistic

usage  makes  no  sharp  distinctions;  and  if  it  treats  ‘puns’  with

contempt  and  ‘play  upon  words’  with  a  certain  respect,  these

judgements of value seem to be determined by considerations otherthan technical ones. It is worth while paying attention to the kind of

jokes that are told one as ‘puns’. There are some people who, when

they are in high spirits, can for considerable periods of time, answer

every remark addressed to them with a pun. One of my friends, who is

a model of discretion where his serious achievements in science are

concerned, is apt to boast of this ability. When on one occasion he

was holding the company breathless in this way and admiration was

expressed for his staying power: ‘Yes’, he said ‘I am lying here auf der

Ka-Lauer.’² And when he was finally begged to stop, he agreed to on

condition that he was appointed ‘Poeta Ka-laureatus’. Both of these,

however,  are  excellent  jokes  of  condensation  with  formation  of

composite words. (‘I am lying here auf der Lauer for making Kalauer

[puns].’)

   In any case we can already gather from the disputes about the

delimitation of puns and play upon words that the former will not be

able to help us to discover a completely new joke technique. If, in the

case of puns, we give up the claim for the use of the same material in

more than one sense, nevertheless the accent falls on rediscovering

what is familiar, on the correspondence between the two words that

make up the pun; and consequently puns merely form a sub-species

of the group which reaches its peak in the play upon words proper.

 

   ¹ ‘Ideen’, Chapter V.

   ² [‘Kalauer’ = ‘pun’. ‘Auf der Lauer’ = ‘on the look-out’.]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1652

 

 

      But  there  really  are  jokes  whose  technique  resists  almost  any

attempt to connect it with the groups that have so far been considered.

   ‘The story is told of Heine that he was in a Paris salon one evening

conversing with the dramatist Soulié, when there came into the room

one of those financial kings of Paris whom people compare with Midas

- and not merely on account of their wealth. He was soon surrounded

by a crowd who treated him with the greatest deference. "Look there!"

Soulié remarked to Heine, "Look at the way the nineteenth century isworshipping the Golden Calf!" With a glance at the object of so much

admiration,  Heine  replied,  as  though  by  way  of  correction:  "Oh,  he

must be older than that by now!"' (Fischer, 1889, 82-3.)

   Where shall we look for the technique of this excellent joke? In a

play  upon  words,  thinks  Fischer:  ‘Thus,  for  instance,  the  words

"Golden Calf" can mean both Mammon and idolatry. In the one case

the gold is the main thing and in the other the statue of the animal; it

may  also  serve  to  characterize,  in  not  precisely  flattering  terms,

someone who has a great deal of money and very little sense.’ (Loc.

cit.) If we make the experiment of removing the expression ‘Golden

Calf’,  we  certainly  get  rid  of  the  joke  at  the  same  time.  We  make

Soulié  say:  ‘Look  there!  Look  at  the  way  the  people  are  crowding

round the stupid fellow simply because he’s rich!’ This is no longer a

joke and Heine’s reply is also made impossible.

   But we must recall that what we are concerned with is not Soulié’s

simile - which is a possible joke - but Heine’s reply, which is certainly a

much better one. That being so, we have no right to touch the phrase

about the Golden Calf: it remains as the precondition of Heine’s mot

and our reduction must be directed only to the latter. If we expand the

words ‘Oh, he must be older than that by now!’ we can only replace

them by something like: ‘Oh, he’s not a calf any longer; he’s a full-

grown  ox!’  Thus  what  was  necessary  for  Heine’s  joke  was  that  he

should  no  longer  take  the  ‘Golden  Calf’  in  a  metaphorical  but  in  a

personal sense and should apply it to the rich man himself. It may

even  be  that  this  double  meaning  was  already  present  in  Soulié’s

remark.

   But just a moment! It looks now as though this reduction has not

done away with Heine’s joke completely, but on the contrary has left

its essence untouched. The position now is that Soulié says: ‘Look

there!  Look  at  the  way  the  nineteenth  century  is  worshipping  the

Golden Calf!’ and Heine replies: ‘Oh, he’s not a calf any longer; he’s

an ox already!’ And in this reduced version it is still a joke. But no

other reduction of Heine’s mot is possible.

   It is a pity that this fine example involves such complicated technical

conditions. We can arrive at no clarification of it. So we will leave it

and  look  for  another  one  in  which  we  seem  to  detect  an  internal

kinship with its predecessor. 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1653

 

   It is one of the ‘bath jokes’ which treat of the Galician Jews’ aversion

to  baths.  For  we  do  not  insist  upon  a  patent  of  nobility  from  our

examples.  We  make  no  enquiries  about  their  origin  but  only  about

their efficiency - whether they are capable of making us laugh and

whether  they  deserve  our  theoretical  interest.  And  both  these  two

requirements are best fulfilled precisely by Jewish jokes.

   ‘Two Jews met in the neighbourhood of the bath-house. "Have you

taken a bath?" asked one of them. "What?" asked the other in return,

"is there one missing?"'

   If one laughs at a joke really heartily, one is not in precisely the best

mood for investigating its technique. Hence some difficulties arise over

making  one’s  way  into  these  analyses.  ‘It  was  a  comical

misunderstanding’,  we  are  inclined  to  say.  Yes  but  what  is  the

technique  of  the  joke?  Clearly  the  use  of  the  word  ‘take’  in  two

meanings. For one of the speakers ‘take’ was the colourless auxiliary;

for the other it was the verb with its sense unwatered down. Thus it is

a case of the same word used ‘full’ and ‘empty’ (Group II (f)). If we

replace the expression ‘taken a bath’ by the equivalent and simpler

‘bathed’, the joke vanishes. The reply no longer fits. Thus the joke is

once again attached to the form of expression ‘taken a bath’.

   That is so. But nevertheless it seems as though in this case too the

reduction has been applied at the wrong point. The joke lies not in the

question but in the answer - the second question: ‘What? is there one

missing?’ And this answer cannot be robbed of being a joke by any

extension or modification, so long as its sense is not interfered with.

We  have  an  impression,  too,  that  in  the  second  Jew’s  reply  the

disregarding of the bath is more important than the misunderstanding

of the word ‘take’. But here once more we cannot see our way clearly,

and we will look for a third example.

   It is again a Jewish joke; but this time it is only the setting that is

Jewish,  the  core  belongs  to  humanity  in  general.  No  doubt  this

example too has its unwanted complications, but fortunately they arenot the same ones that have so far prevented us from seeing clearly.

   ‘An impoverished individual borrowed 25 florins from a prosperous

acquaintance,  with  many  asseverations  of  his  necessitous

circumstances. The very same day his benefactor met him again in a

restaurant  with  a  plate  of  salmon  mayonnaise  in  front  of  him.  The

benefactor reproached him: "What? You borrow money from me and

then order yourself salmon mayonnaise? Is that what you’ve used my

money for?" "I don’t understand you", replied the object of the attack;

"if I haven’t any money I can’t eat salmon mayonnaise, and if I have

some money I mustn’t eat salmon mayonnaise. Well, then, when am I

to eat salmon mayonnaise?"'

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1654

 

   Here at last no more trace of a double meaning is to be found. Nor

can  the  repetition  of  ‘salmon  mayonnaise’  contain  the  joke’s

technique, for it is not ‘multiple use’ of the same material but a real

repetition of identical material called for by the subject-matter of the

anecdote. We may for a time be quite baffled by this analysis and may

even think of taking refuge in denying that the anecdote - though it

made us laugh - possesses the character of a joke.

      What  more  is  there  deserving  of  comment  in  the  impoverished

person’s reply? That it has been very markedly given the form of a

logical argument. But quite unjustifiably, for the reply is in fact illogical.

The man defends himself for having spent the money lent to him on a

delicacy and asks, with an appearance of reason, when he is to eat

salmon.  But  that  is  not  the  correct  answer.  His  benefactor  is  not

reproaching him with treating himself to salmon precisely on the day

on  which  he  borrowed  the  money;  he  is  reminding  him  that  in  his

circumstances he has no right to think of such delicacies at all. The

impoverished bon vivant disregards this only possible meaning of the

reproach,  and  answers  another  question  as  though  he  had

misunderstood the reproach.

   Can it be that the technique of this joke lies precisely in this diverting

of the reply from the meaning of the reproach? If so, a similar changeof  standpoint,  a  similar  shifting  of  the  psychical  emphasis,  may

perhaps be traceable in the two earlier examples, which we felt were

akin to this one.

   And, lo and behold! this suggestion is an easy success and in fact

reveals the technique of those examples. Soulié pointed out to Heine

that society in the nineteenth century worshipped the ‘Golden Calf’ just

as did the Jews in the Wilderness. An appropriate answer by Heine

might have been ‘Yes, such is human nature; thousands of years have

made  no  change  in  it’  or  something  similar  by  way  of  assent.  But

Heine  diverted  his  answer  from  the  thought  suggested  to  him  and

made no reply to it at all. He made use of the double meaning of

which the phrase ‘Golden Calf’ is capable to branch off along a side-

track.  He  caught  hold  of  one  component  of  the  phrase,  ‘Calf’,  and

replied, as though the emphasis in Soulié’s remark had been upon it:

‘Oh, he’s not a calf any longer’ . . etc.¹

 

   ¹ Heine’s answer combines two joke-techniques: a diversion combined with an allusion. He

did not say straight out: ‘He’s an ox.’
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1655

 

   The diversion in the bath-joke is even plainer. This example calls for

a graphic presentation:

   The first Jew asks: ‘Have you taken a bath?’ The emphasis is on the

element ‘bath’.

   The second replies as though the question had been: ‘Have you

taken a bath?’

   This shifting of the emphasis is only made possible by the wording

‘taken a bath’. If it had run ‘have you bathed?’ no displacement would

have been possible. The non-joking answer would then have been:

‘Bathed?  What  d’you  mean?  I  don’t  know  what  that  is.’  But  the

technique of the joke lies in the displacement of the accent from ‘bath’

to ‘taken’.¹

   Let us go back to the ‘Salmon Mayonnaise’, since it is the most

straightforward example. What is new in it deserves our attention in

various directions. First we must give a name to the technique broughtto  light  in  it.  I  propose  to  describe  it  as  ‘displacement’,  since  its

essence lies in the diversion of the train of thought, the displacement

of the psychical emphasis on to a topic other than the opening one.

Our next task is to enquire into the relation between the technique of

displacement and the form of expression of the joke. Our example

(‘Salmon Mayonnaise’) shows us that a displacement joke is to a high

degree independent of verbal expression. It depends not on words but

on the train of thought. No replacement of the words will enable us to

get rid of it so long as the sense of the answer is retained. Reduction

is  only  possible  if  we  change  the  train  of  thought  and  make  the

gourmet  reply  directly  to  the  reproach  which  he  has  evaded  in  the

version represented in the joke. The reduced version would then run:

‘I  can’t  deny  myself  what  tastes  good  to  me,  and  it’s  a  matter  of

indifference to me where I get the money from to pay for it. There you

have the explanation of why I’m eating salmon mayonnaise on the

very day you’ve lent me the money.’ But that would not be a joke; it

would be a piece of cynicism.

 

   ¹ The word ‘take [nehmen]’ is very well adapted to form a basis for play upon words owing

to the variety of ways in which it can be used. I will give a plain example, as a contrast to the
displacement  jokes  reported  above:  ‘A  well-known  stock-exchange  speculator  and  bank-
director  was  walking  with  a  friend  along  the  Ringstrasse.  As  they  went  past  a  cafe  he
remarked: "Let’s go inside and take something!" His friend held him back: "But, Herr Hofrat,
the place is full of people!" ‘
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1656

 

   It is instructive to compare this joke with another that is very close to

it in meaning:

   ‘A man who had taken to drink supported himself by tutoring in a

small  town.  His  vice  gradually  became  known,  however,  and  as  a

result he lost most of his pupils. A friend was commissioned to urge

him to mend his ways. "Look, you could get the best tutoring in the

town if you would give up drinking. So do give it up!" "Who do you

think you are?" was the indignant reply. "I do tutoring so that I can

drink. Am I to give up drinking so that I can get tutoring?"'

   This joke gives the same appearance of being logical that we saw inthe ‘Salmon Mayonnaise’; but it is not a displacement joke. The reply

was a direct one. The cynicism which was concealed in the former

joke is openly admitted in this one: ‘Drinking is the most important

thing for me.’ Actually the technique of this joke is extremely scanty

and  cannot  explain  its  effectiveness.  It  consists  simply  in  the

rearrangement of the same material or, more precisely, in the reversal

of  the  relation  of  means  and  ends  between  drinking  and  doing  or

getting tutoring. As soon as my reduction ceases to emphasize this

factor in its form of expression, the joke fades; for instance: ‘What a

senseless suggestion! The important thing for me is the drinking, not

the tutoring. After all, tutoring is only a means to enable me to go on

drinking.’ So the joke did in fact depend on its form of expression.

   In the bath-joke the dependence of the joke on its wording (‘Have

you taken a bath?’) is unmistakable, and a change in it involves the

disappearance of the joke. For in this case the technique is a more

complicated one - a combination of double meaning (sub-species f)

and  displacement.  The  wording  of  the  question  admits  a  double

meaning, and the joke is produced by the answer disregarding the

meaning intended by the questioner and catching on to the subsidiary

meaning. We are accordingly in a position to find a reduction which

allows the double meaning of the wording to persist and yet destroys

the joke; we can do this merely by undoing the displacement:

   ‘Have you taken a bath?’ - ‘What do you think I’ve taken? A bath?

What’s that?’ But this is no longer a joke, but a malicious or facetious

exaggeration.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1657

 

   A precisely similar part is played by the double meaning in Heine’s

joke  about  the  ‘Golden  Calf’.  It  enables  the  answer  to  make  a

diversion from the suggested train of thought (which is effected in the

‘Salmon  Mayonnaise’  joke  without  any  such  assistance  from  the

wording).  In  the  reduction  Souliés  remark  and  Heine’s  reply  would

perhaps run: ‘The way in which the people here are crowding round

the man simply because he’s rich reminds one vividly of the worship ofthe Golden Calf.’ And Heine: ‘That he should be honoured in this way

because of his wealth doesn’t strike me as the worst of it. In what you

say you’re not putting enough stress on the fact that because of his

wealth  people  forgive  him  his  stupidity.’  In  this  way  the  double

meaning  would  be  retained  but  the  displacement  joke  would  be

destroyed.

   But at this point we must be prepared to meet an objection which will

assert  that  these  fine  distinctions  are  seeking  to  tear  apart  what

belongs together. Does not every double meaning give occasion for a

displacement - for a diversion of the train of thought from one meaning

to the other? And are we prepared, then, to allow ‘double meaning’

and  ‘displacement’  to  be  set  up  as  representatives  of  two  quite

different  types  of  joke-technique?  Well,  it  is  true  that  this  relation

between  double  meaning  and  displacement  does  exist,  but  it  has

nothing to do with our distinguishing the different joke-techniques. In

the case of double meaning a joke contains nothing other than a word

capable of multiple interpretation, which allows the hearer to find the

transition from one thought to another - a transition which, stretching a

point,  might  be  equated  with  a  displacement.  In  the  case  of  a

displacement joke, however, the joke it self contains a train of thought

in which a displacement of this kind has been accomplished. Here the

displacement is part of the work which has created the joke; it is not

part of the work necessary for understanding it. If this distinction is not

clear to us, we have an unfailing means of bringing it tangibly before

our eyes in our attempts at reduction. But there is one merit which we

will not deny to this objection. It draws our attention to the necessity of

not confusing the psychical processes involved in the construction of

the  joke  (the  ‘joke-work’)  with  the  psychical  processes  involved  in

taking in the joke (the work of understanding). Our present enquiry is

only concerned with the former.¹

 

   ¹ For the latter, see later chapters of this book. - A few further words of explanation are

perhaps not unnecessary here. Displacement habitually takes place between a remark and a
reply which pursues the train of thought in a direction other than that in which it was started by
the original remark. The justification for distinguishing displacement from double meaning is
most convincingly shown by the examples in which the two are combined - where, that is, the
wording of the remark admits of a double meaning which is not intended by the speaker, but
which points the way for the reply to make a displacement. (See the examples.)
                 Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1658

 

   Are there other examples of the displacement technique? They are

not easy to find. A straightforward instance is afforded by the following

joke, which moreover is not characterized by the appearance of logic

which was so much overstressed in our model case:

   ‘A horse-dealer was recommending a saddle-horse to a customer.

"If you take this horse and get on it at four in the morning you’ll be at

Pressburg by half-past six." - "What should I be doing in Pressburg at

half-past six in the morning?"'

      Here  the  displacement  leaps  to  the  eye.  The  dealer  obviously

mentions  the  early  hour  of  arriving  at  the  provincial  town  simply  in

order  to  demonstrate  the  horse’s  capacity  by  an  example.  The

customer  disregards  the  animal’s  capacity,  which  he  does  not

question,  and  merely  enters  into  the  data  of  the  example  that  has

been chosen. The reduction of this joke is accordingly easy to give.

   Greater difficulties are presented by another example the technique

of which is most obscure, but which can nevertheless be solved as

double meaning combined with displacement. The joke describes the

prevarication of a ‘Schadchen’ (a Jewish marriage-broker), and is thus

one of a group with which we shall often be concerned.

   ‘The Schadchen had assured the suitor that the girl’s father was no

longer living. After the betrothal it emerged that the father was still

alive and was serving a prison sentence. The suitor protested to the

Schadchen, who replied: "Well, what did I tell you? You surely don’t

call that living?"'

   The double meaning lies in the word ‘living’, and the displacement

consists in the Schadchen shifting the meaning of the word from its

ordinary sense, as a contrast to ‘dead’, to the sense which it has in the

phrase  ‘that’s  not  living’.  In  doing  so  he  explains  his  former

pronouncement  retrospectively  as  having  had  a  double  meaning,

though  any  such  multiple  meaning  was  decidedly  remote  in  this

particular case. So far the technique would seem similar to that in the

‘Golden Calf’ joke and the bath-joke. But here there is another factor

to  be  considered  which  by  its  prominence  interferes  with  our

understanding  of  the  technique.  It  might  be  described  as  a‘characterizing’ joke: it seeks by an example to illustrate a marriage-

broker’s  characteristic  mixture  of  mendacious  impudence  and

readiness of repartee. We shall find that this is only the outer shell, the

façade,  of  the  joke;  its  meaning  -  that  is  to  say,  its  purpose  -  is

something different. And we must postpone the attempt at a reduction

of it.¹

      After  these  complicated  examples,  which  have  been  so  hard  to

analyse, it will be with satisfaction that we are able to turn once more

to an example which can be recognized as a perfectly straightforward

and transparent sample of a displacement joke:

   ‘A Schnorrer [someone who is reluctant to part with his own money]

approached  a  wealthy  baron  with  a  request  for  the  grant  of  some

assistance  for  his  journey  to  Ostend.  The  doctors,  he  said,  had

recommended him sea-bathing to restore his health. "Very well", said

the  rich  man,  "I’II  give  you  something  towards  it.  But  must  you  go

precisely to Ostend, which is the most expensive of all sea-bathing

resorts?" - "Herr Baron", was the reproachful reply, "I consider nothing

too expensive for my health."' This is no doubt a correct point of view,

but not correct for a petitioner. The answer is given from the point of

view of a rich man. The Schnorrer behaves as though it was his own

money that he was to sacrifice for his health, as though the money

and the health were the concern of the same person.

 

   ¹ See Chapter III below.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1659

 

 

   Let us start once more from that highly instructive example ‘Salmon

Mayonnaise’. It, too, presented us with a façade, in which a striking

parade of logical thinking was exhibited; and we learnt from analysing

it  that  this  logic  was  used  to  conceal  a  piece  of  faulty  reasoning  -

namely,  a  displacement  of  the  train  of  thought.  This  may  serve  to

remind us, if only by means of a contrasting connection, of other jokes

which, quite the other way, undisguisedly exhibit a piece of nonsense

or stupidity. We shall be curious to learn what may be the technique ofsuch jokes.

   I will begin with the most forcible and at the same time the plainest

example of the whole group. Once again it is a Jewish joke:

   ‘Itzig had been declared fit for service in the artillery. He was clearly

an  intelligent  lad,  but  intractable  and  without  any  interest  in  the

service. One of his superior officers, who was friendlily disposed to

him, took him on one side and said to him: "Itzig, you’re no use to us.

I’II  give  you  a  piece  of  advice:  buy  yourself  a  cannon  and  make

yourself independent!"'

   This advice, which may raise a hearty laugh, is obvious nonsense.

Cannons are not to be bought and an individual cannot make himself

independent as a military unit - set himself up in business, as it were.

But it is impossible to doubt for a moment that the advice is not mere

nonsense but joking nonsense - an excellent joke. How then is the

nonsense turned into a joke?

   Not much reflection is needed. We can infer from the authorities’

comments  indicated  above  in  the  introduction  that  there  is  sense

behind  joking  nonsense  such  as  this,  and  that  it  is  this  sense  that

makes the nonsense into a joke. The sense in our example is easy to

find. The officer who gives Artilleryman Itzig this nonsensical advice is

only making himself out stupid to show Itzig how stupidly he himself is

be  having.  He  is  copying  Itzig:  ‘I’II  give  you  some  advice  that’s  as

stupid as you are.’ He enters into Itzig’s stupidity and makes it clear to

him by taking it as the basis of a suggestion which would fit in with

Itzig’s wishes: if Itzig possessed a cannon of his own and carried out

military  duties  on  his  own  account,  how  useful  his  intelligence  and

ambition  would  be  to  him!  In  what  good  order  he  would  keep  his

cannon and how familiar he would make himself with its mechanism

so as to meet the competition of the other possessors of cannons!

   I will interrupt the analysis of this example, to point out the same

sense in nonsense in a shorter and simpler, though less glaring, case

of a nonsensical joke:

   ‘Never to be born would be the best thing for mortal men.’ ‘But’,

adds the philosophical comment in Fliegende Blätter, ‘this happens to

scarcely one person in a hundred thousand.’

      This  modern  addition  to  an  ancient  saw  is  an  evident  piece  of

nonsense, made sillier by the ostensibly cautious ‘scarcely’. But theaddition is attached to the original statement as an indisputably correct

limitation,  and  is  thus  able  to  open  our  eyes  to  the  fact  that  this

solemnly accepted piece of wisdom is itself not much better than a

piece of nonsense. Anyone who is not born is not a mortal man at all,

and there is no good and no best for him. Thus the nonsense in the

joke serves to uncover and demonstrate another piece of nonsense,

just as in the example of Artilleryman Itzig.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1660

 

   And here I can add a third instance, which, from its content, would

scarcely  deserve  the  lengthy  description  that  it  requires,  but  which

once again exemplifies with special clarity the use of nonsense in a

joke to demonstrate another piece of nonsense.

   ‘A man who was obliged to go on a journey confided his daughter to

a friend with the request that he should watch over her virtue during

his absence. Some months later he returned, and found that she was

pregnant. As was natural, he reproached his friend, who, however,

seemed unable to explain the misfortune. "Well", asked the father at

last, "where did she sleep?" - "In the room with my son." - "But how

could you let her sleep in the same room as your son after I’d begged

you  so  to  look  after  her?"  -  "After  all  there  was  a  screen  between

them. Your daughter’s bed was on one side and my son’s bed on the

other,  with  the  screen  between  them."  -  "And  suppose  he  walked

round the screen?" - "Yes, there is that", replied the other thoughtfully;

"it might have happened like that."'

   We can arrive with the greatest ease at the reduction of this joke,

whose  qualities  have  otherwise  little  to  recommend  it.  It  would

obviously run: ‘You have no right to reproach me. How could you be

so stupid as to leave your daughter in a house where she is bound to

live  in  the  constant  company  of  a  young  man?  How  would  it  be

possible  for  an  outsider  to  answer  for  a  girl’s  virtue  in  such

circumstances?’ Here, then, the friend’s apparent stupidity is only a

reflection of the father’s stupidity. The reduction has disposed of the

stupidity  in  the  joke  and  at  the  same  time  of  the  joke  itself.  Theelement ‘stupidity’ itself has not been got rid of: it is to be found at

another point in the context of the sentence after it has been reduced

to its original meaning.

   We can now attempt a reduction of the joke about the cannon. The

officer  should  have  said:  ‘Itzig,  I  know  you’re  an  intelligent  man  of

business. But I assure you it is very stupid of you if you can’t see that

it is impossible to behave in the army in the same way as in business

life,  where  each  person  acts  for  himself  and  against  the  others.  In

military life subordination and co-operation are the rule.’

      The  technique  of  the  nonsensical  jokes  which  we  have  so  far

considered really consists, therefore, in presenting something that is

stupid and nonsensical, the sense of which lies in the revelation and

demonstration of something else that is stupid and nonsensical.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1661

 

      Has  this  use  of  absurdity  in  joke  technique  always  the  same

significance? Here is one more example which gives an affirmative

reply:

      ‘When  on  one  occasion  Phocion  was  applauded  after  making  a

speech, he turned to his friends and asked: "What have I said that’s

stupid, then?"'

   The question sounds absurd. But we see its meaning at once: ‘What

have  I  said,  then,  that  can  have  pleased  these  stupid  people  so

much? I ought to feel ashamed of the applause. If what I said has

pleased stupid people, it cannot itself have been very sensible.’

   Other examples, however, can teach us that absurdity is very often

used in joke-technique without serving the purpose of demonstrating

another piece of nonsense:

   ‘A well-known University teacher, who was in the habit of peppering

his  unattractive  special  subject  with  numerous  jokes,  was

congratulated on the birth of his youngest child, who was granted to

him when he had already reached an advanced age. "Yes", he replied

to  his  well-wishers,  "it  is  remarkable  what  human  hands  can

accomplish.’ - This answer seems quite specially nonsensical and outof place. Children, after all, are regarded as a blessing of God, quite in

contrast to human handiwork. But it soon occurs to us that after all the

answer  has  a  meaning  and,  at  that,  an  obscene  one.  There  is  no

question here of the happy father making himself out stupid in order to

show  that  something  or  someone  else  is  stupid.  The  apparently

senseless answer makes a surprising, a bewildering impression on us,

as the authorities would say. As we have seen they attribute the whole

effect of jokes like this to an alternation between ‘bewilderment and

illumination’. We shall try later to form a judgement on this; for the

moment we must be content to stress the fact that the technique of

this  joke  lies  in  its  presentation  of  something  bewildering  and

nonsensical.

   A joke of Lichtenberg’s takes a quite special place among these

‘stupid’ jokes:

   ‘He wondered how it is that cats have two holes cut in their skin

precisely  at  the  place  where  their  eyes  are.’  To  wonder  about

something  that  is  in  fact  only  the  statement  of  an  identity  is

undoubtedly  a  piece  of  stupidity.  It  reminds  one  of  Michelet’s

exclamation¹ which was meant to be taken seriously, and which to the

best of my recollection runs: ‘How beautifully Nature has arranged it

that as soon as a child comes into the world it finds a mother ready to

take care of it!’ Michelet’s pronouncement is a real piece of stupidity,

but  Lichtenberg’s  is  a  joke  which  makes  use  of  stupidity  for  some

purpose and behind which something lies. But what? For the moment,

we must admit, no answer can be given.

 

   ¹ La Femme

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1662

 

 

   We have now already found from two groups of examples that the

joke-work  makes  use  of  deviations  from  normal  thinking  -  of

displacement and absurdity - as technical methods for producing a

joking form of expression. It is no doubt justifiable to expect that other

kinds  of  faulty  reasoning  may  find  a  similar  use.  And  it  is  in  factpossible to produce a few examples of the sort:

   ‘A gentleman entered a pastry-cook’s shop and ordered a cake; but

he soon brought it back and asked for a glass of liqueur instead. He

drank  it  and  began  to  leave  without  having  paid.  The  proprietor

detained him. "What do you want?" asked the customer. - "You’ve not

paid for the liqueur." - "But I gave you the cake in exchange for it." -

"You didn’t pay for that either." - "But I hadn’t eaten it."'

   This anecdote too has an appearance of logic about it, which, as we

already know, is a suitable façade for a piece of faulty reasoning. The

mistake  evidently  lies  in  the  crafty  customer’s  constructing  a

connection which did not exist between the giving back of the cake

and the taking of the liqueur in its place. The episode in fact fell into

two processes, which were independent of each other so far as the

vendor was concerned and were substitutes for each other only from

the point of view of the purchaser’s intention. First he took the cake

and gave it back, and therefore owed nothing for it; then he took the

liqueur, and for it he owed payment. We might say that the customer

used the relation ‘in exchange for’ with a double meaning. But it would

be  more  correct  to  say  that  by  means  of  a  double  meaning  he

constructed a connection which was not in reality valid.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added  1912:]  A  similar  nonsensical  technique  appears  if  a  joke  seeks  to

maintain a connection which seems to be excluded by the special conditions implied in its
content. Such, for instance, is Lichtenberg’s knife without a blade which has no handle. So,
too, the joke repeated by Von Falke: ‘Is this the place where the Duke of Wellington spoke
those words?’  - ‘Yes, it is the place; but he never spoke the words.’
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1663

 

   This is an opportunity for making a not unimportant admission. We

are  engaged  in  investigating  the  technique  of  jokes  as  shown  in

examples; and we should therefore be certain that the examples we

have chosen are really genuine jokes. It is the case, however, that in a

number of instances we are in doubt whether the particular example

ought to be called a joke or not. We have no criterion at our disposal

before  our  investigation  has  given  us  one.  Linguistic  usage  is

untrustworthy  and  itself  needs  to  have  its  justification  examined.  Incoming to our decision we can base ourselves on nothing but a certain

‘feeling’, which we may interpret as meaning that the decision is made

in our judgement in accordance with particular criteria that are not yet

accessible to our knowledge. In the case of our last example we must

feel a doubt whether it should be represented as a joke, or perhaps as

a ‘sophistical’ joke, or simply as a piece of sophistry. For the fact is

that  we  do  not  yet  know  in  what  the  characteristic  of  being  a  joke

resides.

   On the other hand, the next example, which exhibits a type of faulty

reasoning  that  may  be  said  to  be  complementary  to  the  former

instance, is an undoubted joke. It is once again a story of a marriage-

broker:

   ‘The Schadchen was defending the girl he had proposed against the

young man’s protests. "I don’t care for the mother-in-law", said the

latter. "She’s a disagreeable, stupid person." - "But after all you’re not

marrying the mother-in-law. What you want is her daughter." - "Yes,

but she’s not young any longer, and she’s not precisely a beauty." -

"No matter. If she’s neither young nor beautiful she’ll be all the more

faithful to you."- "And she hasn’t much money." - "Who’s talking about

money? Are you marrying money then? After all it’s a wife that you

want." - "But she’s got a hunchback too." - "Well, what do you want?

Isn’t she to have a single fault?"'

   What was really in question, then, was an unbeautiful girl, no longer

young,  with  a  scanty  dowry  and  an  unpleasant  mother,  who  was

moreover the victim of a serious deformity - not very inviting conditions

for contracting a marriage. The marriage broker was able, in the case

of each one of these defects, to point out how it would be possible to

come to terms with it. He was then able to claim that the inexcusable

hunch  back  was  the  single  defect  that  every  individual  must  be

allowed to possess. Once more there is the appearance of logic which

is  characteristic  of  a  piece  of  sophistry  and  which  is  intended  to

conceal the faulty reasoning. Clearly the girl had a number of defects -

several that might be overlooked and one that it was impossible to

disregard; she was unmarriageable. The broker behaved as though

each separate defect was got rid of by his evasions, whereas in fact

each one of them left a certain amount of depreciation behind which

had to be added to the next one. He insisted on treating each defect inisolation and refused to add them up into a total.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

 1664

 

   The same omission is the core of another piece of sophistry which

has  been  much  laughed  over,  but  whose  right  to  be  called  a  joke

might be doubted:

   ‘A. borrowed a copper kettle from B. and after he had returned it was

sued by B. because the kettle now had a big hole in it which made it

unusable. His defence was: "First, I never borrowed a kettle from B. at

all; secondly, the kettle had a hole in it already when I got it from him;

and thirdly, I gave him back the kettle undamaged."' Each one of these

defences is valid in itself, but taken together they exclude one another.

A. was treating in isolation what had to be regarded as a connected

whole, just as the marriage-broker treated the girl’s defects. We might

also say: ‘A. has put an "and" where only an "either-or" is possible.’

   We find another piece of sophistry in the following marriage broker

story:

   ‘The would-be bridegroom complained that the bride had one leg

shorter than the other and limped. The Schadchen contradicted him:

"You’re  wrong.  Suppose  you  marry  a  woman  with  healthy,  straight

limbs! What do you gain from it? You never have a day’s security that

she won’t fall down, break a leg and afterwards be lame all her life.

And think of the suffering then, the agitation, and the doctor’s bill! But

if you take this one, that can’t happen to you. Here you have a fait

accompli.’

   The appearance of logic is very thin in this case, and no one will be

ready to prefer an already ‘accomplished misfortune’ to one that is

merely  a  possibility.  The  fault  in  this  train  of  thought  can  be  more

easily  shown  in  another  example  -  a  story  which  I  cannot  entirely

divest of its dialect:

   ‘In the temple at Cracow the Great Rabbi N. was sitting and praying

with  his  disciples.  Suddenly  he  uttered  a  cry,  and,  in  reply  to  his

disciples’  anxious  enquiries,  exclaimed:  "At  this  very  moment  the

Great Rabbi L. has died in Lemberg." The community put on mourningfor the dead man. In the course of the next few days people arriving

from Lemberg were asked how the Rabbi had died and what had been

wrong with him; but they knew nothing about it, and had left him in the

best of health. At last it was established with certainty that the Rabbi

L. in Lemberg had not died at the moment at which the Rabbi N. had

observed his death by telepathy, since he was still alive. A stranger

took the opportunity of jeering at one of the Cracow Rabbi’s disciples

about this occurrence: "Your Rabbi made a great fool of himself that

time, when he saw the Rabbi L. die in Lemberg. The man’s alive to

this day." "That makes no difference", replied the disciple. "Whatever

you may say, the Kück¹ from Cracow to Lemberg was a magnificent

one."'

      The  faulty  reasoning  common  to  the  last  two  examples  is  here

undisguisedly  admitted.  The  value  of  phantasy  is  exalted  unduly  in

comparison with reality; a possibility is almost equated with an actual

event.  The  distant  look  across  the  stretch  of  country  separating

Cracow  and  Lemberg  would  have  been  an  impressive  telepathic

achievement  if  it  had  produced  something  that  was  true.  But  the

disciple was not concerned with that. It might after all have possibly

happened that the Rabbi in Lemberg had died at the moment at which

the Cracow Rabbi announced his death; and the disciple displaced the

emphasis  from  the  condition  subject  to  which  the  teacher’s

achievement deserved admiration on to an unconditional admiration of

the  achievement.  ‘In  magnis  rebus  voluisse  sat  est’  ²  expresses  a

similar point of view. Just as in this example reality is disregarded in

favour  of  possibility,  so  in  the  former  one  the  marriage-broker

suggests to the would-be bridegroom that the possibility of a woman

being made lame by an accident should be regarded as something far

more important than the question of whether she is really lame or not.

 

   ¹ [A Yiddish word] from the German ‘gucken [to look or peep]’: ‘look’, ‘distant look’.

   ² [‘In great things it is enough to have wished.’]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1665

 

   This group of ‘sophistical’ pieces of faulty reasoning is resembled byanother  interesting  group  in  which  the  faulty  reasoning  can  be

described as ‘automatic’. It may be due to no more than a whim of

chance  that  all  the  examples  that  I  shall  bring  forward  of  this  new

group are once more Schadchen stories:

   ‘A Schadchen had brought an assistant with him to the discussion

about the proposed bride, to bear out what he had to say. "She is

straight  as  a  pine-tree",  said  the Schadchen.  -  "As  a  pine-tree",

repeated  the  echo.  -  "And  she  has  eyes  that  ought  to  be  seen!"  -

"What  eyes  she  has!"  confirmed  the  echo.-  "And  she  is  better

educated than anyone!" - "What an education!" - "It’s true there’s one

thing", admitted the broker, "she has a small hump." - "And what a

hump!"  the  echo  confirmed  once  more.’  The  other  stories  are

analogous, but have more sense.

   ‘The bridegroom was most disagreeably surprised when the bride

was  introduced  to  him,  and  drew  the  broker  on  one  side  and

whispered his remonstrances: "Why have you brought me here?" he

asked  reproachfully.  "She’s  ugly  and  old,  she  squints  and  has  bad

teeth  and  bleary  eyes  .  .  ."  -  "You  needn’t  lower  your  voice",

interrupted the broker, "she’s deaf as well."'

   ‘The bridegroom was paying his first visit to the bride’s house in the

company of the broker, and while they were waiting in the salon for

the  family  to  appear,  the  broker  drew  attention  to  a  cupboard  with

glass  doors  in  which  the  finest  set  of  silver  plate  was  exhibited.

"There! Look at that! You can see from these things how rich these

people are." - "But", asked the suspicious young man, "mightn’t it be

possible that these fine things were only collected for the occasion -

that they were borrowed to give an impression of wealth?" - "What an

idea!" answered the broker protestingly. "Who do you think would lend

these people anything?"'

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1666

 

      The  same  thing  happens  in  all  three  cases.  A  person  who  has

reacted  in  the  same  way  several  times  in  succession  repeats  this

mode of expression on the next occasion, when it is unsuitable anddefeats his own intentions. He neglects to adapt himself to the needs

of the situation, by giving way to the automatic action of habit. Thus, in

the first story the assistant forgets that he was brought along in order

to prejudice the would-be bridegroom in favour of the proposed bride.

And since to begin with he has performed his task and underlined the

bride’s advantages by repeating each one as it is brought forward, he

goes on to underline her timidly admitted hump, which he should have

minimized. The broker in the second story is so much fascinated by

the  enumeration  of  the  bride’s  defects  and  infirmities  that  he

completes the list out of his own knowledge, though that was certainly

not  his  business  or  purpose.  In  the  third  story,  finally,  he  allows

himself to be so much carried away by his eagerness to convince the

young  man  of  the  family’s  wealth  that,  in  order  to  establish  one

confirmatory point, he brings up something that is bound to upset all

his efforts. In every case automatic action triumphs over the expedient

modification of thought and expression.

   This is easy to see; but it is bound to have a confusing effect when

we notice that these three stories have as much right to be called

‘comic’  as  we  had  to  produce  them  as  ‘jokes’.  The  uncovering  of

psychical automatism is one of the techniques of the comic, just as is

any  kind  of  revelation  or  self-betrayal.  We  suddenly  find  ourselves

faced at this point with the problem of the relation of jokes to the comic

which we intended to evade. (See the introduction.) Are these stories

perhaps only ‘comic’ and not ‘jokes’? Is the comic operating here by

the same methods as jokes do? And, once again, what constitutes the

peculiar characteristics of jokes?

   We must keep to our view that the technique of this last group of

jokes  that  we  have  examined  lies  in  nothing  else  than  in  bringing

forward  ‘faulty  reasoning’.  But  we  are  obliged  to  admit  that  their

examination has so far led us more into obscurity than understanding.

Nevertheless  we  do  not  abandon  our  expectation  that  a  more

complete knowledge of the techniques of jokes will lead us to a result

which can serve as a starting point for further discoveries.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1667 

 

   The next examples of jokes, with which we shall pursue our enquiry,

offer an easier task. Their technique, in particular, reminds us of what

we already know.

   First, here is a joke of Lichtenberg’s:

   ‘January is the month in which we offer our dear friends wishes, and

the rest are the months in which they are not fulfilled.’

   Since these jokes are to be described as refined rather than strong,

and work by methods that are unobtrusive, we will begin by presenting

a number of them in order to intensify their effect:

   ‘Human life falls into two halves. In the first half we wish the second

one would come; and in the second we wish the first one were back.’

      ‘Experience  consists  in  experiencing  what  we  do  not  wish  to

experience.’

   (Both these last two are from Fischer, 1889.)

   These examples cannot fail to remind us of a group with which we

have already dealt and which is distinguished by the ‘multiple use of

the  same  material’.  The  last  example  in  particular  will  raise  the

question  of  why  we  did  not  include  it  in  that  group  instead  of

introducing it here in a fresh connection. ‘Experience’ is once again

described in its own terms, just as ‘jealousy’ was earlier (p. 1640). I

should not be inclined to dispute this classification very seriously. But

as regards the other two examples (which are of a similar nature), I

think  another  factor  is  more  striking  and  more  important  than  the

multiple use of the same words, in which in this case there is nothing

that fringes on double meaning. I should like in particular to stress the

fact  that  here  new  and  unexpected  unities  are  set  up,  relations  of

ideas to one another, definitions made mutually or by reference to a

common third element. I should like to name this process ‘unification’.

It is clearly analogous to condensation by compression into the same

words. Thus the two halves of human life are described by a mutual

relation  discovered  to  exist  between  them:  in  the  first  we  wish  the

second would come and in the second we wish the first were back.

Speaking more precisely, two very similar mutual relations have been

chosen  for  representation.  To  the  similarity  of  the  relations  there

corresponds a similarity of the words, which may indeed remind us ofthe multiple use of the same material: ‘wish . . . would come’ - ‘wish . .

. back’. In Lichtenberg’s joke January and the months contrasted with

it  are  characterized  by  a  (once  again,  modified)  relation  to  a  third

element; these are the good wishes, which are received in the first

month and not fulfilled in the remaining ones. Here the distinction from

the multiple use of the same material (which approximates to double

meaning) is very clear.¹

 

   ¹ In order to give a better description of ‘unification’ than the examples above allow of, I will

make use of something I have already mentioned - namely the peculiar negative relation that
holds between jokes and riddles, according to which the one conceals what the other exhibits.
Many of the riddles with the production of which G. T. Fechner, the philosopher, passed his
time when he was blind, are characterized by a high degree of unification, which lends them a
special  charm.  Take,  for  instance,  as  a  neat  example,  Riddle  No.  203  (Dr.  Mises’
Rätselbüchlein, 4th edition, enlarged, N.D.):
 
                                                Die beiden ersten finden ihre Ruhestätte
                                                Im Paar der andern, und das Ganze macht ihr Bette.
 
   [My two first (Toten, the dead) find their resting-place in my two last (Gräber, graves), and
my whole (Totengräber, grave-digger) makes their bed.]
   We are told nothing about the two pairs of syllables that have to be guessed except a
relation that holds between them, and about the whole we are only told its relation to the first
pair.
   The following are two examples of description by relation to the same or a slightly modified
third element:
 
                                                Die erste Silb’hat Zähn’ und Haare,
                                                Die zweite Zähne in den Haaren,
                                                Wer auf den Zähnen nicht hat Haare,
                                                Vom Ganzen kaufe keine Waren.        No. 170.
 
   [The first syllable has teeth and hair (Ross, horse), the second has teeth in the hair (Kamm,
comb). No one who has not hair on his teeth (i.e. who is not able to look after his interests)
should buy goods from the whole (Rosskamm, horse-dealer).]
 
                                                Die erste Silbe frisst,
                                                Die andere Silbe isst,
                                                Die dritte wird gefressen,
                                                Das Ganze wird gegessen.                No. 168.
 
   [The first syllable gobbles (Sau, sow), the second syllable eats (Er, he), the third is gobbled
(Kraut, weeds), the whole is eaten (Sauerkraut).]
   The most perfect instance of unification is to be found in a riddle of Schleiermacher’s, which
cannot be denied the character of a joke:
 
                                                Von der letzten umschlungen                                                Schwebt das vollendete Ganze
                                                Zu den zwei ersten empor.
 
   [Entwined by my last (Strick, rope), my completed whole (Galgenstrick, rogue) swings to the
top of my two first (Galgen, gallows).]
   The great majority of all such riddles lack unification. That is to say, the clue by which one
syllable is to be guessed is quite independent of those that point to the second or third, as well
as of the indication which is to lead to the separate discovery of the whole.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1668

 

      Here  is  a  neat  example  of  a  unification  joke  which  needs  no

explanation:

   ‘The French poet J. B. Rousseau wrote an Ode to Posterity. Voltaire

was  not  of  opinion  that  the  poem  merited  survival,  and  jokingly

remarked: "This poem will not reach its destination."' (Fischer, 1889.)

   This last example draws attention to the fact that it is essentially

unification that lies at the bottom of jokes that can be described as

‘ready repartees’. For repartee consists in the defence going to meet

the aggression, in ‘turning the tables on someone’ or ‘paying someone

back in his own coin’ - that is, in establishing an unexpected unity

between attack and counter-attack. For instance:

   ‘An innkeeper had a whitlow on his finger and the baker said to him:

"You must have got that by putting your finger in your beer." "It wasn’t

that", replied the innkeeper, "I got a piece of your bread under my

nail."' (From Überhorst (1900, 2).)

   ‘Serenissimus was making a tour through his provinces and noticed

a  man  in  the  crowd  who  bore  a  striking  resemblance  to  his  own

exalted person. He beckoned to him and asked: "Was your mother at

one  time  in  service  in  the  Palace?"-  "No,  your  Highness,"  was  the

reply, "but my father was."'

      ‘Duke  Charles  of  Württemberg  happened  on  one  of  his  rides  to

come upon a dyer who was engaged on his job. Pointing to the grey

horse he was riding, the Duke called out: "Can you dye him blue?"

"Yes, of course, your Highness," came the answer, "if he can stand

boiling."'

   In this excellent tu quoque, in which a nonsensical question is met

by an equally impossible condition, there is another technical factor atwork which would have been absent if the dyer had answered: ‘No,

your Highness. I’m afraid the horse wouldn’t stand boiling.’

      Unification  has  another,  quite  specially  interesting  technical

instrument  at  its  disposal:  stringing  things  together  with  the

conjunction ‘and’. If things are strung together in this way it implies

that  they  are  connected:  we  cannot  help  understanding  it  so.  For

instance,  when  Heine,  speaking  of  the  city  of  Göttingen  in  the

Harzreise, remarks: ‘Speaking generally, the inhabitants of Göttingen

are divided into students, professors, philistines and donkeys’, we take

this grouping in precisely the sense which Heine emphasizes in an

addition  to  the  sentence:  ‘and  these  four  classes  are  anything  but

sharply divided.’ Or, again, when he speaks of the school in which he

had to put up with ‘so much Latin, caning and Geography’, this series,

which is made even more transparent by the position of the ‘caning’

between the two educational subjects, tells us that the unmistakable

view taken by the schoolboys of the caning certainly extended to Latin

and Geography was well.

   Among the examples given by Lipps of ‘joking enumeration’ (‘co-

ordination’), we find the following lines quoted as being closely akin to

Heine’s ‘students, professors, philistines and donkeys’:

 

                                                Mit einer Gabel und mit Müh’
                                                Zos ihn die Mutter aus der Brüh.
 
                                                [With a fork and much to-do
                                                His mother dragged him from the stew.]

 

   It is as though (Lipps comments), the Müh [trouble, to-do] were an

instrument like the fork. We have a feeling, however, that these lines,

though they are very comic, are far from being a joke, while Heine’s

list undoubtedly is one. We may perhaps recall these examples later,

when we need no longer evade the problem of the relation between

the comic and jokes.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1669

 

    We observed in the example of the Duke and the dyer that it would

remain a joke by unification if the dyer had replied: ‘No, I’m afraid the

horse  wouldn’t  stand  boiling.’  But  his  actual  reply  was:  ‘ Yes, your

Highness,  if  he  can  stand  boiling.’  The  replacement  of  the  really

appropriate  ‘no’  by  a  ‘yes’  constitutes  a  new  technical  method  of

joking,  the  employment  of  which  we  will  pursue  in  some  other

examples.

   A joke similar to the one we have just mentioned (also quoted by

Fischer) is simpler:

   ‘Frederick the Great heard of a preacher in Silesia who had the

reputation of being in contact with spirits. He sent for the man and

received him with the question "You can conjure up spirits?" The reply

was: "At your Majesty’s command. But they don’t come."' It is quite

obvious here that the method used in the joke lay in nothing else than

the replacing of the only possible answer ‘no’ by its opposite. In order

to carry out the replacement, it was necessary to add a ‘but’ to the

‘yes’; so that ‘yes’ and ‘but’ are equivalent in sense to ‘no’.

   This ‘representation by the opposite’, as we shall call it, serves the

joke-work in various forms. In the next two examples it appears almost

pure:

   ‘This lady resembles the Venus of Milo in many respects: she, too, is

extraordinarily  old,  like  her  she  has  no  teeth,  and  there  are  white

patches on the yellowish surface of her body.’ (Heine.)

   Here we have a representation of ugliness through resemblances to

what  is  most  beautiful.  It  is  true  that  these  resemblances  can  only

exist in qualities that are expressed in terms with a double meaning or

in  unimportant  details.  This  latter  feature  applies  to  our  second

example - ‘The Great Spirit’, by Lichtenberg:

   ‘He united in himself the characteristics of the greatest men. He

carried his head askew like Alexander; he always had to wear a toupet

like  Caesar;  he  could  drink  coffee  like  Leibnitz;  and  once  he  was

properly  settled  in  his  armchair,  he  forgot  eating  and  drinking  like

Newton, and had to be woken up like him; he wore his wig like Dr.

Johnson,  and  he  always  left  a  breeches-button  undone  like

Cervantes.’

                 Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1670

 

   Von Falke (1897, 271) brought home a particularly good example of

representation by the opposite from a journey to Ireland, an example

in which no use whatever is made of words with a double meaning.

The scene was a wax-work show (as it might be, Madame Tussaud’s).

A guide was conducting a company of old and young visitors from

figure  to  figure  and  commenting  on  them:  ‘This  is  the  Duke  of

Wellington  and  his  horse’,  he  explained.  Whereupon  a  young  lady

asked: ‘Which is the Duke of Wellington and which is his horse?’ ‘Just

as you like, my pretty child,’ was the reply. ‘You pays your money and

you takes your choice.’

   The reduction of this Irish joke would be: ‘Shameless the things

these wax-work people dare to offer the public! One can’t distinguish

between the horse and its rider! (Facetious exaggeration.) And that’s

what one pays one’s money for!’ This indignant exclamation is then

dramatized, based on a small occurrence. In place of the public in

general  an  individual  lady  appears  and  the  figure  of  the  rider  is

particularized: he must be the Duke of Wellington, who is so extremely

popular in Ireland. But the shamelessness of the proprietor or guide,

who takes money out of people’s pockets and offers them no thing in

return,  is  represented  by  the  opposite  -  by  a  speech  in  which  he

boasts  himself  a  conscientious  man  of  business,  who  has  nothing

more closely at heart than regard for the rights which the public has

acquired by its payment. And now we can see that the technique of

this joke is not quite a simple one. In so far as it enables the swindler

to insist on his conscientiousness it is a case of representation by the

opposite;  but  in  so  far  as  it  effects  this  on  an  occasion  on  which

something quite different is demanded of him - so that he replies with

business  like  respectability  where  what  we  expect  of  him  is  the

identification  of  the  figures  -  it  is  an  instance  of  displacement.  The

technique of the joke lies in a combination of the two methods.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1671

    No great distance separates this example from a small group which

might be described as ‘overstatement’ jokes. In these the ‘yes’ which

would  be  in  place  in  the  reduction  is  replaced  by  a  ‘no’,  which,

however,  on  account  of  its  content,  has  the  force  of  an  intensified

‘yes’,  and vice  versa.  A  denial  is  a  substitute  for  an  overstated

confirmation. Thus, for instance, in Lessing’s epigram:¹

 

                                                Die gute Galathee! Man sagt, sie schwärz’ ihr Haar;
                                                Da doch ihr Haar schon schwarz, als sie es kaufte, war.
 
                                                [Good Galathea blacks her hair, ‘tis thought;
                                                And yet her hair was black when it was bought.]

 

   Or Lichtenberg’s malicious defence of philosophy:

   ‘There are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamt of in

your  philosophy’,  said  Prince  Hamlet  contemptuously.  Lichtenberg

knew that this condemnation is not nearly severe enough, for it does

not  take  into  account  all  the  objections  that  can  be  made  to

philosophy. He therefore added what was missing: ‘But there is much,

too,  in  philosophy  that  is  not  to  be  found  in  heaven  or  earth.’  His

addition,  it  is  true,  emphasizes  the  way  in  which  philosophy

compensates us for the insufficiency for which Hamlet censures it. But

this compensation implies another and still greater reproach.

      Two  Jewish  jokes,  though  they  are  of  a  coarse  type,  are  even

clearer, since they are free from any trace of displacement:

   ‘Two Jews were discussing baths. "I have a bath every year", said

one of them, "whether I need one or not."'

   It is obvious that this boastful insistence on his cleanliness only

serves to convict him of uncleanliness.

   ‘A Jew noticed the remains of some food in another one’s beard. "I

can tell you what you had to eat yesterday." - "Well, tell me." - "Lentils,

then." - "Wrong: the day before yesterday! "'

   The following example is an excellent ‘overstatement’ joke, which

can easily be traced back to representation by the opposite:

   ‘The King condescended to visit a surgical clinic and came on the

professor  as  he  was  carrying  out  the  amputation  of  a  leg.  He

accompanied  all  its  stages  with  loud  expressions  of  his  royal

satisfaction: "Bravo! bravo! my dear Professor!" When the operationwas  finished,  the  professor  approached  him  and  asked  him  with  a

deep bow: "Is it your Majesty’s command that I should remove the

other leg too?" ‘

 

   ¹ Modelled on one in the Greek Anthology.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1672

 

   The professor’s thoughts during the royal applause could certainly

not have been expressed unaltered: ‘This makes it look as though I

were taking off the poor fellows bad leg by royal command and only

for the royal satisfaction. After all I really have other reasons for the

operation.’ But he then goes to the King and says: ‘I have no reasons

for carrying out an operation other than your Majesty’s command. The

applause you honoured me with has made me so happy that I only

await your Majesty’s orders to amputate the sound limb too.’ In this

way he succeeds in making himself understood by saying the opposite

of  what  he  thinks  but  must  keep  to  himself.  This  opposite  is  an

overstatement that cannot be believed.

      As  these  examples  show,  representation  by  the  opposite  is  an

instrument  of  joke-technique  that  is  used  frequently  and  works

powerfully. But there is something else that we should not overlook:

namely that this technique is by no means peculiar to jokes. When

Mark Antony, after he has made a long speech in the Forum and has

reversed  the  emotional  attitude  of  his  audience  round  Caesar’s

corpse, finally exclaims once more:

 

                                                ‘For Brutus is an honourable man . . .’

 

he knows that the people will now shout back to him the true sense of

his words:

 

                                                ‘They were traitors: honourable men!’

 

   Or when Simplicissimus describes a collection of incredible pieces

of brutality and cynicism as the expressions of ‘men of feeling’, this toois  a  representation  by  the  opposite.  But  we  call  this  ‘irony’  and  no

longer  a  joke.  The  only  technique  that  characterizes  irony  is

representation by the opposite. Moreover we read and hear of ‘ironical

jokes’.  So  it  can  no  longer  be  doubted  that  technique  alone  is

insufficient to characterize the nature of jokes. Something further is

needed which we have not yet discovered. But on the other hand it

remains an uncontradicted fact that if we undo the technique of a joke

it disappears. For the time being we may find difficulty in thinking how

these two fixed points that we have arrived at in explaining jokes can

be reconciled.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1673

 

 

   If representation by the opposite is one of the technical methods of

jokes, we can expect that jokes may also make use of its contrary -

representation by something similar or akin. A further pursuit of our

enquiry will in fact show us that this is the technique of a fresh and

particularly  comprehensive  group  of  conceptual  jokes.  We  shall

describe  the  peculiarity  of  this  technique  far  more  appropriately  if,

instead of representation by something ‘akin’, we say by something

‘correlated’ or ‘connected’. We will take our start, in fact, with this latter

characteristic and illustrate it at once by an example.

      Here  is  an  American  anecdote:  ‘Two  not  particularly  scrupulous

business  men  had  succeeded,  by  dint  of  a  series  of  highly  risky

enterprises, in amassing a large fortune, and they were now making

efforts to push their way into good society. One method, which struck

them as a likely one, was to have their portraits painted by the most

celebrated and highly paid artist in the city, whose pictures had an

immense reputation. The precious canvases were shown for the first

time at a large evening party, and the two hosts themselves led the

most influential connoisseur and art critic up to the wall upon which

the  portraits  were  hanging  side  by  side,  to  extract  his  admiring

judgement on them. He studied the works for a long time, and then,

shaking  his  head,  as  though  there  was  something  he  had  missed,pointed  to  the  gap  between  the  pictures  and  asked  quietly:  "But

where’s the Saviour?"' (I.e. ‘I don’t see the picture of the Saviour’.)

   The meaning of this remark is clear. It is once again a question of

the  representation  of  something  that  cannot  be  expressed  directly.

How does this ‘indirect representation’ come about?  Starting from the

representation  in  the  joke,  we  trace  the  path  backwards  through  a

series of easily established associations and inferences.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1674

 

   We can guess from the question ‘Where’s the Saviour: Where’s the

picture of the Saviour?’ that the sight of the two pictures had reminded

the speaker of a similar sight, familiar to him, as to us, which however,

included an element that was missing here - the picture of the Saviour

between two other pictures. There is only one such situation: Christ

hanging between the two thieves. The missing element is brought into

prominence by the joke. The similarity lies in the pictures, hanging to

the right and left of the Saviour, which the joke passes over; it can

only  consist  in  the  fact  that  the  pictures  hanging  on  the  walls  are

pictures of thieves. What the critic wanted to say but could not say

was: ‘You are a couple of rascals’ or, in greater detail: ‘What do I care

about your pictures? You are a couple of rascals - I know that!’ And he

did  in  fact  end  by  saying  it  by  means  of  a  few  associations  and

inferences, using the method which we speak of as an ‘allusion’.

   We at once recall where we have already come across allusion -  in

connection, namely, with double meaning. When two meanings are

expressed in one word and one of them is so much more frequent and

usual that it occurs to us at once, while the second is more out of the

way and therefore less prominent, we proposed to speak of this as

‘double meaning with an allusion’. In a whole number of the examples

we have already examined we remarked that the technique was not a

simple  one,  and  we  now  perceive  that  the  ‘allusion’  was  the

complicating  factor  in  them.  (See,  for  instance,  the  inversion  joke

about the wife who has lain back a bit and so has been able to earn a

lot  or  the  nonsensical  joke  about  the  man  who  replied  tocongratulations on the birth of his youngest child by saying that it was

remarkable what human hands could accomplish.)

      In  the  American  anecdote  we  now  have  before  us  an  allusion

without  any  double  meaning,  and  we  see  that  its  characteristic  is

replacement by something linked to it in a conceptual connection. It

may easily be guessed that the utilizable connection can be of more

than one kind. In order not to lose ourselves in a maze of detail, we

will discuss only the most marked variants and these only in a few

examples.

      The  connection  used  for  the  replacement  may  be  merely  a

resemblance in sound, so that this sub-species becomes analogous to

puns among verbal jokes. Here, however, it is not the resemblance in

sound  between  two words,  but  between  whole  sentences,

characteristic phrases, and so on.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1675

 

   For instance, Lichtenberg coined the saying: ‘New spas cure well’,

which at once reminds us of the proverb: ‘New brooms sweep clean.’

The two phrases share the first one and a half words and the last

word, as well as the whole structure of the sentence.¹ And there is no

doubt that the sentence came into the witty philosopher’s head as an

imitation of the familiar proverb. Thus Lichtenberg’s saying becomes

an  allusion  to  the  proverb.  By  means  of  this  allusion  something  is

suggested that is not said straight out - namely that something else is

responsible for the effects produced by spas besides the unvarying

characteristics of thermal springs.

   A similar technical solution applies to another jest [Scherz] or joke

[Witz] of Lichtenberg’s: ‘A girl scarcely twelve Moden old.’ This sounds

like ‘twelve Monden  [moons]’,  i.e.  months,  and  may  originally  have

been a slip of the pen for the latter, which is a permissible expression

in poetry. But it also makes good sense to use the changing fashion

instead of the changing moon as a method of determining a woman’s

age.

   The connection may also consist in similarity except for a ‘slightmodification’.  So  that  this  technique,  too,  is  parallel  to  a  verbal

technique. Both species of joke make almost the same impression,

but they can be better distinguished from each other if we consider the

processes of the joke-work.

   Here is an example of a verbal joke or pun of this kind: Marie Wilt

was a great singer, famous, however, for the compass not only of her

voice. She suffered the humiliation of having the title of a play based

on  Jules  Verne’s  well-known  novel  used  as  an  allusion  to  her

misshapen figure: ‘Round the Wilt in 80 Days’.²

   Or: ‘Every fathom a queen’, a modification of Shakespeare’s familiar

‘Every  inch  a  king’.  The  allusion  to  this  quotation  was  made  with

reference  to  an  aristocratic  and  over-life-size  lady.  No  very  serious

objection could really be made if anyone were to prefer to include this

joke  among  the  ‘condensations  accompanied  by  modifications  as

substitute’. (See ‘tête-à-bête’, p. 1631.)

 

   ¹ [In the German the first syllables of ‘spas (Bäder)' and ‘brooms (Besen)' sound alike; and

in the German proverb the last word is ‘well (gut)'.]

   ² [The German for ‘world’ is ‘Welt '.]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1676

 

   A friend said of someone who had lofty views but was obstinate in

the pursuit of his aims: ‘Er hat ein Ideal vor dem Kopf.’ The current

phrase is: ‘Ein Brett vor dem Kopf haben’. The modification alludes to

this phrase and makes use of its meaning for its own purposes. Here,

once more, the technique might be described as ‘condensation with

modification’.

   It is almost impossible to distinguish between ‘allusion by means of

modification’ and ‘condensation with substitution’, if the modification is

limited to a change of letters. For instance: ‘Dichteritis’¹ This allusion

to  the  scourge  of  ‘Diphteritis  '  represents  authorship  by  unqualified

persons as another public danger.

   Negative particles make very neat allusions possible at the cost of

slight alterations:

   ‘My fellow-unbeliever Spinoza’, says Heine. ‘We, by the ungrace ofGod, day-labourers, serfs, negroes, villeins . . .’ is how Lichtenberg

begins  a  manifesto  (which  he  carries  no  further)  made  by  these

unfortunates - who certainly have more right to this title than kings and

princes have to its unmodified form.

   Finally, another kind of allusion consists in  ‘omission’, which may be

compared  to  condensation  without  the  formation  of  a  substitute.

Actually,  in  every  allusion  something  is  omitted,  viz.  the  train  of

thought leading to the allusion. It only depends on whether the more

obvious thing is the gap in the wording of the allusion or the substitute

which partly fills the gap. Thus a series of examples would lead us

back from blatant omission to allusion proper.

 

   ¹ [A non-existent word, which might be translated ‘authoritis’ - from ‘Dichter (an author)'.]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1677

 

   Omission without a substitute is shown in the following example:

There  is  a  witty  and  pugnacious  journalist  in  Vienna,  whose  biting

invective has repeatedly led to his being physically maltreated by the

subjects of his attacks. On one occasion, when a fresh misdeed on

the  part  of  one  of  his  habitual  opponents  was  being  discussed,

somebody  exclaimed:  ‘If  X  hears  of  this,  he’ll  get  his  ears  boxed

again.’  The  technique  of  this  joke  includes,  in  the  first  place,

bewilderment  at  its  apparent  nonsense,  since  we  cannot  see  how

getting one’s ears boxed can be an immediate consequence of having

heard something. The absurdity of the remark disappears if we insert

in the gap: ‘he’ll write such a scathing article upon the man that . . .

etc.’  Allusion  by  means  of  omission,  combined  with  nonsense,  are

accordingly the technical methods used in this joke.

   ‘He praises himself so much that the price of fumigating candles is

going up.’ (Heine.) This gap is easy to fill. What is omitted has been

replaced by an inference, which then leads back to what has been

omitted, in the form of an allusion: ‘self-praise stinks.’

   And now once again two Jews outside the bath-house:

   One of them sighed: ‘Another year gone by already!’

   These examples leave us in no doubt that here the omission formspart of the allusion.

   There is still quite a marked gap to be seen in our next example,

though  it  is  a  genuine  and  correct  allusive  joke.  After  an  artists’

carnival in Vienna a jest-book was circulated, in which, among others,

the following highly remarkable epigram appeared:

   ‘A wife is like an umbrella. Sooner or later one takes a cab.’

   An umbrella is not enough protection against rain. The ‘sooner or

later’ can only mean ‘if it rains hard’, and a cab is a public vehicle. But

since we are only concerned here with the form of the analogy, we will

postpone the closer examination of this joke to a later moment.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1678

 

   Heine’s ‘Bäder von Lucca’ contains a regular wasp’s next of the

most stinging allusions and makes the most ingenious use of this form

of joke for polemical purposes (against Count Platen). Long before the

reader  can  suspect  what  is  afoot,  there  are  foreshadowings  of  a

particular  theme,  peculiarly  ill-adapted  for  direct  representation,  by

allusions to material of the most varied kind, - for instance, in Hirsch-

Hyacinth’s verbal contortions: ‘You are too stout and I am too thin; you

have a good deal of imagination and I have all the more business

sense; I am a practicus and you are a diarrheticus; in short you are my

complete antipodex.’ - ‘Venus Urinia’ - ‘the stout Gudel von Dreckwall’

of Hamburg, and so on. In what follows, the events described by the

author  take  a  turn  which  seems  at  first  merely  to  display  his

mischievous  spirit  but  soon  reveals  its  symbolic  relation  to  his

polemical  purpose  and  at  the  same  time  shows  itself  as  allusive.

Eventually  the  attack  on  Platen  bursts  out,  and  thenceforward

allusions  to  the  theme  (with  which  we  have  already  been  made

acquainted) of the Count’s love for men gushes out and overflows in

every  sentence  of  Heine’s  attack  on  his  opponent’s  talents  and

character. For instance:

   ‘Even though the Muses do not favour him, he has the Genius of

Speech in his power, or rather he knows how to do violence to him.

For  he  does  not  possess  the  free  love  of  that  Genius,  he  mustunceasingly pursue this young man, too, and he knows how to capture

only the outer forms, which, despite their lovely curves never speak

nobly.’

   ‘He is like the ostrich, which believes he is well hidden if he sticks

his head in the sand, so that only his behind can be seen. Our exalted

bird would have done better to hide his behind in the sand and show

us his head.’

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1679

 

 

   Allusion is perhaps the commonest and most easily manageable

method of joking and is at the bottom of the majority of short-lived

jokes which we are accustomed to weaving into our conversations and

which will not bear being uprooted from their original soil and kept in

isolation. But it precisely reminds us once more of the fact that had

begun to puzzle us in our consideration of the technique of jokes. An

allusion  in  itself  does  not  constitute  a  joke;  there  are  correctly

constructed allusions which have no claim to such a character. Only

allusions that possess that character can be described as jokes. So

that the criterion of jokes, which we have pursued into their technique,

eludes us there once again.

   I have occasionally described allusion as  ‘indirect representation’;

and we may now observe that the various species of allusion, together

with representation by the opposite and other techniques that have

still  to  be  mentioned,  may  be  united  into  a  single  large  group,  for

which  ‘indirect  representation’  would  be  the  most  comprehensive

name. ‘Faulty reasoning’, ‘unification’, ‘indirect representation’ - these,

then, are the headings under which we can classify those techniques

of conceptual jokes which we have come to know.

 

   If we examine our material further, we seem to recognize a fresh

sub-species  of  indirect  representation  which  can  be  precisely

characterized  but  of  which  few  examples  can  be  adduced.  This  is

representation by something small or very small - which performs thetask of giving full expression to a whole characteristic by means of a

tiny  detail.  This  group  can  be  brought  under  the  classification  of

‘allusion’, if we bear in mind that this smallness is related to what has

to be represented, and can be seen to proceed from it. For instance:

   ‘A Galician Jew was travelling in a train. He had made himself really

comfortable, had unbuttoned his coat and put his feet up on the seat.

Just then a gentleman in modern dress entered the compartment. The

Jew promptly pulled himself together and took up a proper pose. The

stranger  fingered  through  the  pages  of  a  notebook,  made  some

calculations, reflected for a moment and then suddenly asked the Jew:

"Excuse me, when is Yom Kippur (the Day of Atonement)?" "Oho!",

said the Jew, and put his feet up on the seat again before answering.’

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1680

 

   It cannot be denied that this representation by something small is

related to the ‘tendency to economy’ which we were left with as the

last common element after our investigation of verbal technique.

   Here is a very similar example:

   ‘The doctor, who had been asked to look after the Baroness at her

confinement,  pronounced  that  the  moment  had  not  come,  and

suggested to the Baron that in the meantime they should have a game

of  cards  in  the  next  room.  After  a  while  a  cry  of  pain  from  the

Baroness  struck  the  ears  of  the  two  men:  "Ah,  mon  Dieu,  que  je

souffre!" Her husband sprang up, but the doctor signed to him to sit

down: "It’s nothing. Let’s go on with the game!" A little later there were

again sounds from the pregnant woman: "Mein Gott, mein Gott, what

terrible pains!" - "Aren’t you going in, Professor?" asked the Baron. -

"No,  no.  It’s  not  time  yet."  -  At  last  there  came  from  next  door  an

unmistakable cry of "Aa-ee, aa-ee, aa-ee!" The doctor threw down his

cards and exclaimed: "Now it’s time."'

   This successful joke demonstrates two things from the example of

the way in which the cries of pain uttered by an aristocratic lady in

child-birth  changed  their  character  little  by  little.  It  shows  how  pain

causes primitive nature to break through all the layers of education,and how an important decision can be properly made to depend on an

apparently trivial phenomenon.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1681

 

 

      There  is  another  kind  of  indirect  representation  used  by  jokes,

namely  the  ‘analogy’.  We  have  kept  it  back  so  long  because  the

consideration  of  it  comes  up  against  new  difficulties,  or  makes

particularly evident difficulties that we have already come up against in

other  connections.  We  have  already  admitted  that  in  some  of  the

examples we have examined we have not been able to banish a doubt

as to whether they ought to be regarded as jokes at all; and in this

uncertainty we have recognized that the foundations of our enquiry

have been seriously shaken. But I am aware of this uncertainty in no

other  material  more  strongly  or  more  frequently  than  in  jokes  of

analogy.  There  is  a  feeling  -  and  this  is  probably  true  of  a  large

number of other people under the same conditions - which tells me

‘this  is  a  joke,  I  can  pronounce  this  to  be  a  joke’  even  before  the

hidden  essential  nature  of  jokes  has  been  discovered.  This  feeling

leaves me in the lurch most often in the case of joking analogies. If to

begin  with  I  unhesitatingly  pronounce  an  analogy  to  be  a  joke,  a

moment later I seem to notice that the enjoyment it gives me is of a

quality different from what I am accustomed to derive from a joke. And

the  circumstance  that  joking  analogies  are  very  seldom  able  to

provoke the explosive laugh which signalizes a good joke makes it

impossible for me to resolve the doubt in my usual way - by limiting

myself to the best and most effective examples of a species.

   It is easy to demonstrate that there are remarkably fine and effective

examples of analogies that do not in the least strike us as being jokes.

The  fine  analogy  between  the  tenderness  in  Ottilie’s  diary  and  the

scarlet  thread  of  the  English  navy  (p. 1629 n.)  is  one  such.  And  I

cannot refrain from quoting in the same sense another one, which I

am never tired of admiring and the effect of which I have not grown

out of. It is the analogy with which Ferdinand Lassalle ended one ofhis celebrated speeches for the defence (‘Science and the Workers’):

‘Upon  a  man  such  as  I  have  shown  you  this  one  to  be,  who  has

devoted his life to the watchword "Science and the Workers", being

convicted,  if  it  were  his  lot,  would  make  no  more  impression  than

would the bursting of a retort upon a chemist deep in his scientific

experiments. As soon as the interruption is past, with a slight frown

over  the  rebelliousness  of  his  material,  he  will  quietly  pursue  his

researches and his labours.’

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1682

 

   A rich selection of apt and joking analogies are to be found among

Lichtenberg’s writings (the second volume of the Göttingen edition of

1853),  and  it  is  from  there  that  I  shall  take  the  material  for  our

investigation.

   ‘It is almost impossible to carry the torch of truth through a crowd

without singeing someone’s beard.’

   No doubt that seems to be a joke; but on closer examination we,

notice that the joking effect does not arise from the analogy itself but

from  a  subsidiary  characteristic.  ‘The  torch  of  truth’  is  not  a  new

analogy but one that has been common for a very long time and has

become reduced to a cliché - as always happens when an analogy is

lucky and accepted into linguistic usage. Though we scarcely notice

the analogy any longer in the phrase ‘the torch of truth’, it is suddenly

given back its full original force by Lichtenberg, since an addition is

now made to the analogy and a consequence is drawn from it. But we

are already familiar with a process like this of giving its full meaning to

a watered-down expression as a technique of joking. It finds a place in

the multiple use of the same material (p. 1639 f.). It might quite well be

that the joking impression produced by Lichtenberg’s remark arises

only from its dependence on this joke-technique.

   The same judgement may certainly apply as well to another joking

analogy by the same author:

      ‘To  be  sure,  the  man  was  not  a  great  light  [Licht],  but  a  great

candlestick [Leuchter] . . . He was a Professor of Philosophy.’   To describe a man of learning as a great light, a lumen mondi, has

long ceased to be an effective analogy, whether or not it originally had

an effect as a joke. But the analogy is refreshed, it is given back its full

force, if a modification is derived from it and a second, new, analogy is

thus obtained from it. The way in which this second analogy comes

about seems to be what determines the joke, not the two analogies

themselves. This would be an instance of the same joke-technique as

in the example of the torch.

   The following example seems to have the character of a joke for

another reason, but one that must be judged similarly:

   ‘Reviews seem to me to be a kind of childish illness to which new-

born  books  are  more  or  less  liable.  There  are  examples  of  the

healthiest  dying  of  it;  and  the  weakest  often  get  through  it.  Some

escape it altogether. Attempts have often been made to guard against

it  by  the  amulets  of  preface  and  dedication,  or  even  to  inoculate

against it by judgements of one’s own. But this does not always help.’

   The comparison of reviews to a childish illness is founded in the first

instance on the fact of being exposed to them shortly after first seeing

the light of day. I cannot venture to decide whether up to this point the

comparison has the character of a joke. But it is then carried further: it

turns out that the subsequent fate of new books can be represented

within  the  framework  of  the  same  analogy  or  through  related

analogies. A prolongation like this of an analogy is undoubtedly in the

nature of a joke, but we already know what technique it has to thank

for  this  -  it  is  a  case  of  unification,  the  making  of  an  unsuspected

connection. The character of the unification is not altered by the fact

that here it consists in making an addition to a previous analogy.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1683

 

      In  another  group  of  analogies  one  is  tempted  to  shift  what  is

undoubtedly  an  impression  that  has  the  character  of  a  joke  on  to

another factor, which once again has in itself nothing to do with the

nature of the analogy. These are analogies which contain a striking

juxtaposition, often a combination that sounds absurd, or which arereplaced by something of the sort as the outcome of the analogy. The

majority of the Lichtenberg examples belong to this group.

   ‘It is a pity that one cannot see the learned entrails of authors so as

to  discover  what  they  have  eaten.’  The  ‘learned’  entrails  is  a

bewildering and indeed absurd epithet, which is only explained by the

analogy. What if the impression of its being a joke were due entirely to

the  bewildering  character  of  the  juxtaposition?  If  so,  it  would

correspond to a method of joking with which we are quite familiar -

‘representation by absurdity’

   Lichtenberg has used the same analogy between the ingestion of

reading  and  instructive  matter  and  the  ingestion  of  physical

nourishment for another joke:

      ‘He  thought  very  highly  of  learning  at  home,  and  was  therefore

entirely in favour of learned stall-feeding.’

   Other analogies by the same author exhibit the same absurd, or at

least remarkable, assignment of epithets, which, as we now begin to

see, are the true vehicles of the joke:

   ‘That is the weather side of my moral constitution; I can stand things

there quite well.’

   ‘Everyone has his moral backside, which he does not show except

in case of need and which he covers as long as possible with the

breeches of respectability.’

   ‘Moral backside’ - the assignment of this remarkable epithet is the

outcome  of  an  analogy.  But  in  addition,  the  analogy  is  continued

further with an actual play upon words - ‘need’ - and a second even

more unusual juxtaposition (‘the breeches of respectability’), which is

perhaps a joke in itself; for the breeches, since they are the breeches

of respectability, themselves, as it were, become a joke. We need not

be surprised, then, if the whole gives us the impression of being an

analogy  that  is  a  very  good  joke.  We  begin  to  notice  that  we  are

inclined, quite generally, where a characteristic attaches only to a part

of  a  whole,  to  extend  it  in  our  estimation  to  the  whole  itself.  The

‘breeches  of  respectability’,  incidentally,  recall  some  similarly

bewildering lines of Heine’s:

 
                                                                . . . Bis mir endlich,
                                                                endlich alle Knopfe rissen

                                                                an der Hose der Geduld.¹ 

      There  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  last  two  analogies  have  a

characteristic that we do not find in every good (that is to say, in every

apt) analogy. They are to a great degree ‘debasing’, as we might put

it. They juxtapose something of a high category, something abstract

(in these instances, ‘respectability’ and ‘patience’), with something of a

very  concrete  and  even  low  kind  (‘breeches’).  We  shall  have  to

consider in another connection whether this peculiarity has anything to

do with the joke. Here we will try to analyse another example in which

this  disparaging  characteristic  is  quite  specially  plain.  Weinberl,  the

clerk in Nestroy’s farce Einen Jux will er sich machen [He wants to

have  a  spree],  pictures  to  himself  how  one  day,  when  he  is  a

respectable old business man, he will remember the days of his youth:

‘When the ice in front of the warehouse of memory has been hacked

up like this in a friendly talk’, he says, ‘when the arched doorway of old

times has been unlocked again and the showcase of the imagination

is fully stocked with goods from the past. . . .’ These are, to be sure,

analogies between abstract and very commonplace concrete things;

but the joke depends - whether entirely or in part - on the fact that a

clerk  is  making  use  of  analogies  taken  from  the  domain  of  his

everyday  activities.  But  the  bringing  of  these  abstractions  into

connection with the ordinary things with which his life is normally filled

is an act of unification.

 

   ¹ [ . . . Till at last,

       at last every button bursts
       on my breeches of patience.]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1684

 

   Let us return to the Lichtenberg analogies:

   ‘The motives that lead us to do anything might be arranged like the

thirty-two winds [= points of the compass] and might be given names

in  a  similar  way:  for  instance,  "bread-bread  fame"  or  "fame-fame-

bread".  As  is  so  often  the  case  with  Lichtenberg’s  jokes,  the

impression of something apt, witty and shrewd is so prominent thatour judgement upon the nature of what constitutes the joke is misled

by it. If some amount of joke is admixed with the admirable meaning in

a remark of this kind, we are probably led into declaring that the whole

thing is an excellent joke. I should like, rather, to hazard the statement

that everything in it that is really in the nature of a joke arises from our

surprise  at  the  strange  combination  ‘bread  bread-fame’.  As  a  joke,

therefore, it would be a ‘representation by absurdity’.

   A strange juxtaposition or the attribution of an absurd epithet can

stand by itself as the outcome of an analogy:

   ‘A zweischläfrige woman.’ ‘An einschläfriger church-pew.’¹ (Both by

Lichtenberg.) Behind both these there is an analogy with a bed; in

both  of  them,  besides  the  ‘bewilderment’  the  technical  factor  of

‘allusion’ is in operation - an allusion in one case to the sleepy effects

of  sermons  and  in  the  other  to  the  inexhaustible  topic  of  sexual

relations.

   So far we have found that whenever an analogy strikes us as being

in the nature of a joke it owes this impression to the admixture of one

of  the  joke-techniques  that  are  familiar  to  us.  But  a  few  other

examples  seem  at  last  to  provide  evidence  that  an  analogy  can  in

itself be a joke.

   This is how Lichtenberg describes certain odes:

   ‘They are in poetry what Jakob Böhme’s immortal works are in prose

-  a  kind  of  picnic,  in  which  the  author  provides  the  words  and  the

reader the sense.’

   ‘When he philosophizes, he throws as a rule an agreeable moonlight

over  things,  which  pleases  in  general  but  shows  no  single  thing

clearly.’

 

   ¹ [These two German words - meaning literally ‘that can sleep two’ and ‘that can sleep one’

- are ordinarily applied to beds, i.e. ‘double’ and ‘single’. Einschläfrig, however, can also mean
‘soporific’.]
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

 1685

 

   Or here is Heine:

   ‘Her face resembled a palimpsest, on which, beneath the fresh blackmonastic manuscript of the text of a Church Father there lurk the half-

obliterated lines of an ancient Greek love poem.’

   Or let us take the lengthy analogy, with a highly degrading purpose,

in the ‘Bäder von Lucca’

   ‘A catholic cleric behaves rather like a clerk with a post in a large

business house. The Church, the big firm, of which the Pope is head,

gives him a fixed job and, in return, a fixed salary. He works lazily, as

everyone  does  who  is  not  working  for  his  own  profit,  who  has

numerous colleagues and can easily escape notice in the bustle of a

large concern. All he has at heart is the credit of the house and still

more its maintenance, since if it should go bankrupt he would lose his

livelihood. A protestant cleric, on the other hand, is in every case his

own principal and carries on the business of religion for his own profit.

He  does  not,  like  his  catholic  fellow-traders,  carry  on  a  wholesale

business but only retail. And since he must himself manage it alone,

he cannot be lazy. He must advertise his articles of faith, he must

depreciate his competitors’ articles, and, genuine retailer that he is, he

stands in his retail shop, full of business envy of all the great houses,

and particularly of the great house in Rome, which pays the wages of

so many thousands of book-keepers and packers and has its factories

in all four quarters of the globe.’

   In the face of this and many other examples, we can no longer

dispute the fact that an analogy can in itself possess the characteristic

of  being  a  joke,  without  this  impression  being  accounted  for  by  a

complication with one of the familiar joke techniques. But, that being

so, we are completely at a loss to see what it is that determines the

joking  characteristic  of  analogies,  since  that  characteristic  certainly

does not reside in analogy as a form of expression of thought or in the

operation of making a comparison. All we can do is to include analogy

among  the  species  of  ‘indirect  representation’  used  by  the  joke-

technique and we must leave unresolved the problem which we have

met  with  much  more  clearly  in  the  case  of  analogies  than  in  the

methods of joking that we came across earlier. No doubt, moreover,

there  must  be  some  special  reason  why  the  decision  whether

something is a joke or not offers greater difficulties in analogies than in

other forms of expression.

                 Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1686

 

 

   This gap in our understanding gives us no grounds, however, for

complaining  that  this  first  investigation  has  been  without  results.  In

view of the intimate connection which we must be prepared to attribute

to the different characteristics of jokes, it would be imprudent to expect

that we could completely explain one side of the problem before we

have so much as cast a glance at the others. We shall no doubt have

now to attack the problem from another direction.

   Can we feel sure that none of the possible techniques of jokes has

escaped  our  investigation?  Of  course  not.  But  a  continued

examination of fresh material can convince us that we have got to

know the commonest and most important technical methods of the

joke-work  -  at  all  events  as  much  as  is  required  for  forming  a

judgement on the nature of that psychical process. So far we have not

arrived at any such judgement; but on the other hand we are now in

possession of an important indication of the direction from which we

may expect to receive further light upon the problem. The interesting

processes  of  condensation  accompanied  by  the  formation  of  a

substitute, which we have recognized as the core of the technique of

verbal jokes, point towards the formation of dreams, in the mechanism

of which the same psychical processes have been discovered. This is

equally  true,  however,  of  the  techniques  of  conceptual  jokes  -

displacement,  faulty  reasoning,  absurdity,  indirect  representation,

representation by the opposite - which re-appear one and all in the

technique  of  the  dream-work.  Displacement  is  responsible  for  the

puzzling appearance of dreams, which prevents our recognizing that

they are a continuation of our waking life. The use of absurdity and

nonsense in dreams has cost them the dignity of being regarded as

psychical  products  and  has  led  the  authorities  to  suppose  that  a

disintegration  of  the  mental  activities  and  a  cessation  of  criticism,

morality  and  logic  are  necessary  conditions  of  the  formation  of

dreams. Representation by the opposite is so common in dreams that

even  the  popular  books  of  dream-interpretation,  which  are  on  a

completely  wrong  tack,  are  in  the  habit  of  taking  it  into  account.Indirect representation - the replacement of a dream-thought by an

allusion,  by  something  small,  a  symbolism  akin  to  analogy  -  is

precisely what distinguishes the mode of expression of dreams from

that of our waking life.¹ So far-reaching an agreement between the

methods of the joke-work and those of the dream-work can scarcely

be a matter of chance. To demonstrate this agreement in detail and to

examine its basis will be one of our later tasks.

 

   ¹ Cf. Chapter VI (‘The Dream-Work’) of my Interpretation of Dreams.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1687

 

                                            III

 

                          THE PURPOSES OF JOKES

 

When at the end of my last chapter I wrote down Heine’s comparison

of a catholic priest to an employee in a wholesale business and of a

protestant one to a retail merchant, I was aware of an inhibition which

was trying to induce me not to make use of the analogy. I told myself

that among my readers there would probably be a few who felt respect

not only for religion but for its governors and assistants. Such readers

would merely be indignant about the analogy and would get into an

emotional state which would deprive them of all interest in deciding

whether the analogy had the appearance of being a joke on its own

account  or  as  a  result  of  something  extra  added  to  it.  With  other

analogies  -  for  instance,  the  neighbouring  one  of  the  agreeable

moonlight  which  a  particular  philosophy  throws  over  things  -  there

seemed to be no need for worry about the disturbing effect they might

have on a section of my readers. The most pious man would remain in

a state of mind in which he could form a judgement on our problem.

   It is easy to divine the characteristic of jokes on which the difference

in their hearers’ reaction to them depends. In the one case the joke is

an end in itself and serves no particular aim, in the other case it does

serve such an aim - it becomes tendentious. Only jokes that have a

purpose run the risk of meeting with people who do not want to listento them.

      Non-tendentious  jokes  were  described  by  Vischer  as  ‘abstract’

jokes. I prefer to call them ‘innocent’ jokes.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1688

 

   Since we have already divided jokes into ‘verbal’ and ‘conceptual’

jokes according to the material handled by their technique, it devolves

on us now to examine the relation between that classification and the

new  one  that  we  are  introducing.  The  relation  between  verbal  and

conceptual jokes on the one hand and abstract and tendentious jokes

on  the  other  is  not  one  of  mutual  influence;  they  are  two  wholly

independent  classifications  of  joking  products.  Some  people  may

perhaps  have  gained  an  impression  that  innocent  jokes  are

predominantly verbal jokes, but that the more complex technique of

conceptual jokes is mostly employed for definite purposes. But there

are innocent jokes that work with play upon words and similarity of

sound,  and  equally  innocent  ones  that  employ  all  the  methods  of

conceptual jokes. And it is just as easy to show that a tendentious joke

need be nothing other than a verbal joke as regards its technique. For

instance,  jokes  that  ‘play  about’  with  proper  names  often  have  an

insulting  and  wounding  purpose,  though,  needless  to  say,  they  are

verbal jokes. But the most innocent of all jokes are once more verbal

jokes; for instance, the Schüttelreime¹, which have recently become

so popular and in which the multiple use of the same material with a

modification entirely peculiar to it constitutes the technique:

 

                                                Und weil er Geld in Menge hatte,

                                                lag stets er in der Hängematte.²

 

It may be hoped that no one will question that the enjoyment derived

from these otherwise unpretentious rhymes is the same as that by

which we recognize jokes.

 

   ¹ [Literally, ‘shaking-up rhymes’.]

   ² [And because he had money in quantities       He always lay in a hammock.]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1689

 

 

   Good examples of abstract or innocent conceptual jokes are to be

found in plenty among the Lichtenberg analogies, with some of which

we have already become acquainted. I add a few more:

   ‘They had sent a small octavo volume to Göttingen, and had got

back something that was a quarto in body and soul.’

   ‘In order to erect this building properly, it is above all necessary that

good foundations shall be laid; and I know of none firmer than if, upon

every course of masonry pro, one promptly lays a course contra.’

      ‘One  person  procreates  a  thought,  a  second  carries  it  to  be

baptized, a third begets children by it, a fourth visits it on its deathbed

and a fifth buries it.’ (Analogy with unification.)

   ‘Not only did he disbelieve in ghosts; he was not even frightened of

them.’  Here  the  joke  lies  entirely  in  the  nonsensical  form  of

representation, which puts what is commonly thought less of into the

comparative  and  uses  the  positive  for  what  is  regarded  as  more

important.  If  this  joking  envelope  is  removed,  we  have:  ‘it  is  much

easier to get rid of a fear of ghosts intellectually than to escape it when

the occasion arises.’ This is no longer in the least a joke, though it is a

correct  and  still  too  little  appreciated  psychological  discovery  -  the

same one which Lessing expressed in a well-known sentence:

                  ‘Not all are free who mock their chains.’

   I may take the opportunity that this affords of getting rid of what is

nevertheless a possible misunderstanding. For ‘innocent’ or ‘abstract’

jokes are far from having the same meaning as jokes that are ‘trivial’

or  ‘lacking  in  substance’;  they  merely  connote  the  opposite  of  the

‘tendentious’  jokes  that  will  be  discussed  presently.  As  our  last

example shows, an innocent - that is, a non-tendentious - joke may

also be of great substance it may assert something of value. But the

substance of a joke is independent of the joke and is the substance of

the  thought  which  is  here,  by  means  of  a  special  arrangement,

expressed as a joke. No doubt, just as watch-makers usually providea particularly good movement with a similarly valuable case, so it may

happen with jokes that the best achievements in the way of jokes are

used as an envelope for thoughts of the greatest substance.

   If now we draw a sharp distinction in the case of conceptual jokes

between the substance of the thought and the joking envelope, we

shall  reach  a  discovery  which  may  throw  light  of  much  of  our

uncertainty in judging jokes. For it turns out - and this is a surprising

thing  -  that  our  enjoyment  of  a  joke  is  based  on  a  combined

impression of its substance and of its effectiveness as a joke and that

we let ourselves be deceived by the one factor over the amount of the

other. Only after the joke has been reduced do we become aware of

this false judgement.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1690

 

   Moreover, the same thing is true of verbal jokes. When we are told

that ‘experience consists in experiencing what one does not wish to

experience’, we are bewildered and think we have learnt a new truth.

It is a little time before we recognize under this disguise the platitude

of ‘Injury makes one wise’. (Fischer.) The apt way in which the joke

succeeds in defining ‘experience’ almost purely by the use of the word

‘to  experience’  deceives  us  into  overvaluing  the  substance  of  the

sentence. Just the same thing is true of Lichtenberg’s ‘January’ joke of

unification (p. 1667), which has nothing more to tell us than something

we have already long known - that New Year’s wishes come true as

seldom as other wishes. So too in many similar cases.

   And we find just the contrary with other jokes, in which the aptness

and truth of the thought tricks us into calling the whole sentence a

brilliant  joke  -  whereas  only  the  thought  is  brilliant  and  the  joke’s

achievement  is  often  feeble.  Precisely  in  Lichtenberg’s  jokes  the

kernel  of  thought  is  frequently  far  more  valuable  than  the  joking

envelope to which we unjustifiably extend our appreciation. Thus, for

instance, the remark about the ‘ torch of truth’ (p. 1682) is an analogy

that scarcely amounts to a joke, but it is so apt that we are inclined to

insist that the sentence is a particularly good joke.   Lichtenberg’s jokes are outstanding above all on account of their

intellectual content and the certainty with which they hit their mark.

Goethe was quite right in saying of that author that in fact his joking

and jesting ideas concealed problems; it would have been even more

correct to say that they touch on the solution of problems. When, for

instance, he remarked as a joke: ‘He had read Homer so much that he

always read "Agamemnon" instead of "angenommen "‘ - the technique

used  is  ‘stupidity’  plus  ‘similarity  of  sound’  -  Lichtenberg  had

discovered nothing less than the secret of misreading.¹

      Similarly  with  a  joke  the  technique  of  which  struck  us  as  most

unsatisfactory (p. 1661): ‘He wondered how it is that cats have two

holes cut in their skin precisely at the place where their eyes are’. The

stupidity  that  is  paraded  here  is  only  apparent.  In  fact,  behind  this

simple remark lies the great problem of teleology in the structure of

animals. It was by no means so completely a matter of course that the

palpebral  fissure  should  open  at  the  point  at  which  the  cornea  is

exposed,  until  the  theory  of  evolution  had  thrown  light  on  the

coincidence.

   We shall bear in mind the fact that we receive from joking remarks a

total impression in which we are unable to separate the share taken

by the thought content from the share taken by the joke-work. It may

be that later on we shall find a still more significant parallel to this.

 

   ¹ See my Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901b)

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1691

 

 

   From the point of view of throwing theoretical light on the nature of

jokes,  innocent  jokes  are  bound  to  be  of  more  value  to  us  than

tendentious ones, and trivial jokes of more value than profound ones.

Innocent and trivial jokes are likely to put the problem of jokes before

us in its purest form, since with them we avoid the danger of being

confused by their purpose or having our judgement misled by their

good sense. On the basis of such material our discoveries can make

fresh advances.   I will select the most innocent possible example of a verbal joke:

   ‘A girl to whom a visitor was announced while she was at her toilet

complained: "Oh, what a shame that one mayn’t let oneself be seen

just when one’s at one’s most anziehend"'¹ (Kleinpaul, 1890.)

   Since, however, doubts arise in me after all as to whether I have a

right to describe this joke as being non-tendentious, I will replace it by

another one which is extremely simple and should really not be open

to that objection.

   At the end of a meal in a house to which I had been invited as a

guest,  a  pudding  of  the  kind  known  as  a  ‘roulard’  was  served.  It

requires some skill on the part of the cook to make it; so one of the

guests asked: ‘Made in the house?’ To which the host replied: ‘Yes,

indeed. A home-roulard.’

 

   ¹ [‘Anziehend’ means both ‘dressing’ and ‘attractive’.]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1692

 

   This time we will not examine the technique of the joke; we propose

to  turn  our  attention  to  another  factor,  which  is  actually  the  most

important one. When those of us present heard this improvised joke it

gave us pleasure - which I can clearly recall - and made us laugh. In

this instance, as in countless others, the hearers’ feeling of pleasure

cannot have arisen from the purpose of the joke or from its intellectual

content; there is nothing left open to us but to bring that feeling of

pleasure into connection with the technique of the joke. The technical

methods of joking which we have earlier described - condensation,

displacement, indirect representation and so on - thus possess the

power of evoking a feeling of pleasure in the hearer, though we cannot

in the least see how they may have acquired this power. In this simple

way we arrive at the second thesis in our clarification of jokes; the first

(p. 1623) asserted that the characteristic of jokes lay in their form of

expression. Let us further reflect that this second thesis has in fact

taught us nothing new. It merely isolates what was already included in

an observation we had made earlier. It will be recalled that when we

had  succeeded  in  reducing  a  joke  (that  is,  in  replacing  its  form  ofexpression by another one, while carefully preserving its sense) it had

lost not only its character as a joke but also its power to make us

laugh - our enjoyment of the joke.

   We cannot proceed further at this point without a discussion with our

philosophical authorities.

   The philosophers, who count jokes a part of the comic and who treat

of the comic itself under the heading of aesthetics, define an aesthetic

idea by the condition that in it we are not trying to get anything from

things or do anything with them, that we are not needing things in

order to satisfy one of our major vital needs, but that we are content

with  contemplating  them  and  with  the  enjoyment  of  the  idea.  ‘This

enjoyment, this kind of ideation, is the purely aesthetic one, which lies

only in itself, which has its aim only in itself and which fulfils none of

the other aims of life.’ (Fischer, 1889, 20.)

   We shall scarcely be contradicting this statement of Fischer’s - we

shall perhaps be doing no more than translating his thoughts into our

mode of expression - if we insist that the joking activity should not,

after  all,  be  described  as  pointless  or  aimless,  since  it  has  the

unmistakable aim of evoking pleasure in its hearers. I doubt if we are

in a position to undertake anything without having an intention in view.

If we do not require our mental apparatus at the moment for supplying

one of our indispensable satisfactions, we allow it itself to work in the

direction  of  pleasure  and  we  seek  to  derive  pleasure  from  its  own

activity. I suspect that this is in general the condition that governs all

aesthetic  ideation,  but  I  understand  too  little  of  aesthetics  to  try  to

enlarge on this statement. As regards joking, however, I can assert,

on the basis of the two discoveries we have already made, that it is an

activity  which  aims  at  deriving  pleasure  from  mental  processes,

whether intellectual or otherwise. No doubt there are other activities

which have the same aim. They are perhaps differentiated according

to the fields of mental activity from which they seek to derive pleasure

or perhaps according to the methods of which they make use. We

cannot for the moment decide about this; but we hold firmly to the

view that the joke technique and the tendency towards economy by

which  it  is  partly  governed  (p.  1647  ff.)  have  been  brought  into

connection with the production of pleasure.

                 Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1693

 

      But  before  we  set  about  solving  the  riddle  of  how  the  technical

methods of the joke-work are able to excite pleasure in the hearer, we

have to recall the fact that, with a view to simplification and greater

perspicuity, we have left tendentious jokes entirely on one side. We

must, after all, try to throw light on the question of what the purposes

of jokes are, and how they serve those purposes.

   There is, first and foremost, one observation which warns us not to

leave tendentious jokes on one side in our investigation of the origin of

the pleasure we take in jokes. The pleasurable effect of innocent jokes

is as a rule a moderate one; a clear sense of satisfaction, a slight

smile, is as a rule all it can achieve in its hearers. And it may be that a

part  even  of  this  effect  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  joke’s  intellectual

content, as we have seen from suitable examples (p. 1690). A non-

tendentious joke scarcely ever achieves the sudden burst of laughter

which makes tendentious ones so irresistible. Since the technique of

both  can  be  the  same,  a  suspicion  may  be  aroused  in  us  that

tendentious jokes, by virtue of their purpose, must have sources of

pleasure at their disposal to which innocent jokes have no access.

   The purposes of jokes can easily be reviewed. Where a joke is not

an aim in itself - that is, where it is not an innocent one - there are only

two  purposes  that  it  may  serve,  and  these  two  can  themselves  be

subsumed under a single heading. It is either a hostile joke (serving

the purpose of aggressiveness, satire, or defence) or an obscene joke

(serving the purpose of exposure). It must be repeated in advance that

the  technical  species  of  the  joke  -  whether  it  is  a  verbal  or  a

conceptual joke - bears no relation to these two purposes.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1694

 

   It is a much lengthier business to show the way in which jokes serve

these two purposes. In this investigation I should prefer to deal first

not with the hostile jokes but with the exposing jokes. It is true thatthese have been far more rarely deemed worthy of investigation, as

though aversion to the thing itself had here been transferred to the

discussion of it. But we will not allow ourselves to be disconcerted by

this, for we shall immediately come upon a marginal case of joking

which promises to bring us enlightenment on more than one obscurity,

      We  know  what  is  meant  by  ‘smut’:  the  intentional  bringing  into

prominence of sexual facts and relations by speech. This definition,

however,  is  no  more  valid  than  other  definitions.  In  spite  of  this

definition,  a  lecture  on  the  anatomy  of  the  sexual  organs  or  the

physiology of procreation need not have a single point of contact with

smut. It is a further relevant fact that smut is directed to a particular

person, by whom one is sexually excited and who, on hearing it, is

expected  to  become  aware  of  the  speaker’s  excitement  and  as  a

result to become sexually excited in turn. Instead of this excitement

the other person may be led to feel shame or embarrassment, which

is only a reaction against the excitement and, in a roundabout way, is

an admission of it. Smut is thus originally directed towards women and

may be equated with attempts at seduction. If a man in a company of

men enjoys telling or listening to smut, the original situation, which

owing  to  social  inhibitions  cannot  be  realized,  is  at  the  same  time

imagined. A person who laughs at smut that he hears is laughing as

though he were the spectator of an act of sexual aggression.

   The sexual material which forms the content of smut includes more

than what is peculiar to each sex; it also includes what is common to

both sexes and to which the feeling of shame extends - that is to say,

what  is  excremental  in  the  most  comprehensive  sense.  This  is,

however, the sense covered by sexuality in childhood, an age at which

there is, as it were, a cloaca within which what is sexual and what is

excremental  are  barely  or  not  at  all  distinguished.¹  Throughout  the

whole  range  of  the  psychology  of  the  neuroses,  what  is  sexual

includes what is excremental, and is understood in the old, infantile,

sense.

 

   ¹ See my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d), which is appearing at the same

time as the present work.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious                                                                                      1695

 

   Smut is like an exposure of the sexually different person to whom it

is  directed.  By  the  utterance  of  the  obscene  words  it  compels  the

person  who  is  assailed  to  imagine  the  part  of  the  body  or  the

procedure  in  question  and  shows  her  that  the  assailant  is  himself

imagining it. It cannot be doubted that the desire to see what is sexual

exposed is the original motive of smut.

      It  can  only  help  to  clarify  things  if  at  this  point  we  go  back  to

fundamental facts. A desire to see the organs peculiar to each sex

exposed is one of the original components of our libido. It may itself be

a  substitute  for  something  earlier  and  go  back  to  a  hypothetical

primary  desire  to  touch  the  sexual  parts.  As  so  often,  looking  has

replaced touching.¹ The libido for looking and touching is present in

everyone  in  two  forms,  active  and  passive,  male  and  female;  and,

according to the preponderance of the sexual character, one form or

the other predominates. It is easy to observe the inclination to self-

exposure  in  young  children.  In  cases  in  which  the  germ  of  this

inclination escapes its usual fate of being buried and suppressed, it

develops in men into the familiar perversion known as exhibitionism.

In women the inclination to passive exhibitionism is almost invariably

buried under the imposing reactive function of sexual modesty, but not

without a loophole being left for it in relation to clothes. I need only hint

at  the  elasticity  and  variability  in  the  amount  of  exhibitionism  that

women are permitted to retain in accordance with differing convention

and circumstances.

   In men a high degree of this trend persists as a portion of their

libido, and it serves to introduce the sexual act. When this urge makes

itself felt at the first approach to a woman, it must make use of words,

for  two  reasons;  firstly,  to  announce  itself  to  her,  and  secondly,

because  if  the  idea  is  aroused  by  speech  it  may  induce  a

corresponding excitement in the woman herself and may awaken an

inclination in her to passive exhibitionism. A wooing speech like this is

not  yet  smut,  but  it  passes  over  into  it.  If  the  woman’s  readiness

emerges quickly the obscene speech has a short life; it yields at once

to a sexual action. It is otherwise if quick readiness on the woman’s

part is not to be counted on, and if in place of it defensive reactionsappear. In that case the sexually exciting speech becomes an aim in

itself in the shape of smut. Since the sexual aggressiveness is held up

in  its  advance  towards  the  act,  it  pauses  at  the  evocation  of  the

excitement and derives pleasure from the signs of it in the woman. In

so doing, the aggressiveness is no doubt altering its character as well,

just as any libidinal impulse will if it is met by an obstacle. It becomes

positively hostile and cruel, and it thus summons to its help against the

obstacle the sadistic components of the sexual instinct.

      The  woman’s  inflexibility  is  therefore  the  first  condition  for  the

development of smut, although, to be sure, it seems merely to imply a

postponement and does not indicate that further efforts will be in vain.

The ideal case of a resistance of this kind on the woman’s part occurs

if another man is present at the same time - a third person -, for in that

case an immediate surrender by the woman is as good as out of the

question. This third person soon acquires the greatest importance in

the development of the smut; to begin with, however, the presence of

the woman is not to be overlooked. Among country people or in inns

of the humbler sort it will be noticed that it is not until the entrance of

the barmaid or the innkeeper’s wife that smuttiness starts up. Only at

higher  social  levels  is  the  opposite  found,  and  the  presence  of  a

woman  brings  the  smut  to  an  end.  The  men  save  up  this  kind  of

entertainment, which originally presupposed the presence of a woman

who  was  feeling  ashamed,  till  they  are  ‘alone  together’.  So  that

gradually,  in  place  of  the  woman,  the  onlooker,  now  the  listener,

becomes the person to whom the smut is addressed, and owing to

this transformation it is already near to assuming the character of a

joke.

   From this point onwards our attention will be drawn to two factors:

the part played by the third person, the listener, and the conditions

governing the subject-matter of the smut itself.

 

   ¹ Cf. Moll’s instinct of ‘contrectation’ (Moll, 1898).

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1696

 

   Generally speaking, a tendentious joke calls for three people: inaddition to the one who makes the joke, there must be a second who

is taken as the object of the hostile or sexual aggressiveness, and a

third in whom the joke’s aim of producing pleasure is fulfilled. We shall

have later to examine the deeper reasons for this state of things; for

the moment let us keep to the fact to which this testifies - namely that

it is not the person who makes the joke who laughs at it and who

therefore enjoys its pleasurable effect, but the inactive listener. In the

case of smut the three people are in the same relation. The course of

events may be thus described. When the first person finds his libidinal

impulse inhibited by the woman, he develops a hostile trend against

that second person and calls on the originally interfering third person

as his ally. Through the first person’s smutty speech the woman is

exposed before the third, who, as listener, has now been bribed by the

effortless satisfaction of his own libido.

   It is remarkable how universally popular a smutty interchange of this

kind is among the common people and how it unfailingly produces a

cheerful  mood.  But  it  also  deserves  to  be  noticed  that  in  this

complicated procedure, which involves so many of the characteristics

of  tendentious  jokes,  none  of  the  formal  requirements  which

characterize  jokes  are  made  of  the  smut  itself.  The  uttering  of  an

undisguised indecency gives the first person enjoyment and makes

the third person laugh.

   Only when we rise to a society of a more refined education do the

formal conditions for jokes play a part. The smut becomes a joke and

is only tolerated when it has the character of a joke. The technical

method which it usually employs is the allusion - that is, replacement

by something small, something remotely connected, which the hearer

reconstructs  in  his  imagination  into  a  complete  and  straightforward

obscenity. The greater the discrepancy between what is given directly

in the form of smut and what it necessarily calls up in the hearer, the

more refined becomes the joke and the higher, too, it may venture to

climb into good society. As can easily be shown from examples, smut

which has the characteristics of a joke has at its disposal, apart from

allusion, whether coarse or refined, all the other methods of verbal

and conceptual jokes.

                 Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1697

 

   And here at last we can understand what it is that jokes achieve in

the service of their purpose. They make possible the satisfaction of an

instinct  (whether  lustful  or  hostile)  in  the  face  of  an  obstacle  that

stands in its way. They circumvent this obstacle and in that way draw

pleasure from a source which the obstacle had made inaccessible.

The  obstacle  standing  in  the  way  is  in  reality  nothing  other  than

women’s  incapacity  to  tolerate  undisguised  sexuality,  an  incapacity

correspondingly  increased  with  a  rise  in  the  educational  and  social

level. The woman who is thought of as having been present in the

initial situation is afterwards retained as though she were still present,

or in her absence her influence still has an intimidating effect on the

men. We can observe how men of a higher class are at once induced,

when they are in the company of girls of an inferior class, to reduce

their smutty jokes to the level of simple smut.

   The power which makes it difficult or impossible for women, and to a

lesser  degree  for  men  as  well,  to  enjoy  undisguised  obscenity  is

termed by us ‘repression’; and we recognize in it the same psychical

process which, in cases of serious illness, keeps whole complexes of

impulses, together with their derivatives, away from consciousness,

and which has turned out to be the main factor in the causation of

what are known as psycho-neuroses. It is our belief that civilization

and higher education have a large influence in the development of

repression, and we suppose that, under such conditions, the psychical

organization  undergoes  an  alteration  (that  can  also  emerge  as  an

inherited disposition) as a result of which what was formerly felt as

agreeable now seems unacceptable and is rejected with all possible

psychical force. The repressive activity of civilization brings it about

that  primary  possibilities  of  enjoyment,  which  have  now,  however,

been repudiated by the censorship in us, are lost to us. But to the

human psyche all renunciation is exceedingly difficult, and so we find

that tendentious jokes provide a means of undoing the renunciation

and retrieving what was lost. When we laugh at a refined obscene

joke, we are laughing at the same thing that makes a peasant laugh at

a coarse piece of smut. In both cases the pleasure springs from thesame source. We, however, could never bring ourselves to laugh at

the  coarse  smut;  we  should  feel  ashamed  or  it  would  seem  to  us

disgusting. We can only laugh when a joke has come to our help.

      Thus  what  we  suspected  to  begin  with  seems  to  be  confirmed:

namely  that  tendentious  jokes  have  sources  of  pleasure  at  their

disposal  besides  those  open  to  innocent  jokes,  in  which  all  the

pleasure is in some way linked to their technique. And we may also

once more repeat that with tendentious jokes we are not in a position

to distinguish by our feeling what part of the pleasure arises from the

sources of their technique and what part from those of their purpose.

Thus, strictly speaking, we do not know what we are laughing at. With

all obscene jokes we are subject to glaring errors of judgement about

the ‘goodness’ of jokes so far as this depends on formal determinants;

the  technique  of  such  jokes  is  often  quite  wretched,  but  they  have

immense success in provoking laughter.

 

 

   We will now examine the question of whether jokes play the same

part in the service of a hostile purpose.

   Here, from the outset, we come upon the same situation. Since our

individual  childhood,  and,  similarly,  since  the  childhood  of  human

civilization, hostile impulses against our fellow men have been subject

to  the  same  restrictions,  the  same  progressive  repression,  as  our

sexual urges. We have not yet got so far as to be able to love our

enemies  or  to  offer  our  left  cheek  after  being  struck  on  the  right.

Furthermore, all moral rules for the restriction of active hatred give the

clearest evidence to this day that they were originally framed for a

small society of fellow clansmen. In so far as we are all able to feel

that we are members of one people, we allow ourselves to disregard

most of these restrictions in relation to a foreign people. Nevertheless,

within our own circle we have made some advances in the control of

hostile impulses. As Lichtenberg puts it in drastic terms: ‘Where we

now  say  "Excuse  me!"  we  used  to  give  a  box  on  the  ears.’  Brutal

hostility, forbidden by law, has been replaced by verbal invective; and

a better knowledge of the interlinking of human impulses is more and

more  robbing  us  -  by  its  consistent  ‘tout  comprendre  c’est  tout

pardonner’ - of the capacity for feeling angry with a fellow man whogets  in  our  way.  Though  as  children  we  are  still  endowed  with  a

powerful  inherited  disposition  to  hostility,  we  are  later  taught  by  a

higher personal civilization that it is an unworthy thing to use abusive

language; and even where fighting has in itself remained permissible,

the  number  of  things  which  may  not  be  employed  as  methods  of

fighting has extraordinarily increased. Since we have been obliged to

renounce  the  expression  of  hostility  by  deeds  -  held  back  by  the

passionless third person, in whose interest it is that personal security

shall  be  preserved  -  we  have,  just  as  in  the  case  of  sexual

aggressiveness, developed a new technique of invective, which aims

at enlisting this third person against our enemy. By making our enemy

small, inferior, despicable or comic, we achieve in a roundabout way

the enjoyment of overcoming him - to which the third person, who has

made no efforts, bears witness by his laughter.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1698

 

   We are now prepared to realize the part played by jokes in hostile

aggressiveness. A joke will allow us to exploit something ridiculous in

our enemy which we could not, on account of obstacles in the way,

bring forward openly or consciously; once again, then, the joke will

evade restrictions and open sources of pleasure that have become

inaccessible. It will further bribe the hearer with its yield of pleasure

into taking sides with us without any very close investigation, just as

on  other  occasions  we  ourselves  have  often  been  bribed  by  an

innocent  joke  into  over  estimating  the  substance  of  a  statement

expressed  jokingly.  This  is  brought  out  with  perfect  aptitude  in  the

common  phrase  ‘die  Lacher  auf  seine  Seite  ziehen  [to  bring  the

laughers over to our side]’.

   Let us, for instance, consider Herr N.’s jokes, which were scattered

over the last chapter. They are all of them pieces of invective. It is as

though Herr N. wanted to exclaim aloud: ‘The Minister for Agriculture

is himself an ox!’ ‘Don’t talk to me about * * * *! He’s bursting with

vanity!’  ‘I’ve  never  in  my  life  read  anything  more  boring  than  this

historian’s essays on Napoleon in Austria!’ But the high position heoccupies makes it impossible for him to give out his judgements in that

form.  They  therefore  bring  in  a  joke  to  their  help,  and  this  in  turn

guarantees them a reception with the hearer which they would never

have  found  in  a  non-joking  form,  in  spite  of  the  truth  they  might

contain. One of these jokes is particularly instructive - the one about

the ‘red Fadian’, perhaps the most impressive of all of them. What is

there  about  it  that  makes  us  laugh  and  diverts  our  interest  so

completely from the question of whether or not an injustice has been

done to the poor author? The joking form, of course - that is to say,

the joke; but what is there about it that we are laughing at? No doubt

at the person himself, who is introduced to us as the ‘red Fadian’, and

in  particular  at  his  having  red  hair.  Educated  people  have  broken

themselves of the habit of laughing at physical defects, and moreover

they  do  not  include  having  red  hair  among  the  laughable  physical

failings. But there is no doubt that it is so regarded by schoolboys and

the common people - and this is still true even at the level of education

of certain municipal and parliamentary representatives. And now Herr

N. has made it possible in the most ingenious manner for us, grown-

up and sensitive people, to laugh like the schoolboys at the historian

X’s red hair. This was certainly not Herr N.’s intention; but it is most

doubtful  whether  a  person  who  gives  free  play  to  a  joke  must

necessarily know its precise intention.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1699

 

   If in these cases the obstacle to the aggressiveness which the joke

helped to evade was an internal one - an aesthetic objection to the

invective - elsewhere it can be of a purely external sort. This was so in

the case in which Serenissimus asked a stranger by whose similarity

to his own person he had been struck: ‘Was your mother in the Palace

at  one  time?’  and  the  repartee  was:  ‘No,  but  my  father  was.’  The

person to whom the question was put would no doubt have liked to

knock down the impertinent individual who dared by such an allusion

to cast a slur on his beloved mother’s memory. But the impertinent

individual was Serenissimus, whom one may not knock down or eveninsult unless one is prepared to purchase that revenge at the price of

one’s whole existence. The insult must therefore, it would seem, be

swallowed in silence. But fortunately a joke shows the way in which

the insult may be safely avenged - by making use of the technical

method of unification in order to take up the allusion and turn it back

against  the  aggressor.  Here  the  impression  of  a  joke  is  so  much

determined by its purpose that, in face of the joking character of the

rejoinder,  we  are  inclined  to  forget  that  the  question  asked  by  the

aggressor  had  itself  the  character  of  a  joke  with  the  technique  of

allusion.

   The prevention of invective or of insulting rejoinders by external

circumstances  is  such  a  common  case  that  tendentious  jokes  are

especially  favoured  in  order  to  make  aggressiveness  or  criticism

possible against persons in exalted positions who claim to exercise

authority. The joke then represents a rebellion against that authority, a

liberation from its pressure. The charm of caricatures lies in this same

factor: we laugh at them even if they are unsuccessful simply because

we count rebellion against authority as a merit.

   If we bear in mind the fact that tendentious jokes are so highly

suitable for attacks on the great, the dignified and the mighty, who are

protected  by  internal  inhibitions  and  external  circumstances  from

direct disparagement, we shall be obliged to take a special view of

certain groups of jokes which seem to be concerned with inferior and

powerless  people.  I  am  thinking  of  the  anecdotes  about  marriage-

brokers, some of which we became acquainted with in the course of

our investigation of the various techniques of conceptual jokes. In a

few of them, for instance in the examples ‘She’s deaf as well’ and

‘Who would lend these people anything?’, the broker is laughed at for

his  improvidence  and  thoughtlessness  and  he  becomes  comic

because the truth escapes him as it were automatically. But does what

we have learnt of the nature of tendentious jokes on the one hand and

on the other hand our great enjoyment of these stories fit in with the

paltriness of the people whom these jokes seem to laugh at? Are they

worthy opponents of the jokes? Is it not rather the case that the jokes

only put forward the marriage-brokers in order to strike at something

more important?  Is it not a case of saying one thing and meaning

another? It is really not possible to reject this view.   This interpretation of the broker anecdotes may be carried further. It

is true that there is no necessity for my entering into them, that I can

content myself with regarding these anecdotes as ‘Schwänke [funny

stories]’ and deny that they have the character of a joke. Thus jokes

can also have a subjective determinant of this kind. Our attention has

now been drawn to that possibility and we shall have to examine it

later. It declares that only what I allow to be a joke is a joke. What is a

joke to me may be merely a comic story to other people. But if a joke

admits of this doubt, the reason can only be that it has a façade - in

these  instances  a  comic  one  -  in  the  contemplation  of  which  one

person is satiated while another may try to peer behind it. A suspicion

may  arise,  moreover,  that  this  façade  is  intended  to  dazzle  the

examining  eye  and  that  these  stories  have  therefore  something  to

conceal.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1700

 

   In any case, if our marriage-broker anecdotes are jokes, they are all

the better jokes because, thanks to their façade, they are in a position

to conceal not only what they have to say but also the fact that they

have  something  -  forbidden  -  to  say.  The  continuation  of  this

interpretation  -  and  this  uncovers  the  hidden  meaning  and  reveals

these anecdotes with a comic façade as tendentious jokes - would be

as  follows.  Anyone  who  has  allowed  the  truth  to  slip  out  in  an

unguarded moment is in fact glad to be free of pretence. This is a

correct  and  profound  piece  of  psychological  insight.  Without  this

internal  agreement  no  one  lets  himself  be  mastered  by  the

automatism which in these cases brings the truth to light.¹ But this

converts  the  laughable  figure  of  the Schadchen  into  a  sympathetic

one, deserving of pity. How happy the man must be to be able at last

to throw off the burden of pretence, since he makes use of the first

chance of shouting out the very last scrap of truth! As soon as he sees

that the case is lost, that the bride does not please the young man, he

gladly  betrays  yet  another  concealed  defect  which  has  escaped

notice,  or  he  takes  the  opportunity  of  producing  an  argument  thatsettles a detail in order to express his contempt for the people he is

working for: ‘I ask you - who would lend these people anything?’ The

whole of the ridicule in the anecdote now falls upon the parents, barely

touched on in it, who think this swindle justified in order to get their

daughter  a  husband,  upon  the  pitiable  position  of  girls  who  let

themselves be married on such terms, and upon the disgracefulness

of marriages contracted on such a basis. The marriage-broker is the

right man to express such criticisms, for he knows most about these

abuses; but he must not say them aloud, for he is a poor man whose

existence  depends  on  exploiting  them.  The  popular  mind,  which

created these stories, and others like them, is torn by a similar conflict;

for it knows that the sacredness of marriages after they have been

contracted is grievously affected by the thought of what happened at

the time when they were arranged.

 

   ¹ This is the same mechanism that governs slips of the tongue and other phenomena of

self-betrayal. See The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901b).
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1701

 

   Let us recall, too, what we observed while we were investigating the

technique of jokes: that in jokes nonsense often replaces ridicule and

criticism  in  the  thoughts  lying  behind  the  joke.  (In  this  respect,

incidentally, the joke-work is doing the same thing as the dream-work.)

Here  we  find  the  fact  confirmed  once  again.  That  the  ridicule  and

criticism are not directed against the figure of the broker, who only

appears in the examples we have quoted as a whipping-boy, is shown

by another class of jokes in which the marriage-broker is represented,

on the contrary, as a superior person, whose dialectical powers prove

sufficient  to  meet  any  difficulty.  They  are  anecdotes  with  a  logical

instead of a comic façade - sophistical conceptual jokes. In one of

them (p. 1664 f.)  the  broker  succeeds  in  arguing  away  the  bride’s

defect of being lame. It is at least a ‘fait accompli’; another wife, with

straight limbs, would on the contrary be in constant danger of falling

down  and  breaking  her  leg,  and  this  would  be  followed  by  illness,

pains, and the expenses of treatment, all of which would be spared inthe  case  of  the  woman  who  is  lame  already.  Or  there  is  another

anecdote,  in  which  he  succeeds  in  repelling  a  whole  series  of

complaints made by the suitor against the bride, meeting each one

with  good  arguments  till  he  replies  to  the  last,  which  cannot  be

countered: ‘What do you want? Isn’t she to have a single fault?’, as

though there were not necessarily something left over from the earlier

objections.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  showing  the  weak  spot  in  the

argument in these two examples, and we did so in examining their

technique.  But  what  interests  us  now  is  something  different.  If  the

broker’s speech is given such a marked appearance of logic which, on

careful examination, is recognizable as being only an appearance, the

truth behind it is that the joke declares the broker to be in the right; the

thought  does  not  venture  to  do  so  seriously  but  replaces  the

seriousness by the appearance which the joke presents. But here, as

so often, a jest betrays something serious. We shall not be mistaken if

we assume of all these anecdotes with a logical façade that they really

mean what they assert for reasons that are intentionally faulty. It is

only this employment of sophistry for the disguised representation of

the truth that gives it the character of a joke, which is thus essentially

dependent on its purpose. For what is hinted at in the two anecdotes

is that it is really the suitor who is making himself ridiculous when he

collects the bride’s different advantages together with so much care,

though all of them are weak, and when, in doing so, he forgets that he

must  be  prepared  to  take  as  his  wife  a  human  being  with  her

inevitable defects; while, on the other hand, the one characteristic that

would  make  marriage  with  the  woman’s  more  or  less  imperfect

personality tolerable - mutual attraction and readiness for affectionate

adaptation - is quite left out of account in the whole transaction.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1702

 

   The mockery directed at the suitor in these examples, in which the

broker quite appropriately plays the part of a superior, is expressed

much more plainly in other anecdotes. The plainer these stories are,

the  less  joke-technique  do  they  contain;  they  are,  as  it  were,  onlymarginal cases of jokes, with the technique of which they no longer

have anything in common but the construction of a façade. But owing

to their having the same purpose and to its being concealed behind

the facade, they produce the complete effect of a joke. Moreover, the

poverty  of  their  technical  methods  explains  how  it  is  that  many  of

these  jokes  cannot,  without  suffering  damage,  dispense  with  the

element of dialect, which has an effect similar to the joke technique.

      A  story  of  this  sort,  which,  while  possessing  all  the  force  of  a

tendentious  joke,  exhibits  nothing  of  its  technique,  is  the  following:

‘The marriage-broker asked: "What do you require of your bride?" -

Answer: "She must be beautiful, she must be rich, and educated." -

"Very  good",  said  the  broker,  "but  I  count  that  as  making  three

matches."' Here the rebuke to the man is delivered openly, and is no

longer clothed as a joke.

      In  the  examples  we  have  considered  hitherto,  the  disguised

aggressiveness has been directed against people - in the broker jokes

against everyone involved in the business of arranging a marriage: the

bride and bridegroom and their parents. But the object of the joke’s

attack  may  equally  well  be  institutions,  people  in  their  capacity  as

vehicles  of  institutions,  dogmas  of  morality  or  religion,  views  of  life

which  enjoy  so  much  respect  that  objections  to  them  can  only  be

made under the mask of a joke and indeed of a joke concealed by its

façade.  Though  the  themes  at  which  these  tendentious  jokes  are

aimed  may  be  few,  their  forms  and  envelopes  are  very  many  and

various. I think we shall do well to distinguish this class of tendentious

joke by a special name. The appropriate name will emerge after we

have interpreted a few examples of the class.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1703

 

   I may recall the two stories - one of the impoverished gourmet who

was  caught  eating  ‘salmon  mayonnaise’  and  the  other  of  the

dipsomaniac  tutor  -  which  we  learnt  to  know  as  sophistical

displacement jokes. I will now continue their interpretation. We have

since heard that if an appearance of logic is tacked on to the façade ofa story the thought would like to say seriously ‘the man is right’, but,

owing to an opposing contradiction, does not venture to declare the

man right except on a single point, on which it can easily be shown

that  he  is wrong.  The  ‘point’  chosen  is  the  correct  compromise

between his rightness and his wrongness; this, indeed, is no decision,

but corresponds to the conflict within ourselves. The two anecdotes

are  simply  epicurean.  They  say:  ‘Yes.  The  man  is  right.  There  is

nothing  higher  than  enjoyment  and  it  is  more  or  less  a  matter  of

indifference how one obtains it.’ This sounds shockingly immoral and

is no doubt not much better. But at bottom it is nothing other than the

poet’s ‘Carpe diem’, which appeals to the uncertainty of life and the

unfruitfulness of virtuous renunciation. If the idea that the man in the

‘salmon mayonnaise’ joke was right has such a repellent effect on us,

this  is  only  because  the  truth  is  illustrated  by  an  enjoyment  of  the

lowest kind, which it seems to us we could easily do without. In reality

each of us has had hours and times at which he has admitted the

rightness of this philosophy of life and has reproached moral doctrine

with  only  understanding  how  to  demand  without  offering  any

compensation.  Since  we  have  ceased  any  longer  to  believe  in  the

promise of a next world in which every renunciation will be rewarded

by a satisfaction - there are, incidentally, very few pious people if we

take renunciation as the sign of faith - ‘Carpe diem’ has become a

serious warning. I will gladly put off satisfaction: but do I know whether

I shall still be here tomorrow? ‘Di doman’ non c’è certezza.’¹

 

   ¹ [‘There is no certainty about tomorrow.’] Lorenzo de’ Medici.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1704

 

   I will gladly renounce all the methods of satisfaction proscribed by

society, but am I certain that society will reward this renunciation by

offering  me  one  of  the  permitted  methods  -  even  after  a  certain

amount  of  postponement?  What  these  jokes  whisper  may  be  said

aloud:  that  the  wishes  and  desires  of  men  have  a  right  to  make

themselves  acceptable  alongside  of  exacting  and  ruthless  morality.

And in our days it has been said in forceful and stirring sentences thatthis morality is only a selfish regulation laid down by the few who are

rich and powerful and who can satisfy their wishes at any time without

any postponement. So long as the art of healing has not gone further

in making our life safe and so long as social arrangements do no more

to make it more enjoyable, so long will it be impossible to stifle the

voice  within  us  that  rebels  against  the  demands  of  morality.  Every

honest man will end by making this admission, at least to himself. The

decision in this conflict can only be reached by the roundabout path of

fresh insight. One must bind one’s own life to that of others so closely

and be able to identify oneself with others so intimately that the brevity

of  one’s  own  life  can  be  overcome;  and  one  must  not  fulfil  the

demands  of  one’s  own  needs  illegitimately,  but  must  leave  them

unfulfilled,  because  only  the  continuance  of  so  many  unfulfilled

demands can develop the power to change the order of society. But

not every personal need can be postponed in this way and transferred

to  other  people,  and  there  is  no  general  and  final  solution  of  the

conflict.

   We now know the name that must be given to jokes like those that

we  have  last  interpreted.  They  are cynical  jokes  and  what  they

disguise are cynicisms.

      Among  the  institutions  which  cynical  jokes  are  in  the  habit  of

attacking none is more important or more strictly guarded by moral

regulations  but  at  the  same  time  more  inviting  to  attack  than  the

institution of marriage, at which, accordingly, the majority of cynical

jokes are aimed. There is no more personal claim than that for sexual

freedom  and  at  no  point  has  civilization  tried  to  exercise  severer

suppression than in the sphere of sexuality. A single example will be

enough for our purposes - the one mentioned on p. 1678, ‘An Entry in

Prince Carnival’s Album’:

   ‘A wife is like an umbrella - sooner or later one takes a cab.’

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1705

 

      We  have  already  discussed  the  complicated  technique  of  this

example:  a  bewildering  and  apparently  impossible  simile,  whichhowever, as we now see, is not in itself a joke; further, an allusion (a

cab is a public vehicle); and, as its most powerful technical method, an

omission  which  increases  the  unintelligibility.  The  simile  may  be

worked out as follows. One marries in order to protect oneself against

the  temptations  of  sensuality,  but  it  turns  out  nevertheless  that

marriage  does  not  allow  of  the  satisfaction  of  needs  that  are

somewhat stronger than usual. In just the same way, one takes an

umbrella with one to protect oneself from the rain and nevertheless

gets wet in the rain. In both cases one must look around for a stronger

protection: in the latter case one must take a public vehicle, and in the

former a woman who is accessible in return for money. The joke has

now been almost entirely replaced by a piece of cynicism. One does

not  venture  to  declare  aloud  and  openly  that  marriage  is  not  an

arrangement  calculated  to  satisfy  a  man’s  sexuality,  unless  one  is

driven to do so perhaps by the love of truth and eagerness for reform

of a Christian von Ehrenfels.¹ The strength of this joke lies in the fact

that nevertheless - in all kinds of roundabout ways - it has declared it.

   A particularly favourable occasion for tendentious jokes is presented

when the intended rebellious criticism is directed against the subject

himself, or, to put it more cautiously, against someone in whom the

subject has a share - a collective person, that is (the subject’s own

nation, for instance). The occurrence of self-criticism as a determinant

may explain how it is that a number of the most apt jokes (of which we

have given plenty of instances) have grown up on the soil of Jewish

popular life. They are stories created by Jews and directed against

Jewish characteristics. The jokes made about Jews by foreigners are

for  the  most  part  brutal  comic  stories  in  which  a  joke  is  made

unnecessary  by  the  fact  that  Jews  are  regarded  by  foreigners  as

comic figures. The Jewish jokes which originate from Jews admit this

too; but they know their real faults as well as the connection between

them and their good qualities, and the share which the subject has in

the person found fault with creates the subjective determinant (usually

so  hard  to  arrive  at)  of  the  joke-work.  Incidentally,  I  do  not  know

whether there are many other instances of a people making fun to

such a degree of its own character.

 

   ¹ See his essays (1903). 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1706

 

   As an example of this I may take the anecdote, quoted on p. 1679 f.,

of a Jew in a railway train promptly abandoning all decent behaviour

when he discovered that the newcomer into his compartment was a

fellow-believer.  We  made  the  acquaintance  of  this  anecdote  as

evidence  of  something  being  demonstrated  by  a  detail,  of

representation  by  something  very  small.  It  is  meant  to  portray  the

democratic mode of thinking of Jews, which recognizes no distinction

between  lords  and  serfs,  but  also,  alas,  upsets  discipline  and  co-

operation.

   Another, especially interesting group of jokes portrays the relation of

poor and rich Jews to one another. Their heroes are the ‘Schnorrer '

and the charitable householder or the Baron.

   ‘A Schnorrer, who was allowed as a guest into the same house

every  Sunday,  appeared  one  day  in  the  company  of  an  unknown

young man who gave signs of being about to sit down to table. "Who

is this?" asked the householder. "He’s been my son-in law", was the

reply, "since last week. I’ve promised him his board for the first year."'

   The purpose of these stories is always the same; it emerges most

clearly in the next one:

   ‘The Schnorrer begged the Baron for some money for a journey to

Ostend;  his  doctor  had  recommended  sea-bathing  for  his  troubles.

The  Baron  thought  Ostend  was  a  particularly  expensive  resort;  a

cheaper one would do equally well. The Schnorrer, however, rejected

the  proposal  with  the  words:  "Herr  Baron,  I  consider  nothing  too

expensive  for  my  health."'  This  is  an  excellent  displacement  joke

which  we  might  have  taken  as  a  model  for  that  class.¹  The  Baron

evidently  wants  to  save  his  money,  but  the Schnorrer  answers  as

though the Baron’s money was his own, which he may then quite well

value  less  than  his  health.  Here  we  are  expected  to  laugh  at  the

impertinence of the demand; but it is rarely that these jokes are not

equipped with a façade to mislead the understanding. The truth that

lies behind is that the Schnorrer, who in his thoughts treats the rich

man’s  money  as  his  own,  has  actually,  according  to  the  sacredordinances of the Jews, almost a right to make this confusion. The

indignation  raised  by  this  joke  is  of  course  directed  against  a  Law

which is highly oppressive even to pious people.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1707

 

   Here is another anecdote:

   ‘A Schnorrer on his way up a rich man’s staircase met a fellow

member of his profession, who advised him to go no further. "Don’t go

up to-day," he said, "the Baron is in a bad mood to-day; he’s giving

nobody more than one florin." - "I’II go up all the same", said the first

Schnorrer  "Why  should  I  give  him  a  florin?  Does  he  give me

anything?" ‘

   This joke employs the technique of absurdity, since it makes the

Schnorrer assert that the Baron gives him nothing at the very moment

at which he is preparing to beg him for a gift. But the absurdity is only

apparent. It is almost true that the rich man gives him nothing, since

he  is  obliged  by  the  Law  to  give  him  alms  and  should,  strictly

speaking,  be  grateful  to  him  for  giving  him  an  opportunity  for

beneficence. The ordinary, middle-class view of charity is in conflict

here with the religious one; it is in open rebellion against the religious

one  in  the  other  story,  of  the  Baron  who,  deeply  moved  by  a

Schnorrer’s tale of woe, rang for his servants: ‘Throw him out! he’s

breaking  my  heart!’  This  open  revelation  of  its  purpose  constitutes

once more a marginal case of a joke. It is only in the fact that they

present the matter as applied to individual cases that these last stories

differ from a complaint which is no longer a joke: ‘There is really no

advantage in being a rich man if one is a Jew. Other people’s misery

makes it impossible to enjoy one’s own happiness.’

   Other stories, which are once again technically frontier cases of

jokes,  give  evidence  of  a  profoundly  pessimistic  cynicism.  For

instance:

   ‘A man who was hard of hearing consulted the doctor, who correctly

diagnosed that the patient probably drank too much brandy and was

on that account deaf. He advised him against it and the deaf manpromised to take his advice to heart. After a while the doctor met him

in the street and asked him in a loud voice how he was. "Thank you",

was  the  answer.  "You  needn’t  shout  so  loud,  doctor.  I’ve  given  up

drinking and hear quite well again." A little while later they met once

more. The doctor asked him how he was in his ordinary voice, but

noticed that his question had not been understood. "Eh? What was

that?" - "It seems to me you’re drinking brandy again", shouted the

doctor in his ear, "and that’s why you’re deaf again." "You may be

right," replied the deaf man, "I have begun drinking brandy again and

I’II  tell  you  why.  So  long  as  I  didn’t  drink  I  was  able  to  hear.  But

nothing I heard was as good as the brandy."' Technically this joke is

nothing  other  than  an  object-lesson:  dialect  or  skill  in  narrative  are

necessary  for  raising  a  laugh,  but  in  the  background  lies  the  sad

question: may not the man have been right in his choice?

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1708

 

   It is on account of the allusion made by these pessimistic stories to

the manifold and hopeless miseries of the Jews that I must class them

with tendentious jokes.

   Other jokes, which are in the same sense cynical and which are not

only Jewish anecdotes, attack religious dogmas and even the belief in

God. The story of the Rabbi’s ‘Kück, the technique of which lay in the

faulty thinking which equated phantasy and reality (another possible

view was to regard it as a displacement), is a cynical or critical joke of

this kind, directed against miracle-workers and certainly against the

belief  in  miracles  as  well.  Heine  is  said  to  have  made  a  definitely

blasphemous joke on his death-bed. When a friendly priest reminded

him of God’s mercy and gave him hope that God would forgive him his

sins, he is said to have replied: ‘Bien sûr qu’il me pardonnera: c’est

son  métier.’¹  This  is  a  disparaging  comparison  (technically  perhaps

only  having  the  value  of  an  allusion),  since  a  ‘métier’,  a  trade  or

profession, is what a workman or a doctor has - and he has only a

single métier.  But  the  force  of  the  joke  lies  in  its  purpose.  What  it

means to say is nothing else than: ‘Of course he’ll forgive me. That’swhat he’s there for, and that’s the only reason I’ve taken him on (as

one engages one’s doctor or one’s lawyer).’ So in the dying man, as

he lay there powerless, a consciousness stirred that he had created

God and equipped him with power so as to make use of him when the

occasion arose. What was supposed to be the created being revealed

itself just before its annihilation as the creator.

 

   ¹ [‘Of course he’ll forgive me: that’s his job.’]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1709

 

 

   To the classes of tendentious jokes that we have considered so far -

       exposing or obscene jokes,

       aggressive (hostile) jokes,

       cynical (critical, blasphemous) jokes -

I should like to add another, the fourth and rarest, the nature of which

can be illustrated by a good example:

   ‘Two Jews met in a railway carriage at a station in Galicia. "Where

are you going?" asked one. "To Cracow", was the answer. "What a liar

you are!" broke out the other. "If you say you’re going to Cracow, you

want me to believe you’re going to Lemberg. But I know that in fact

you’re going to Cracow. So why are you lying to me?"'

   This excellent story, which gives an impression of over-subtlety,

evidently  works  by  the  technique  of  absurdity.  The  second  Jew  is

reproached for lying because he says he is going to Cracow, which is

in fact his destination! But the powerful technical method of absurdity

is here linked with another technique, representation by the opposite,

for,  according  to  the  uncontradicted  assertion  of  the  first  Jew,  the

second is lying when he tells the truth and is telling the truth by means

of a lie. But the more serious substance of the joke is the problem of

what  determines  the  truth.  The  joke,  once  again,  is  pointing  to  a

problem  and  is  making  use  of  the  uncertainty  of  one  of  our

commonest concepts. Is it the truth if we describe things as they are

without troubling to consider how our hearer will understand what we

say? Or is this only jesuitical truth, and does not genuine truth consistin taking the hearer into account and giving him a faithful picture of our

own knowledge? I think that jokes of this kind are sufficiently different

from the rest to be given a special position. What they are attacking is

not a person or an institution but the certainty of our knowledge itself,

one of our speculative possessions. The appropriate name for them

would therefore be ‘sceptical’ jokes.

 

   In the course of our discussion of the purposes of jokes we have

perhaps  thrown  light  on  a  number  of  questions  and  have  certainly

come upon plenty of suggestions for further enquiries. But the findings

of this chapter combine with those of the last one to present us with a

difficult problem. If it is correct to say that the pleasure provided by

jokes depends on the one hand on their technique and on the other

hand  on  their  purpose,  from  what  common  point  of  view  can  such

different sources of the pleasure in jokes be brought together?

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1710

 

                              B.  SYNTHETIC PART

 

                                            IV

 

THE MECHANISM OF PLEASURE AND THE PSYCHOGENESIS OF

                                        JOKES

 

We can now start out from an assured knowledge of the sources of

the peculiar pleasure given us by jokes. We are aware that we may be

deceived into confusing our enjoyment of the intellectual content of

what is stated with the pleasure proper to jokes; but we know that that

pleasure  itself  has  at  bottom  two  sources  -  the  technique  and  the

purposes of jokes. What we now want to discover is the way in which

the  pleasure  arises  from  these  sources,  the  mechanism  of  the

pleasurable effect.

   We shall, I think, find the explanation we are in search of far easier

from  tendentious  jokes  than  from  innocent  ones.  We  will  thereforebegin with the former.

      The  pleasure  in  the  case  of  a  tendentious  joke  arises  from  a

purpose being satisfied whose satisfaction would otherwise not have

taken place. That a satisfaction such as this is a source of pleasure

calls for no further remark. But the manner in which a joke leads to

this satisfaction is linked with particular conditions, from which we may

perhaps  arrive  at  some  further  information.  Two  cases  are  to  be

distinguished here. The simpler one is where the satisfaction of the

purpose is opposed by an external obstacle which is evaded by the

joke.  We  found  this,  for  instance,  in  the  reply  received  by

Serenissimus to his question of whether the mother of the man he was

speaking to had ever lived in the Palace and in the critic’s rejoinder to

the two rich rascals who showed him their portraits: ‘But where’s the

Saviour?’ In the former case the purpose was to answer one insult by

another, and in the latter it was to hand across an insult instead of the

assessment that had been asked for. What opposed the purpose were

purely external factors - the powerful position of the people at whom

the insults were directed. It may nevertheless strike us that, however

much these and analogous jokes of a tendentious nature may satisfy

us, they are not able to provoke much laughter.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1711

 

   It is otherwise when what stands in the way of the direct realization

of the purpose is not an external factor but an internal obstacle, when

an internal impulse opposes the purpose. This condition would seem,

on our hypothesis, to be fulfilled in the jokes of Herr N., in whom a

strong inclination to invective is held in check by a highly developed

aesthetic  culture.  By  the  help  of  a  joke,  this  internal  resistance  is

overcome  in  the  particular  case  and  the  inhibition  lifted.  By  that

means, as in the instance of the external obstacle, the satisfaction of

the purpose is made possible and its suppression, together with the

‘psychical  damming-up’  that  this  would  involve,  is  avoided.  To  that

extent  the  mechanism  of  the  generation  of  pleasure  would  be  the

same in the two cases.      Nevertheless,  we  are  inclined  here  to  go  more  deeply  into  the

distinctions  between  the  psychological  situation  in  the  cases  of  an

external and an internal obstacle, for we have a suspicion that the

removal  of  an  internal  obstacle  may  make  an  incomparably  higher

contribution to the pleasure. But I suggest that at this point we should

exercise moderation and be satisfied for the moment with establishing

what remains the essential point for us. The cases of an external and

an internal obstacle differ only in the fact that in the latter an already

existing inhibition is lifted and that in the former the erection of a new

one is avoided. That being so, we shall not be relying too much on

speculation if we assert that both for erecting and for maintaining a

psychical  inhibition  some  ‘psychical  expenditure’  is  required.  And,

since  we  know  that  in  both  cases  of  the  use  of  tendentious  jokes

pleasure is obtained, it is therefore plausible to suppose that this yield

of pleasure corresponds to the psychical expenditure that is saved.

   Here then we have once more come upon the principle of economy

which we met first in discussing the technique of verbal jokes. But

whereas in the earlier case we seemed to find the economy in the use

of as few words as possible or of words as much alike as possible, we

now have a suspicion of an economy in the far more comprehensive

sense of psychical expenditure in general; and we must regard it as

possible that a closer understanding of what is still the very obscure

concept of ‘psychical expenditure’ may bring us nearer to the essential

nature of jokes.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1712

 

   A certain lack of clarity which we have been unable to overcome in

our handling of the mechanism of pleasure in tendentious jokes may

be taken as an appropriate punishment for our having tried to clear up

the more complex problem before the simpler one, tendentious jokes

before  innocent  ones.  We  take  note  of  the  fact  that  ‘economy  in

expenditure on inhibition or suppression’ appears to be the secret of

the  pleasurable  effect  of  tendentious  jokes,  and  pass  on  to  the

mechanism of pleasure in innocent jokes.   On the basis of suitable specimens of innocent jokes, in which there

was  no  fear  of  our  judgement  being  disturbed  by  their  content  or

purpose, we were driven to conclude that the techniques of jokes are

themselves  sources  of  pleasure;  and  we  shall  now  try  to  discover

whether  it  may  perhaps  be  possible  to  trace  that  pleasure  back  to

economy in psychical expenditure. In one group of these jokes (play

upon words) the technique consisted in focusing our psychical attitude

upon the sound of the word instead of upon its meaning - in making

the (acoustic) word presentation itself take the place of its significance

as  given  by  its  relations  to  thing-presentations.  It  may  really  be

suspected  that  in  doing  so  we  are  bringing  about  a  great  relief  in

psychical work and that when we make serious use of words we are

obliged  to  hold  ourselves  back  with  a  certain  effort  from  this

comfortable  procedure.  We  can  observe  how  pathological  states  of

thought-activity,  in  which  the  possibility  of  concentrating  psychical

expenditure on a particular point is probably restricted, do in fact give

this sort of sound-presentation of the word greater prominence than its

meaning, and that sufferers in such states proceed in their speech on

the lines (as the formula runs) of the ‘external’ instead of the ‘internal’

associations of the word-presentation. We notice, too, that children,

who, as we know, are in the habit of still treating words as things, tend

to  expect  words  that  are  the  same  or  similar  to  have  the  same

meaning behind them - which is a source of many mistakes that are

laughed at by grown-up people. If, therefore, we derive unmistakable

enjoyment in jokes from being transported by the use of the same or a

similar word from one circle of ideas to another, remote one (in the

‘Home-Roulard’,  for  instance,  from  the  kitchen  to  politics),  this

enjoyment  is  no  doubt  correctly  to  be  attributed  to  economy  in

psychical expenditure. The pleasure in a joke arising from a ‘short-

circuit’ like this seems to be the greater the more alien the two circles

of ideas that are brought together by the same word - the further apart

they are, and thus the greater the economy which the joke’s technical

method provides in the train of thought. We may notice, too, that here

jokes  are  making  use  of  a  method  of  linking  things  up  which  is

rejected and studiously avoided by serious thought.¹

   In a second group of technical methods used in jokes - unification,

similarity  of  sound,  multiple  use,  modification  of  familiar  phrases,allusions  to  quotations  -  we  can  single  out  as  their  common

characteristic  the  fact  that  in  each  of  them  something  familiar  is

rediscovered, where we might instead have expected something new.

This rediscovery of what is familiar is pleasurable, and once more it is

not difficult for us to recognize this pleasure as a pleasure in economy

and to relate it to economy in psychical expenditure.

 

   ¹ If I may be allowed to anticipate the exposition in the text, I can at this point throw light on

the condition which seems to determine whether a joke is to be called a ‘good’ or a ‘bad’ one.
If, by means of a word with two meanings or a word that is only slightly modified, I take a short
cut from one circle of ideas to another, and if there is not at the same time a link between
those circles of ideas which has a significant sense, then I shall have made a ‘bad’ joke. In a
bad joke like this the only existing link between the two disparate ideas is the one word - the
‘point’ of the joke. The example of ‘Home-Roulard’ quoted above is a joke of this kind. A
‘good’ joke, on the other hand, comes about when what children expect proves correct and
the similarity between the words is shown to be really accompanied by another, important
similarity in their sense. Such, for instance, is the example ‘Traduttore - Traditore’. The two
disparate  ideas,  which  are  here  linked  by  an  external  association,  are  also  united  in  a
significant  relation  which  indicates  an  essential  kinship  between  them.  The  external
association merely takes the place of the internal connection; it serves to point it out or make
it clear. A ‘translator’ is not only called by a similar name to a ‘traitor’; he actually in a kind of
traitor and bears the name, as it were by right.
   The distinction that is here developed coincides with the one which is to be introduced later
between a ‘jest’ and a ‘joke’. But it would be unjust to exclude examples like ‘Home-Roulard’
from the discussion of the nature of jokes. As soon as we take into consideration the peculiar
pleasure derived from jokes, we find that the ‘bad’ jokes are by no means bad as jokes - that
is, unsuitable for producing pleasure.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1713

 

      It  seems  to  be  generally  agreed  that  the  rediscovery  of  what  is

familiar,  ‘recognition’,  is  pleasurable.  Groos  (1899,  153)  writes:

‘Recognition  is  always,  unless  it  is  too  much  mechanized  (as,  for

instance, in dressing, . . .), linked with feelings of pleasure. The mere

quality  of  familiarity  is  easily  accompanied  by  the  quiet  sense  of

comfort  which  Faust  felt  when,  after  an  uncanny  encounter,  he

entered his study once again . . . If the act of recognition thus gives

rise to pleasure, we might expect that men would hit on the idea of

exercising this capacity for its own sake - that is, would experiment

with it in play. And in fact Aristotle regarded joy in recognition as the

basis  of  the  enjoyment  of  art,  and  it  cannot  be  disputed  that  thisprinciple should not be overlooked, even if it does not possess such

far-reaching significance as Aristotle attributes to it.’

   Groos goes on to discuss games whose characteristic lies in the fact

that they intensify the joy in recognition by putting obstacles in its way

- that is to say, by creating a ‘psychical damming up’, which is got rid

of by the act of recognition. His attempt at an explanation, however,

abandons  the  hypothesis  that  recognition  is  pleasurable  in  itself,

since, by referring to these games, he is tracing back the enjoyment of

recognition to a joy in power, a joy in the overcoming of a difficulty. I

regard the latter factor as secondary, and I see no reason to depart

from  the  simpler  view  that  recognition  is  pleasurable  in  itself  i.e.,

through relieving psychical expenditure - and that the games founded

on this pleasure make use of the mechanism of damming up only in

order to increase the amount of such pleasure.

   It is also generally acknowledged that rhymes, alliterations, refrains,

and  other  forms  of  repeating  similar  verbal  sounds  which  occur  in

verse, make use of the same source of pleasure - the rediscovery of

something familiar. The ‘sense of power’ plays no perceptible part in

these techniques, which show so much similarity to that of ‘multiple

use’ in the case of jokes.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1714

 

      In  view  of  the  close  connection  between  recognizing  and

remembering,  it  is  not  rash  to  suppose  that  there  may  also  be  a

pleasure  in  remembering  -  that  the  act  of  remembering  is  in  itself

accompanied by a feeling of pleasure of similar origin. Groos seems

not to be averse to such a hypothesis, but he derives it once again

from the ‘sense of power’, to which he attributes (wrongly, in my view)

the chief reason for enjoyment in almost all games.

      The  ‘rediscovery  of  what  is  familiar’  is  the  basis  for  the  use  of

another technical resource in jokes, which we have not yet mentioned.

I refer to the factor of ‘topicality’, which is a fertile source of pleasure in

a great many jokes and which explains a few of the peculiarities in the

life-history of jokes. There are jokes which are completely independentof this condition, and in a monograph on jokes we are obliged to make

almost exclusive use of examples of that kind. But we cannot forget

that,  in  comparison  with  these  perennial  jokes,  we  have  perhaps

laughed even more heartily at others which it is difficult for us to use

now because they would call for long commentaries and even with

such help would not produce their original effect. These latter jokes

contained  allusions  to  people  and  events  which  at  the  time  were

‘topical’,  which  had  aroused  general  interest  and  still  kept  it  alive.

When this interest had ceased and the business in question had been

settled,  these  jokes  too  lost  a  part  of  their  pleasurable  effect  and

indeed a very considerable part. For instance, the joke made by my

friendly  host  when  he  called  a  pudding  that  was  being  served  a

‘Home-Roulard’ does not seem to me to-day nearly so good as it did

at the time when ‘Home Rule’ provided a standing head-line in the

political  columns  of  our  daily  papers.  In  attempting  to  estimate  the

merits of this joke I now attribute them to the fact that a single word

has transported us, with the economy of a long detour in thought, from

the circle of ideas of the kitchen to the remote one of politics. But at

the time my account would have had to be different, and I should have

said  that  this  word  transported  us  from  the  circle  of  ideas  of  the

kitchen to that of politics, which was remote from it but was certain of

our  lively  interest  because  we  were  constantly  concerned  with  it.

Another  joke,  ‘This  girl  reminds  me  of  Dreyfus;  the  army  doesn’t

believe in her innocence’, has also faded to-day, though its technical

methods must have remained unaltered. The bewilderment caused by

the  comparison  and  the double-entendre  in  the  word  ‘innocence’

cannot compensate for the fact that the allusion, which at the time

touched on an event cathected with fresh excitement, to-day recalls a

question that is settled. Here is a joke which is still topical: ‘The Crown

Princess  Louise  approached  the  crematorium  in  Gotha  with  the

question  of  how  much  a Verbrennung  [cremation]  costs.  The

management replied: "Five thousand marks normally; but we will only

charge you three thousand as you have been durchgebrannt [literally

‘been burnt through’ - slang for ‘eloped’] once already.’ A joke like this

sounds  irresistible  to-day;  in  a  short  time  it  will  have  sunk  very

considerably in our estimation; and some time later still, in spite of its

good  play  upon  words,  it  will  lose  its  effect  entirely,  for  it  will  beimpossible to repeat it without adding a commentary to explain who

Princess Louise was and the sense in which she was durchgebrannt.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1715

 

   Thus a great number of the jokes in circulation have a certain length

of life: their life runs a course made up of a period of flowering and a

period of decay and it ends in complete oblivion. The need which men

feel for deriving pleasure from their processes of thought is therefore

constantly creating new jokes based on the new interests of the day.

The vital force of topical jokes is not their own; it is borrowed, by the

method  of  allusion,  from  those  other  interests,  the  expiry  of  which

determines the fate of the joke as well. The factor of topicality is a

source  of  pleasure,  ephemeral  it  is  true  but  particularly  abundant,

which supplements the sources inherent in the joke itself. It cannot be

simply equated with the rediscovery of what is familiar. It is concerned

rather  with  a  particular  category  of  what  is  familiar,  which  must  in

addition  possess  the  characteristic  of  being  fresh,  recent  and

untouched  by  forgetting.  In  the  formation  of  dreams,  too,  we  come

across a special preference for what is recent and we cannot escape

a suspicion that association with what is recent is rewarded, and so

facilitated, by a peculiar bonus of pleasure.

   Unification, which is after all no more than repetition in the sphere of

thought-connections  instead  of  in  that  of  subject-matter,  was  given

special recognition by Fechner as a source of the pleasure in jokes.

He writes (Fechner, 1897, 1, Chapter XVII): ‘In my opinion the chief

part in the field we are now considering is played by the principle of

the unified linking of multiplicities; it requires support, however, from

auxiliary  determinants  in  order  that  the  enjoyment  which  can  be

derived from these cases, with its peculiar character, may be carried

over the threshold.’¹

   In all these cases of repeating the same connections or the same

subject-matter  in  the  words,  or  of  rediscovering  what  is  familiar  or

recent, it seems impossible to avoid deriving the pleasure felt in them

from  economy  in  psychical  expenditure  provided  that  this  line  ofapproach  turns  out  to  be  fruitful  in  throwing  light  on  details  and  in

arriving at new generalities. We are aware that we have still to make it

clear how the economy comes about and what the meaning is of the

expression ‘psychical expenditure’.

      The  third  group  of  techniques  of  jokes  -  for  the  most  part  of

conceptual  jokes  -  which  comprises  faulty  thinking,  displacements,

absurdity, representation by the opposite, etc., may at a first glance

seem  to  bear  a  special  impress  and  to  betray  no  kinship  with  the

techniques  of  rediscovery  of  what  is  familiar  or  the  replacement  of

object-associations  by  word-associations.  Nevertheless  it  is

particularly easy here to bring into play the theory of economy or relief

in psychical expenditure.

 

   ¹ The title of Chapter XVII is ‘On significant and joking similes, play upon words and other

cases which bear the character of being amusing, funny or ridiculous.’
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1716

 

   It cannot be doubted that it is easier and more convenient to diverge

from a line of thought we have embarked on than to keep to it, to

jumble up things that are different rather than to contrast them - and,

indeed, that it is specially  convenient  to  admit  as  valid  methods  of

inference  that  are  rejected  by  logic  and,  lastly,  to  put  words  or

thoughts together without regard to the condition that they ought also

to make sense. This cannot be doubted; and these are precisely the

things that are done by the joke-techniques which we are discussing.

But  the  hypothesis  that  behaviour  of  this  kind  by  the  joke-work

provides a source of pleasure will strike us as strange, since apart

from jokes all such inefficient intellectual functioning produces in us

nothing but unpleasurable defensive feelings.

   ‘Pleasure in nonsense’, as we may call it for short, is concealed in

serious life to a vanishing point. In order to demonstrate it we must

investigate two cases - one in which it is still visible and one in which it

becomes visible again: the behaviour of a child in learning, and that of

an adult in a toxically altered state of mind.

   During the period in which a child is learning how to handle thevocabulary  of  his  mother-tongue,  it  gives  him  obvious  pleasure  to

‘experiment with it in play’, to use Groos’s words. And he puts words

together without regard to the condition that they should make sense,

in order to obtain from them the pleasurable effect of rhythm or rhyme.

Little  by  little  he  is  forbidden  this  enjoyment,  till  all  that  remains

permitted to him are significant combinations of words. But when he is

older attempts still emerge at disregarding the restrictions that have

been learnt on the use of words. Words are disfigured by particular

little additions being made to them, their forms are altered by certain

manipulations (e.g. by reduplications or ‘Zittersprache’), or a private

language may even be constructed for use among playmates. These

attempts are found again among certain categories of mental patients.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1717

 

   Whatever the motive may have been which led the child to begin

these games, I believe that in his later development he gives himself

up to them with the consciousness that they are nonsensical, and that

he finds enjoyment in the attraction of what is forbidden by reason. He

now  uses  games  in  order  to  withdraw  from  the  pressure  of  critical

reason. But there is far more potency in the restrictions which must

establish  themselves  in  the  course  of  a  child’s  education  in  logical

thinking and in distinguishing between what is true and false in reality;

and for this reason the rebellion against the compulsion of logic and

reality  is  deep-going  and  long-lasting.  Even  the  phenomena  of

imaginative activity must be included in this category. The power of

criticism has increased so greatly in the later part of childhood and in

the period of learning which extends over puberty that the pleasure in

‘liberated  nonsense’  only  seldom  dares  to  show  itself  directly.  One

does  not  venture  to  say  anything  absurd.  But  the  characteristic

tendency  of  boys  to  do  absurd  or  silly  things  seems  to  me  to  be

directly derived from the pleasure in nonsense. In pathological cases

we  often  see  this  tendency  so  far  intensified  that  once  more  it

dominates  the  schoolboy’s  talk  and  answers.  I  have  been  able  to

convince myself in the case of a few boys of secondary school agewho had developed neuroses that the unconscious workings of their

pleasure in the nonsense they produced played no less a part in their

inefficiency than did their real ignorance.

      Nor,  later  on,  does  the  University  student  cease  these

demonstrations  against  the  compulsion  of  logic  and  reality,  the

dominance of which, however, he feels growing ever more intolerant

and unrestricted. A large amount of student ‘rags’ are a part of this

reaction.  For  man  is  a  ‘tireless  pleasure-seeker’  -  I  forget  where  I

came  across  this  happy  expression  -  and  any  renunciation  of  a

pleasure he has once enjoyed comes hard to him. With the cheerful

nonsense of his Bierschwefel,¹ for instance, the student tries to rescue

his pleasure in freedom of thinking, of which he is being more and

more deprived by the schooling of academic instruction. Much later

still,  indeed,  when  as  a  grown  man  he  meets  others  in  scientific

congresses and once more feels himself a learner, after the meeting is

over  there  comes  the Kneipzeitung,²  which  distorts  the  new

discoveries  into  nonsense,  and  offers  him  a  compensation  for  the

fresh addition to his intellectual inhibition.

 

   ¹ [‘Bierschwefel’: ludicrous speech delivered at a beer party.]

   ² [A comic set of minutes. Literally, ‘tavern newspaper’.]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1718

 

      The Bierschwefel  and  the Kneipzeitung  give  evidence  by  their

names to the fact that the criticism which has repressed pleasure in

nonsense has already grown so powerful that it cannot be put aside

even temporarily without toxic assistance. A change in mood is the

most precious thing that alcohol achieves for mankind, and on that

account  this  ‘poison’  is  not  equally  indispensable  for  everyone.  A

cheerful  mood,  whether  it  is  produced  endogenously  or  toxically,

reduces  the  inhibiting  forces,  criticism  among  them,  and  makes

accessible  once  again  sources  of  pleasure  which  were  under  the

weight  of  suppression.  It  is  most  instructive  to  observe  how  the

standards of joking sink as spirits rise. For high spirits replace jokes,

just as jokes must try to replace high spirits, in which possibilities ofenjoyment which are otherwise inhibited - among them the pleasure in

nonsense  -  can  come  into  their  own:  ‘Mit  wenig  Witz  und  viel

Behagen.’¹ Under the influence of alcohol the grown man once more

becomes  a  child,  who  finds  pleasure  in  having  the  course  of  his

thoughts freely at his disposal without paying regard to the compulsion

of logic.

   I hope I have now also shown that the absurdity-techniques of jokes

are a source of pleasure. It need only be repeated that this pleasure

arises from an economy in psychical expenditure or a relief from the

compulsion of criticism.

 

   If we look back once more at the three separate groups of joke-

techniques,  we  see  that  the  first  and  third  of  these  groups  -  the

replacement of thing-associations by word-associations and the use of

absurdity - can be brought together as re-establishing old liberties and

getting rid of the burden of intellectual upbringing; they are psychical

reliefs,  which  can  in  a  sense  be  contrasted  with  the  economizing

which  constitutes  the  technique  of  the  second  group.  Relief  from

psychical  expenditure  that  is  already  there  and  economizing  in

psychical expenditure that is only about to be called for - from these

two principles all the techniques of jokes, and accordingly all pleasure

from these techniques, are derived. The two species of technique and

of obtaining pleasure coincide - in the main at all events - with the

distinction between verbal and conceptual jokes.

 

   ¹ [‘With little wit and much enjoyment.’]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1719

 

 

   The preceding discussion has given us unawares an insight into the

evolution or psychogenesis of jokes, which we will now examine more

closely.  We  have  made  the  acquaintance  of  preliminary  stages  of

jokes,  and  their  development  into  tendentious  jokes  will  probably

uncover fresh relations between the various characteristics of jokes.

Before there is such a thing as a joke, there is something that we maydescribe as ‘play’ or as ‘a jest’.

   Play - let us keep to that name - appears in children while they are

learning to make use of words and to put thoughts together. This play

probably obeys one of the instincts which compel children to practise

their  capacities  (Groos).  In  doing  so  they  come  across  pleasurable

effects, which arise from a repetition of what is similar, a rediscovery

of  what  is  familiar,  similarity  of  sound,  etc.,  and  which  are  to  be

explained as unsuspected economies in psychical expenditure. It is

not  to  be  wondered  at  that  these  pleasurable  effects  encourage

children in the pursuit of play and cause them to continue it without

regard for the meaning of words or the coherence of sentences. Play

with words and thoughts, motivated by certain pleasurable effects of

economy, would thus be the first stage of jokes.

   This play is brought to an end by the strengthening of a factor that

deserves  to  be  described  as  the  critical  faculty  or  reasonableness.

The play is now rejected as being meaningless or actually absurd; as

a result of criticism it becomes impossible. Now, too, there is no longer

any  question  of  deriving  pleasure,  except  accidentally,  from  the

sources of rediscovery of what is familiar, etc., unless it happens that

the growing individual is overtaken by a pleasurable mood which, like

the child’s cheerfulness, lifts the critical inhibition. Only in such a case

does the old game of getting pleasure become possible once more;

but  the  individual  does  not  want  to  wait  for  this  to  happen  nor  to

renounce the pleasure that is familiar to him. He thus looks about for

means of making himself independent of the pleasurable mood, and

the  further  development  towards  jokes  is  governed  by  the  two

endeavours: to avoid criticism and to find a substitute for the mood.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

 1720

 

   And with this the second preliminary stage of jokes sets in - the jest.

It is now a question of prolonging the yield of pleasure from play, but

at the same time of silencing the objections raised by criticism which

would not allow the pleasurable feeling to emerge. There is only one

way of reaching this end: the meaningless combination of words or theabsurd  putting  together  of  thoughts  must  nevertheless  have  a

meaning. The whole ingenuity of the joke-work is summoned up in

order  to  find  words  and  aggregations  of  thoughts  in  which  this

condition  is  fulfilled.  All  the  technical  methods  of  jokes  are  already

employed  here  -  in  jests;  moreover  linguistic  usage  draws  no

consistent line between a jest and a joke. What distinguishes a jest

from  a  joke  is  that  the  meaning  of  the  sentence  which  escapes

criticism need not be valuable or new or even good; it need merely be

permissible to say the thing in this way, even though it is unusual,

unnecessary or useless to say it in this way. In jests what stands in

the foreground is the satisfaction of having made possible what was

forbidden by criticism.

      It  is,  for  instance,  simply  a  jest  when  Schleiermacher  defines

Eifersucht  [jealousy]  as  the Leidenschaft  [passion]  which mit  eifer

Sucht  [with  eagerness  seeks]  what Leiden schafft  [causes  pain].  It

was a jest when Professor Kästner, who taught physics (and made

jokes) at Göttingen in the eighteenth century, asked a student named

Kriegk,  when  he  was  enrolling  himself  for  his  lectures,  how  old  he

was. ‘Thirty years old’ was the reply, whereupon Kästner remarked:

‘Ah! so I have the honour of meeting the Thirty Years’ War [Krieg].’

(Kleinpaul, 1890.) It was with a jest that the great Rokitansky replied to

the question of what were the professions of his four sons: ‘Two heilen

[heal]  and  two heulen  [howl]’  (two  doctors  and  two  singers).  The

information  was  correct  and  therefore  not  open  to  criticism;  but  it

added nothing to what might have been expressed in the words in

brackets.  There  can  be  no  mistaking  the  fact  that  the  answer  was

given  the  other  form  only  on  account  of  the  pleasure  which  was

produced by the unification and the similar sound of the two words.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1721

 

      I  think  now  at  length  we  see  our  way  clearly.  All  through  our

consideration of the techniques of jokes we have been disturbed by

the fact that they were not proper to jokes only; and yet the essence of

jokes seemed to depend on them, since when they were got rid of byreduction the characteristics and the pleasure of the joke were lost.

We now see that what we have described as the techniques of jokes -

and we must in a certain sense continue to describe them so - are

rather the sources from which jokes provide pleasure; and we feel that

there is nothing strange in other procedures drawing from the same

sources for the same end. The technique which is characteristic of

jokes and peculiar to them, however, consists in their procedure for

safeguarding the use of these methods of providing pleasure against

the  objections  raised  by  criticism  which  would  put  an  end  to  the

pleasure.  There  is  little  that  we  can  say  in  general  about  this

procedure. The joke-work, as we have already remarked, shows itself

in  a  choice  of  verbal  material  and  conceptual  situations  which  will

allow the old play with words and thoughts to withstand the scrutiny of

criticism; and with that end in view every peculiarity of vocabulary and

every  combination  of  thought-sequences  must  be  exploited  in  the

most  ingenious  possible  way.  We  may  be  in  a  position  later  to

characterize the joke-work by a particular property; for the moment it

remains unexplained how the selection favourable for jokes can be

made.  The  purpose  and  function  of  jokes,  however  -  namely,  the

protection of sequences of words and thoughts from criticism - can

already  be  seen  in  jests  as  their  essential  feature.  Their  function

consists  from  the  first  in  lifting  internal  inhibitions  and  in  making

sources of pleasure fertile which have been rendered inaccessible by

those  inhibitions;  and  we  shall  find  that  they  remain  loyal  to  this

characteristic throughout their development.

   We are also in a position now to assign its correct place to the factor

of  ‘sense  in  nonsense’  (cf.  the  introduction, p. 1618),  to  which  the

authorities attribute such great importance as a distinguishing mark of

jokes and as an explanation of their pleasurable effect. The two fixed

points  in  what  determines  the  nature  of  jokes  -  their  purpose  of

continuing  pleasurable  play  and  their  effort  to  protect  it  from  the

criticism of reason immediately explain why an individual joke, though

it may seem senseless from one point of view, must appear sensible,

or at least allowable, from another. How it does so remains the affair

of the joke-work; if it fails to do so, it is simply rejected as ‘nonsense’.

But  there  is  no  necessity  for  us  to  derive  the  pleasurable  effect  of

jokes  from  the  conflict  between  the  feelings  which  arise  (whetherdirectly or along the path of ‘bewilderment and enlightenment’) from

the  simultaneous  sense  and  nonsense  of  jokes.  Nor  have  we  any

need to enter further into the question of how pleasure could arise

from the alternation between ‘thinking it senseless’ and ‘recognizing it

as  sensible’.  The  psychogenesis  of  jokes  has  taught  us  that  the

pleasure  in  a  joke  is  derived  from  play  with  words  or  from  the

liberation  of  nonsense,  and  that  the  meaning  of  the  joke  is  merely

intended  to  protect  that  pleasure  from  being  done  away  with  by

criticism.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1722

 

   In this way the problem of the essential character of jokes is already

explained in jests. We may now turn to the further development of

jests, to the point at which they reach their height in tendentious jokes.

Jests  still  give  the  foremost  place  to  the  purpose  of  giving  us

enjoyment,  and  are  content  if  what  they  say  does  not  appear

senseless  or  completely  devoid  of  substance.  If  what  a  jest  says

possesses substance and value, it turns into a joke. A thought which

would  deserve  our  interest  even  if  it  were  expressed  in  the  most

unpretentious  form  is  now  clothed  in  a  form  which  must  give  us

enjoyment on its own account.¹ A combination like this can certainly

not, we must suppose, have come about unintentionally; and we must

try to discover the intention underlying the construction of the joke. An

observation which we made earlier (in passing, as it seemed) will put

us on the track. We said above (p. 1691) that a good joke makes, as it

were, a total impression of enjoyment on us, without our being able to

decide at once what share of the pleasure arises from its joking form

and  what  share  from  its  apt  thought-content.  We  are  constantly

making mistakes in this apportionment. Sometimes we over-estimate

the goodness of the joke on account of our admiration of the thought it

contains; another time, on the contrary, we over-estimate the value of

the  thought  on  account  of  the  enjoyment  given  us  by  its  joking

envelope. We do not know what is giving us enjoyment and what we

are  laughing  at.  This  uncertainty  in  our  judgement,  which  must  beassumed  to  be  a  fact,  may  have  provided  the  motive  for  the

construction of jokes in the proper sense of the word. The thought

seeks to wrap itself in a joke because in that way it recommends itself

to our attention and can seem more significant and more valuable, but

above all because this wrapping bribes our powers of criticism and

confuses them. We are inclined to give the thought the benefit of what

has pleased us in the form of the joke; and we are no longer inclined

to find anything wrong that has given us enjoyment and so to spoil the

source  of  a  pleasure.  If  the  joke  has  made  us  laugh,  moreover,  a

disposition most unfavourable for criticism will have been established

in us; for in that case something will have forced us into the mood

which play has previously sufficed to produce, and for which the joke

has tried by every possible means to make itself a substitute. Even

though we have earlier asserted that such jokes are to be described

as innocent and not yet tendentious, we must not forget that strictly

speaking only jests are non-tendentious - that is, serve solely the aim

of producing pleasure. Jokes, even if the thought contained in them is

non-tendentious and thus only serves theoretical intellectual interests,

are in fact never non-tendentious. They pursue the second aim: to

promote the thought by augmenting it and guarding it against criticism.

Here they are once again expressing their original nature by setting

themselves up against an inhibiting and restricting power - which is

now the critical judgement.

 

   ¹ As an example which shows the difference between a jest and a joke proper we may take

the excellent joking remark with which a member of the ‘Bürger’ Ministry in Austria answered
a question about the cabinet’s solidarity: ‘How can we einstehen [stand up] for one another if
we can’t ausstehen [stand] one another?’ Technique: use of the same material with slight
(contrary)  modification.  Logical  and  apposite  thought:  there  can  be  no  solidarity  without
mutual  understanding.  The  contrary  nature  of  the  modification  (ein  [in]  - aus  [out])
corresponds to the incompatibility asserted in the thought and serves as a representation of it.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1723

 

      This,  the  first  use  of  jokes  that  goes  beyond  the  production  of

pleasure, points the way to their further uses. A joke is now seen to be

a  psychical  factor  possessed  of  power:  its  weight,  thrown  into  onescale or the other, can be decisive. The major purposes and instincts

of  mental  life  employ  it  for  their  own  ends.  The  originally  non-

tendentious  joke,  which  began  as  play,  is secondarily  brought  into

relation with purposes from which nothing that takes form in the mind

can ultimately keep away. We know already what it is able to achieve

in the service of the purpose of exposure, and of hostile, cynical and

sceptical purposes. In the case of obscene jokes, which are derived

from smut, it turns the third person who originally interfered with the

sexual  situation  into  an  ally,  before  whom  the  woman  must  feel

shame, by bribing him with the gift of its yield of pleasure. In the case

of aggressive purposes it employs the same method in order to turn

the hearer, who was indifferent to begin with, into a co-hater or co-

despiser, and creates for the enemy a host of opponents where at first

there was only one. In the first case it overcomes the inhibitions of

shame and respectability by means of the bonus of pleasure which it

offers;  in  the  second  it  upsets  the  critical  judgement  which  would

otherwise have examined the dispute. In the third and fourth cases, in

the service of cynical and sceptical purposes, it shatters respect for

institutions and truths in which the hearer has believed, on the one

hand by reinforcing the argument, but on the other by practising a new

species of attack. Where argument tries to draw the hearer’s criticism

over on to its side, the joke endeavours to push the criticism out of

sight. There is no doubt that the joke has chosen the method which is

psychologically the more effective.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1724

 

      In  this  survey  of  the  achievements  of  tendentious  jokes,  most

prominence has been assumed by - what is more easily seen - the

effect  of  jokes  on  the  person  who  hears  them.  More  important,

however,  from  the  point  of  view  of  our  understanding,  are  the

functions accomplished by jokes in the mind of the person who makes

them or, to put it in the only correct way, the person to whom they

occur. We have already proposed - and here we have occasion to

repeat  the  notion  -  that  we  should  try  to  study  the  psychicalphenomena of jokes with reference to their distribution between two

people.  We  will  make  a  provisional  suggestion  that  the  psychical

process provoked by the joke in the hearer is in most cases modelled

on that which occurs in its creator. The external obstacle which is to

be overcome in the hearer corresponds to an internal inhibition in the

maker of the joke. At the least the expectation of an external obstacle

is  present  in  the  latter  as  an  inhibiting  idea.  In  certain  cases  the

internal  obstacle  which  is  overcome  by  the  tendentious  joke  is

obvious;  in  Herr  N.’s  jokes,  for  instance,  we  were  able  to  assume

(p. 1699) that not only did they make it possible for their hearers to

enjoy aggressiveness in the form of insults, but that above all they

made it possible for him to produce them. Among the various kinds of

internal  inhibition  or  suppression  there  is  one  which  deserves  our

special  interest,  because  it  is  the  most  far-reaching.  It  is  given  the

name of ‘repression’, and is recognized by its function of preventing

the  impulses  subjected  to  it,  and  their  derivatives,  from  becoming

conscious. Tendentious jokes, as we shall see, are able to release

pleasure even from sources that have undergone repression. If, as

has been suggested above, the overcoming of external obstacles can

in this way be traced back to the overcoming of internal inhibitions and

repressions,  we  may  say  that  tendentious  jokes  exhibit  the  main

characteristic of the joke-work - that of liberating pleasure by getting

rid  of  inhibitions  more  clearly  than  any  other  of  the  developmental

stages of jokes. Either they strengthen the purposes which they serve,

by  bringing  assistance  to  them  from  impulses  that  are  kept

suppressed,  or  they  put  themselves  entirely  at  the  service  of

suppressed purposes.

      We  may  be  ready  to  admit  that  this  is  what  tendentious  jokes

achieve; yet we must bear in mind that we do not understand how

they are able to put these achievements into effect. Their power lies in

the yield of pleasure which they draw from the sources of play upon

words  and  of  liberated  nonsense;  but  if  we  are  to  judge  by  the

impressions  gained  from  non-tendentious  jests,  we  cannot  possibly

think the amount of this pleasure great enough to attribute to it the

strength  to  lift  deeply-rooted  inhibitions  and  repressions.  What  we

have before us here is in fact no simple effect of force but a more

complex situation of release. Instead of setting out the long detour bywhich I reached an understanding of this situation, I will try to give a

short synthetic exposition of it.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1725

 

      Fechner  (1897, 1,  Chapter  V)  has  put  forward  a  ‘principle  of

aesthetic  assistance  or  intensification’,  which  he  has  expressed  as

follows: ‘If determinants of pleasure that in themselves produce little

effect converge without mutual contradiction, there results a greater,

and often a much greater, outcome of pleasure than corresponds to

the pleasure-value of the separate determinants - a greater pleasure

than could be explained as the sum of the separate effects. Indeed, a

convergence  of  this  kind  can  even  lead  to  a  positive  resultant  of

pleasure and the threshold of pleasure may be crossed, where the

separate  factors  are  too  weak  to  do  so:  though  they  must,  in

comparison  with  others,  show  a  perceptible  advantage  in

enjoyableness.’ (Ibid., 51. The italics are Fechner’s.)

   The topic of jokes does not, I think, give us much opportunity of

confirming the correctness of this principle, which can be shown to

hold good in many other aesthetic structures. As regards jokes we

have learnt something else, which at least fringes upon this principle:

namely, that where several pleasure-giving factors operate together

we are not able to attribute to each of them the share it has really

taken in bringing about the result. (p. 1691.) We can, however, vary

the situation that is assumed in the ‘principle of assistance’ and, as a

result of these fresh conditions, arrive at a number of questions which

would deserve reply. What happens in general if, in a combination,

determinants of pleasure and determinants of unpleasure converge?

On what does the outcome depend and what decides whether that

outcome is in pleasure or unpleasure?

      The  case  of  tendentious  jokes  is  a  special  one  among  these

possibilities.  An  impulse  or  urge  is  present  which  seeks  to  release

pleasure  from  a  particular  source  and,  if  it  were  allowed  free  play,

would release it. Besides this, another urge is present which works

against this generation of pleasure - inhibits it, that is, or suppresses it.The suppressing current must, as the outcome shows, be a certain

amount stronger than the suppressed one, which, however, is not on

that  account  abolished.  Now  let  us  suppose  that  yet  another  urge

makes  its  appearance  which  would  release  pleasure  through  the

same process, though from other sources, and which thus operates in

the same sense as the suppressed urge. What can the result be in

such a case?

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1726

 

   An example will give us our bearings better than this schematic

discussion.  Let  us  assume  that  there  is  an  urge  to  insult  a  certain

person; but this is so strongly opposed by feelings of propriety or of

aesthetic culture that the insult cannot take place. If, for instance, it

were able to break through as a result of some change of emotional

condition or mood, this break through by the insulting purpose would

be felt subsequently with unpleasure. Thus the insult does not take

place. Let us now suppose, however, that the possibility is presented

of deriving a good joke from the material of the words and thoughts

used for the insult - the possibility, that is, of releasing pleasure from

other sources which are not obstructed by the same suppression. This

second development of pleasure could, nevertheless, not occur unless

the insult were permitted; but as soon as the latter is permitted the

new  release  of  pleasure  is  also  joined  to  it.  Experience  with

tendentious jokes shows that in such circumstances the suppressed

purpose can, with the assistance of the pleasure from the joke, gain

sufficient strength to overcome the inhibition, which would otherwise

be stronger than it. The insult takes place, because the joke is thus

made possible. But the enjoyment obtained is not only that produced

by the joke: it is incomparably greater. It is so much greater than the

pleasure  from  the  joke  that  we  must  suppose  that  the  hitherto

suppressed  purpose  has  succeeded  in  making  its  way  through,

perhaps without any diminution whatever. It is in such circumstances

that the tendentious joke is received with the heartiest laughter.

   An examination of the determinants of laughing will perhaps lead usto  a  plainer  idea  of  what  happens  when  a  joke  affords  assistance

against suppression. Even now, however, we can see that the case of

tendentious jokes is a special case of the ‘principle of assistance’. A

possibility of generating pleasure supervenes in a situation in which

another possibility of pleasure is obstructed so that, as far as the latter

alone  is  concerned,  no  pleasure  would  arise.  The  result  is  a

generation of pleasure far greater than that offered by the supervening

possibility. This has acted, as it were, as an incentive bonus with the

assistance of the offer of a small amount of pleasure, a much greater

one,  which  would  otherwise  have  been  hard  to  achieve,  has  been

gained. I have good reason to suspect that this principle corresponds

with  an  arrangement  that  holds  good  in  many  widely  separated

departments of mental life and it will, I think, be expedient to describe

the pleasure that serves to initiate the large release of pleasure as

‘fore-pleasure’, and the principle as the ‘fore-pleasure principle’.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1727

 

   We are now able to state the formula for the mode of operation of

tendentious jokes. They put themselves at the service of purposes in

order  that,  by  means  of  using  the  pleasure  from  jokes  as  a  fore-

pleasure, they may produce new pleasure by lifting suppressions and

repressions. If now we survey the course of development of the joke,

we may say that from its beginning to its perfecting it remains true to

its essential nature. It begins as play, in order to derive pleasure from

the free use of words and thoughts. As soon as the strengthening of

reasoning puts an end to this play with words as being senseless, and

with thoughts as being nonsensical, it changes into a jest, in order that

it may retain these sources of pleasure and be able to achieve fresh

pleasure from the liberation of nonsense. Next, as a joke proper, but

still  a  non-tendentious  one,  it  gives  its  assistance  to  thoughts  and

strengthens  them  against  the  challenge  of  critical  judgement,  a

process in which the ‘principle of confusion of sources of pleasure’ is

of use to it. And finally it comes to the help of major purposes which

are combating suppression, in order to lift their internal inhibitions bythe  ‘principle  of  fore-pleasure’.  Reason,  critical  judgement,

suppression  -  these  are  the  forces  against  which  it  fights  in

succession; it holds fast to the original sources of verbal pleasure and,

from the stage of the jest onwards, opens new sources of pleasure for

itself by lifting inhibitions. The pleasure that it produces, whether it is

pleasure  in  play  or  pleasure  in  lifting  inhibitions,  can  invariably  be

traced back to economy in psychical expenditure, provided that this

view does not contradict the essential nature of pleasure and that it

proves itself fruitful in other directions.¹

 

   ¹ Nonsense jokes, which have not had due attention paid to them in my account, deserve

some supplementary consideration.
   The importance which our views attach to the factor of ‘sense in nonsense’ might lead to a
demand that every joke must be a nonsense joke. But this is not necessary, because it is only
playing with thoughts that inevitably leads to nonsense; the other source of pleasure in jokes,
playing with words, only gives that impression occasionally and does not invariably provoke
the implied criticism. The twofold root of the pleasure in jokes - from playing with words and
playing with thoughts, which corresponds to the very important distinction between verbal and
conceptual jokes - makes it perceptibly more difficult to arrive at a concise formulation of
general statements about jokes. Playing with words produces manifest pleasure as a result of
the factors that have been enumerated above (recognition, and so on), and is consequently
only to a small degree liable to suppression. Playing with thoughts cannot have its motive in
this kind of pleasure; it meets with very energetic suppression, and the pleasure which it can
yield is only pleasure in the lifting of an inhibition. It can accordingly be said that the pleasure
in  jokes  exhibits  a  core  of  original  pleasure  in  play  and  a  casing  of  pleasure  in  lifting
inhibitions. - We naturally do not perceive that our pleasure in a nonsense joke arises from our
having succeeded in liberating a piece of nonsense in spite of its suppression; whereas we
see directly that playing with words has given us pleasure. - The nonsense that still remains in
a conceptual joke acquires secondarily the function of increasing our attention by bewildering
us. It serves as a means of intensifying the effect of the joke, but only when it acts obtrusively,
so that the bewilderment can hurry ahead of the understanding by a perceptible moment of
time. The examples on p. 1659 ff. have shown that in addition to this, nonsense in a joke can
be used to represent a judgement contained in the thought. But this, too, is not the primary
significance of nonsense in jokes.
   [Added 1912:] A number of productions resembling jokes can be classed alongside of
nonsense jokes. There is no appropriate name for them, but they might well be described as
‘idiocy masquerading as a joke’. There are countless numbers of them, and I will only select
two samples:
   ‘A man at the dinner table who was being handed fish dipped his two hands twice in the
mayonnaise  and  then  ran  them  through  his  hair.  When  his  neighbour  looked  at  him  in
astonishment, he seemed to notice his mistake and apologized: "I’m so sorry, I thought it was
spinach."'
   Or: ‘"Life is a suspension bridge", said one man. - "Why is that?" asked the other. - "How
should I know?" was the reply.’
   These extreme examples have an effect because they rouse the expectation of a joke, so
that one tries to find a concealed sense behind the nonsense. But one finds none: they reallyare  nonsense.  The  pretence  makes  it  possible  for  a  moment  to  liberate  the  pleasure  in
nonsense. These jokes are not entirely without a purpose; they are a ‘take-in’, and give the
person who tells them a certain amount of pleasure in misleading and annoying his hearer.
The latter then damps down his annoyance by determining to tell them himself later on.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1728

 

                                            V

 

    THE MOTIVES OF JOKES - JOKES AS A SOCIAL PROCESS

 

It might seem superfluous to talk about the motives of jokes, since the

aim of getting pleasure must be recognized as a sufficient motive for

the joke-work. But on the one hand the possibility cannot be excluded

of other motives as well having a share in the production of jokes, and

on  the  other  hand,  bearing  in  mind  some  familiar  experiences,  we

must  raise  the  general  question  of  the  subjective  determinants  of

jokes.

   Two facts in particular make this necessary. Although the joke-work

is an excellent method of getting pleasure out of psychical processes,

it  is  nevertheless  evident  that  not  everyone  is  equally  capable  of

making  use  of  that  method,  the  joke-work  is  not  at  everyone’s

command, and altogether only a few people have a plentiful amount of

it;  and  these  are  distinguished  by  being  spoken  of  as  having  ‘wit’

[Witz]. ‘Wit’ appears in this connection as a special capacity - rather in

the class of the old mental ‘faculties’; and it seems to emerge fairly

independently  of  the  others,  such  as  intelligence,  imagination,

memory, etc. We must therefore presume the presence in these ‘witty’

people  of  special  inherited  dispositions  or  psychical  determinants

which permit or favour the joke-work.

   I fear that we shall not get very far in exploring this question. We can

only succeed here and there in advancing from an understanding of a

particular joke to a knowledge of the subjective determinants in the

mind of the person who made it. It is a remarkable coincidence that

precisely  the  example  of  the  joke  on  which  we  began  our

investigations of the technique of jokes also gives us a glimpse into

the subjective determinants of jokes. I refer to Heine’s joke, which hasalso been considered by Heymans and Lipps:

   ‘. . . I sat beside Salomon Rothschild and he treated me quite as his

equal - quite famillionairely.’ (‘Bäder von Lucca.’)

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1729

 

   Heine puts this remark into the mouth of a comic character, Hirsch-

Hyacinth, a Hamburg lottery-agent, extractor of corns and professional

valuer,  the  valet  of  the  aristocratic  Baron  Gristoforo  Gumpelino

(formerly Gumpel). The poet evidently takes the greatest satisfaction

in this creation of his, for he makes Hirsch-Hyacinth into a great talker

and  gives  him  the  most  amusing  and  plain-spoken  speeches,  and

even lets him display the practical philosophy of a Sancho Panza. It is

a  pity  that  Heine,  who  seems  to  have  had  no  taste  for  dramatic

construction, dropped this delightful character so soon. There are not

a  few  passages  in  which  the  poet  himself  seems  to  be  speaking,

under a thing disguise, through the mouth of Hirsch-Hyacinth, and it

soon  becomes  a  certainty  that  this  character  is  only  a  self-parody.

Hirsch explains his reasons for having given up his former name and

why he now calls himself ‘Hyacinth’. He goes on: ‘There’s the further

advantage that I already have an "H" on my signet, so that I don’t

need to have a new one cut.’ But Heine himself effected the same

economy when, at his baptism, he changed his first name from ‘Harry’

to ‘Heinrich’. Everyone, too, who is familiar with the poet’s biography,

will recall that Heine had an uncle of the same name in Hamburg (a

place  which  provides  another  connection  with  the  figure  of  Hirsch-

Hyacinth) who, as the rich man of the family, played a large part in his

life. This uncle was also called ‘Salomon’, just like the old Rothschild

who  treated  Hirsch  so  famillionairely.  What  seemed  in  Hirsch-

Hyacinth’s mouth no more than a jest soon reveals a background of

serious bitterness if we ascribe it to the nephew, Harry-Heinrich. After

all, he was one of the family, and we know that he had a burning wish

to marry a daughter of this uncle’s; but his cousin rejected him, and

his uncle always treated him a little famillionairely, as a poor relation.

His rich cousins in Hamburg never took him seriously. I recall a storytold by an old aunt of my own, who had married into the Heine family,

how one day, when she was an attractive young woman, she found

sitting next her at the family dinner-table a person who struck her as

uninviting and whom the rest of the company treated contemptuously.

She herself felt no reason to be any more affable towards him. It was

only  many  years  later  that  she  realized  that  this  negligent  and

neglected cousin had been the poet Heinrich Heine. There is not a

little evidence to show how much Heine suffered both in his youth and

later from this rejection by his rich relations. It was from the soil of this

subjective emotion that the ‘famillionairely’ joke sprang.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1730

 

   The presence of similar subjective determinants may be suspected

in some other of the great scoffer’s jokes; but I know of no other one in

which this can be demonstrated so convincingly. For this reason it is

not easy to try to make any more definite statement about the nature

of  these  personal  determinants.  Indeed,  we  shall  be  disinclined  in

general to claim such complicated determinants for the origin of every

individual joke. Nor are the jokes produced by other famous men any

more easily accessible to our examination. We get an impression that

the subjective determinants of the joke-work are often not far removed

from  those  of  neurotic  illness  -  when  we  learn,  for  instance,  of

Lichtenberg  that  he  was  a  severely  hypochrondriacal  man,  with  all

kinds  of  eccentricities.  The  great  majority  of  jokes,  and  especially

those that are constantly being newly produced in connection with the

events of the day, are circulated anonymously; one would be curious

to learn from what sort of people such productions originate. If one

has  occasion  as  doctor  to  make  the  acquaintance  of  one  of  those

people who, though not remarkable in other ways, are well known in

their circle as jokers and the originators of many viable jokes, one may

be  surprised  to  discover  that  the  joker  is  a  disunited  personality,

disposed  to  neurotic  disorders.  The  insufficiency  of  documentary

evidence, however, will certainly prevent our setting up a hypothesis

that  a  psychoneurotic  constitution  of  this  kind  is  a  habitual  ornecessary subjective condition for the construction of jokes.

   A more transparent case is offered, once more, by the Jewish jokes,

which, as I have already mentioned (p. 1705), are ordinarily made by

Jews themselves, while the anecdotes about them from other sources

scarcely ever rise above the level of comic stories or of brutal derision.

What determines their participating in the jokes themselves seems to

be the same as in the case of Heine’s ‘famillionairely’ joke; and its

significance seems to lie in the fact that the person concerned finds

criticism  or  aggressiveness  difficult  so  long  as  they  are  direct,  and

possible only along circuitous paths.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1731

 

   Other subjective factors which determine or favour the joke-work are

less  wrapped  in  obscurity.  The  motive  force  for  the  production  of

innocent  jokes  is  not  infrequently  an  ambitious  urge  to  show  one’s

cleverness, to display oneself - an instinct that may be equated with

exhibitionism in the sexual field. The presence of numerous inhibited

instincts,  whose  suppression  has  retained  a  certain  degree  of

instability,  will  provide  the  most  favourable  disposition  for  the

production  of  tendentious  jokes.  Thus  individual  components  of  a

person’s sexual constitution in particular, can appear as motives for

the construction of a joke. A whole class of obscene jokes allows one

to infer the presence of a concealed inclination to exhibitionism in their

inventors;  aggressive  tendentious  jokes  succeed  best  in  people  in

whose  sexuality  a  powerful  sadistic  component  is  demonstrable,

which is more or less inhibited in real life.

      The  second  fact  which  makes  an  enquiry  into  the  subjective

determination  of  jokes  necessary  is  the  generally  recognized

experience that no one can be content with having made a joke for

himself  alone.  An  urge  to  tell  the  joke  to  someone  is  inextricably

bound up with the joke-work; indeed, this urge is so strong that often

enough it is carried through in disregard of serious misgivings. In the

case  of  the  comic  as  well,  telling  it  to  someone  else  produces

enjoyment; but the demand is not peremptory. If one comes acrosssomething comic, one can enjoy it by oneself. A joke, on the contrary,

must be told to someone else. The psychical process of constructing a

joke  seems  not  to  be  completed  when  the  joke  occurs  to  one:

something remains over which seeks, by communicating the idea, to

bring the unknown process of constructing the joke to a conclusion.

   We cannot in the first instance guess what the basis may be of this

urge to communicate the joke. But we can see another peculiarity in

jokes  which  distinguishes  them  from  the  comic.  If  I  come  across

something comic, I myself can laugh heartily at it, though it is true that

I am also pleased if I can make someone else laugh by telling it to

him. But I myself cannot laugh at a joke that has occurred to me, that I

have made, in spite of the unmistakable enjoyment that the joke gives

me. It is possible that my need to communicate the joke to someone

else is in some way connected with the laughter produced by it, which

is denied to me but is manifest in the other person.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1732

 

   Why is it, then, that I do not laugh at a joke of my own? And what

part is played in this by the other person?

   Let us take the second question first. In the case of the comic, two

persons  are  in  general  concerned:  besides  myself,  the  person  in

whom I find something comic. If inanimate things seem to me comic,

that  is  on  account  of  a  kind  of  personification  which  is  not  of  rare

occurrence in our ideational life. The comic process is content with

these two persons: the self and the person who is the object; a third

person may come into it, but is not essential. Joking as a play with

one’s own words and thoughts is to begin with without a person as an

object.  But  already  at  the  preliminary  stage  of  the jest,  if  it  has

succeeded  in  making  play  and  nonsense  safe  from  the  protests  of

reason, it demands another person to whom it can communicate its

result.  But  this  second  person  in  the  case  of  jokes  does  not

correspond to the person who is the object, but to the third person, the

‘other’ person in the case of the comic. It seems as though in the case

of a jest the other person has the decision passed over to him onwhether the joke-work has succeeded in its task - as though the self

did not feel certain in its judgement on the point. Innocent jokes, too,

jokes that serve to reinforce a thought, require another person to test

whether they have attained their aim. If a joke enters the service of the

purpose of exposing or of a hostile purpose, it may be described as a

psychical process between three persons, who are the same as in the

case  of  the  comic,  though  the  part  played  by  the  third  person  is

different; the psychical process in jokes is accomplished between the

first person (the self) and the third (the outside person) and not, as in

the case of the comic, between the self and the person who is the

object.

   Jokes are confronted by subjective determinants in the case of the

third  person  too,  and  these  may  make  their  aim  of  producing

pleasurable excitation unattainable. As Shakespeare (Love’s Labour

Lost, V, 2) reminds us:

 

                                                                A jest’s prosperity lies in the ear
                                                                Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
                                                                Of him that makes it . . .
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1733

 

      A  person  who  is  dominated  by  a  mood  concerned  with  serious

thoughts is not fitted to confirm the fact that a jest has succeeded in

rescuing the verbal pleasure. He must himself be in a cheerful or at

least in an indifferent state of feeling in order to act as the jest’s third

person.  The  same  obstacle  applies  to  innocent  and  to  tendentious

jokes;  but  in  the  latter  there  is  a  further  obstacle  in  the  form  of

opposition to the purpose which the joke is trying to serve. The third

person cannot be ready to laugh at an excellent obscene joke if the

exposure applies to a highly respected relative of his own; before a

gathering of priests and ministers no one would venture to produce

Heine’s  comparison  of  catholic  and  protestant  clerics  to  retail

tradesmen and employees of a wholesale business; and an audience

composed of my opponent’s devoted friends would receive my most

successful pieces of joking invective against him not as jokes but asinvective,  and  would  meet  them  with  indignation  and  not  with

pleasure.  Some  degree  of  benevolence  or  a  kind  of  neutrality,  an

absence  of  any  factor  that  could  provoke  feelings  opposed  to  the

purpose of the joke, is an indispensable condition if the third person is

to collaborate in the completion of the process of making the joke.

   Where there are no such obstacles to the operation of the joke, the

phenomenon which is now the subject of our enquiry emerges: the

pleasure  which  the  joke  has  produced  is  more  evident  in  the  third

person than in the creator of the joke. We must be content to say

more  ‘evident’  where  we  should  be  inclined  to  ask  whether  the

hearer’s pleasure is not more ‘intense than that of the maker of the

joke, since we naturally have no means of measuring and comparing.

We see, however, that the hearer gives evidence of his pleasure with

a burst of laughter, after the first person has as a rule produced the

joke with a tensely serious look. If I repeat a joke that I have heard

myself, I must, if I am not to spoil its effect, behave in telling it exactly

like the person who made it. The question now arises whether we can

draw  any  conclusions  about  the  psychical  process  of  constructing

jokes from this factor of laughing at jokes.

   It cannot be our design to consider at this point all that has been

propounded and published on the nature of laughter. We may well be

deterred from any such plan by the remarks with which Dugas, a pupil

of Ribot’s, prefaces his book La psychologie du rire (1902, 1): ‘Il n’est

pas de fait plus banal et plus étudié que le rire; il n’en est pas qui ait

eu  le  don  d’exciter  davantage  la  curiosité  du  vulgaire  et  celle  des

philosophes;  il  n’en  est  pas  sur  lequel  on  ait  receuilli  plus

d’observations et bâti plus de théories, et avec cela il n’en est pas qui

demeure plus inexpliqué. On serait tenté de dire avec les sceptiques

qu’il faut être content de rire et de ne pas chercher à savoir pourquoi

on rit, d’autant que peut-être la réflexion tue le rire, et qu’il serait alors

contradictoire qu’elle en découvrît les causes.’¹

 

   ¹ [‘There is no action that is more commonplace or that has been more widely studied than

laughter. There is none that has succeeded more in exciting the curiosity both of ordinary
people and of philosophers. There is none on which more observations have been collected
and more theories built. But at the same time there is none that remains more unexplained. It
would be tempting to say with the sceptics that we must be content to laugh and not try to
know  why  we  laugh,  since  it  may  be  that  reflection  kills  laughter  and  it  would  thus  be  a
contradiction to think that it could discover its causes.’] 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1734

 

   On the other hand we shall not miss the opportunity of making use

for our purposes of an opinion on the mechanism of laughter which fits

in excellently with our own line of thought. I have in mind the attempt

at  an  explanation  made  by  Herbert  Spencer  in  his  essay  on  ‘The

Physiology of Laughter’ (1860). According to Spencer, laughter is a

phenomenon of the discharge of mental excitation and a proof that the

psychical employment of this excitation has suddenly come up against

an obstacle. He describes the psychological situation which ends in

laughter in the following words: ‘Laughter naturally results only when

consciousness is unawares transferred from great things to small -

only when there is what we may call a descending incongruity.’¹

 

   ¹ Various points in this definition would call for detailed examination in an investigation of

comic pleasure; this has already been undertaken by other authors and in any case does not
concern us here. - I do not think Spencer has been happy in his explanation of why the
discharge  takes  the  particular  paths  whose  excitation  produces  the  somatic  picture  of
laughter. The theme of the physiological explanation of laughter - that is, the tracing back or
interpretation of the muscular actions characteristic of laughter - has been treated at length
both before and since Darwin, but has still not been finally cleared up. I have one contribution
to make to this theme. So far as I know, the grimace characteristic of smiling, which twists up
the corners of the mouth, appears first in an infant at the breast when it is satisfied and
satiated and lets go of the breast as it falls asleep. Here it is a genuine expression of the
emotions, for it corresponds to a decision to take no more nourishment, and represents as it
were an ‘enough’ or rather a ‘more than enough’. This original meaning of pleasurable satiety
may have brought the smile, which is after all the basic phenomenon of laughter, into its later
relation with pleasurable processes of discharge.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1735

 

      In  a  quite  similar  sense  French  authors  (e.g.  Dugas)  describe

laughter as a ‘détente’, a phenomenon of relaxation of tension. So too

the formula proposed by Bain - ‘laughter a release from constraint’ -

seems to me to diverge from Spencer’s view much less than some

authorities would have us believe.   Nevertheless, we feel a need to modify Spencer’s notion, in part to

give a more definite form to the ideas contained in it and in part to

change  them.  We  should  say  that  laughter  arises  if  a  quota  of

psychical  energy  which  has  earlier  been  used  for  the  cathexis  of

particular psychical paths has become unusable, so that it can find

free discharge. We are well aware what ‘evil looks’ we are inviting with

such  a  hypothesis;  but  we  will  venture  to  quote  in  our  defence  an

apposite sentence from Lipps’s book Komik und Humor (1898, 71),

from which illumination is to be derived on more subjects than that of

the  comic  and  humour:  ‘Finally,  specific  psychological  problems

always  lead  fairly  deep  into  psychology,  so  that  at  bottom  no

psychological problem can be treated in isolation.’ The concepts of

‘psychical  energy’  and  ‘discharge’  and  the  treatment  of  psychical

energy as a quantity have become habitual in my thoughts since I

began  to  arrange  the  facts  of  psychopathology  philosophically;  and

already in my Interpretation of Dreams (1900a) I tried (in the same

sense as Lipps) to establish the fact that what are ‘really psychically

effective’  are  psychical  processes  which  are  unconscious  in

themselves,  not  the  contents  of  consciousness.¹  It  is  only  when  I

speak of the ‘cathexis of psychical paths’ that I seem to depart from

the  analogies  commonly  used  by  Lipps.  My  experiences  of  the

displaceability of psychical energy along certain paths of association,

and of the almost indestructible persistence of the traces of psychical

processes, have in fact suggested to me an attempt at picturing the

unknown in some such way. To avoid misunderstanding, I must add

that I am making no attempt to proclaim that the cells and nerve fibres,

or the systems of neurones which are taking their place to-day, are

these psychical paths, even though it would have to be possible in

some manner which cannot yet be indicated to represent such paths

by organic elements of the nervous system.

 

   ¹ Cf. the sections ‘On Psychical Force’, etc. in Chapter VIII of Lipps’s book quoted above.

‘Thus the following general statement holds good: The factors of psychical life are not the
contents of consciousness but the psychical processes which are in themselves unconscious.
The task of psychology, if it does not merely wish to describe the contents of consciousness,
must  therefore  consist  in  inferring  the  nature  of  these  unconscious  processes  from  the
character of the contents of consciousness and their temporal connections. Psychology must
be a theory of these processes. But a psychology of this kind will very soon find that there are
quite  a  number  of  characteristics  of  these  processes  which  are  not  represented  in  thecorresponding contents of consciousness.’ (Lipps, ibid., 123-4.) See also Chapter VII of my
Interpretation of Dreams.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1736

 

   In laughter, therefore, on our hypothesis, the conditions are present

under which a sum of psychical energy which has hitherto been used

for  cathexis  is  allowed  free  discharge.  And  since  laughter  -  not  all

laughter, it is true, but certainly laughter at a joke - is an indication of

pleasure, we shall be inclined to relate this pleasure to the lifting of the

cathexis which has previously been present. If we see that the hearer

of a joke laughs but that its creator cannot laugh, this may amount to

telling us that in the hearer a cathectic expenditure has been lifted and

discharged,  while  in  the  construction  of  the  joke  there  have  been

obstacles  either  to  the  lifting  or  to  the  possibility  of  discharge.  The

psychical process in the hearer, the joke’s third person, can scarcely

be more aptly described than by stressing the fact that he has bought

the pleasure of the joke with very small expenditure on his own part.

He might be said to have been presented with it. The words of the

joke  he  hears  necessarily  bring  about  in  him  the  idea  or  train  of

thought  to  the  construction  of  which  great  internal  inhibitions  were

opposed in him too. He would have had to make an effort of his own in

order to bring it about spontaneously as the first person, he would

have had to use at least as much psychical expenditure on doing so

as would correspond to the strength of the inhibition, suppression or

repression of the idea. He has saved this psychical expenditure. On

the basis of our earlier discussions (p. 1711) we should say that his

pleasure  corresponds  to  this  economy.  Our  insight  into  the

mechanism  of  laughter  leads  us  rather  to  say  that,  owing  to  the

introduction  of  the  proscribed  idea  by  means  of  an  auditory

perception,  the  cathectic  energy  used  for  the  inhibition  has  now

suddenly become superfluous and has been lifted, and is therefore

now ready to be discharged by laughter. The two ways of expressing

the facts amount to the same thing in essentials, since the expenditure

economized  corresponds  exactly  to  the  inhibition  that  has  become

superfluous.  But  the  second  method  of  expression  is  the  moreilluminating, since it allows us to say that the hearer of the joke laughs

with the quota of psychical energy which has become free through the

lifting of the inhibitory cathexis; we might say that he laughs this quota

off.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1737

 

   If the person in whom the joke is formed cannot laugh, this, as we

have already said, points to a divergence from what happens in the

third person that lies either in the lifting of the inhibitory cathexis or in

the possibility of its discharge. But the first of these alternatives will not

meet the case, as we shall see at once. The inhibitory cathexis must

have been lifted in the first person as well, or otherwise no joke would

have  come  about,  since  its  formation  was  precisely  in  order  to

overcome  a  resistance  of  that  kind;  otherwise,  too,  it  would  be

impossible for the first person to feel the pleasure in the joke which we

have been obliged to trace back precisely to the lifting of the inhibition.

All that remains, then, is the other alternative, namely that the first

person cannot laugh, although he feels pleasure, because there is an

interference with the possibility of discharge. An interference of this

kind  with  the  possibility  of  discharge,  which  is  a  necessary

precondition of laughter, may arise from the liberated cathectic energy

being immediately applied to some other endopsychic use. It is a good

thing  that  our  attention  has  been  drawn  to  that  possibility;  and  our

interest  in  it  will  very  soon  be  further  engaged.  Another  condition,

however,  leading  to  the  same  result,  may  be  realized  in  the  first

person of a joke. It is possible that no quota of energy at all that is

capable of being manifested may be liberated, in spite of the lifting of

the inhibitory cathexis. In the first person of a joke the joke-work is

performed, which must correspond to a certain quota of new psychical

expenditure. Thus the first person himself produces the force which

lifts the inhibition. This no doubt results in a yield of pleasure for him,

and even, in the case of tendentious jokes, a very considerable one,

since the fore-pleasure obtained by the joke-work itself takes over the

lifting of further inhibitions; but the expenditure on the joke-work is inevery  case  deducted  from  the  yield  resulting  from  the  lifting  of  the

inhibition - an expenditure which is the same as the one which the

hearer of the joke avoids. What I have just said may be confirmed by

observing  that  a  joke  loses  its  effect  of  laughter  even  in  the  third

person  as  soon  as  he  is  required  to  make  an  expenditure  on

intellectual work in connection with it. The allusions made in a joke

must  be  obvious  and  the  omissions  easy  to  fill;  an  awakening  of

conscious  intellectual  interest  usually  makes  the  effect  of  the  joke

impossible. There is an important distinction here between jokes and

riddles. Perhaps the psychical constellation during the joke-work is in

general not favourable to the free discharge of what has been gained.

We are not, it seems, in a position to see further on this point; we have

been more successful in throwing light on one part of our problem - on

why the third person laughs - than on its other part - on why the first

person does not laugh.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1738

 

   Nevertheless, if we firmly accept these views on the determinants of

laughter and on the psychical process in the third person, we are now

in a position to give a satisfactory explanation of a whole number of

peculiarities which jokes have been known to possess but which have

not  been  understood.  If  a  quota  of  cathectic  energy  capable  of

discharge  is  to  be  liberated  in  the  third  person,  there  are  several

conditions which must be fulfilled or which are desirable in order to act

as encouragements: (1) It must be ensured that the third person is

really making this cathectic expenditure. (2) It is necessary to guard

against the cathectic expenditure, when it is liberated, finding some

other psychical use instead of offering itself for motor discharge. (3) It

cannot but be an advantage if the cathexis which is to be liberated in

the third person is intensified before hand, raised to a greater height.

All  these  aims  are  served  by  particular  methods  of  the  joke-work,

which may be classed together as secondary or auxiliary techniques:-

      The  first  of  these  conditions  lays  down  one  of  the  necessary

qualifications of the third person as hearer of the joke. It is essentialthat he should be in sufficient psychical accord with the first person to

possess  the  same  internal  inhibitions,  which  the  joke-work  has

overcome in the latter. A person who is responsive to smut will be

unable to derive any pleasure from witty jokes of exposure; Herr N.’s

attacks  will  not  be  understood  by  uneducated  people  who  are

accustomed to give free play to their desire to insult. Thus every joke

calls for a public of its own and laughing at the same jokes is evidence

of far reaching psychical conformity. Here moreover we have arrived

at a point which enables us to guess still more precisely what takes

place in the third person. He must be able as a matter of habit to erect

in  himself  the  same  inhibition  which  the  first  person’s  joke  has

overcome, so that, as soon as he hears the joke, the readiness for this

inhibition will compulsively or automatically awaken. This readiness for

inhibition,  which  I  must  regard  as  a  real  expenditure,  analogous  to

mobilization in military affairs, will at the same moment be recognized

as superfluous or too late, and so be discharged in statu nascendi by

laughter.¹

   The second condition for making free discharge possible - that the

liberated energy shall be prevented from being used in any other way

-  seems  very  much  the  more  important.  It  provides  the  theoretical

explanation of the uncertainty of the effect of jokes when the thoughts

expressed in a joke arouse powerfully exciting ideas in the hearer; in

that case the question whether the purposes of the joke agree with or

contradict the circle of thoughts by which the hearer is dominated will

decide whether his attention will remain with the joking process or be

withdrawn from it. Of still greater theoretical interest, however, are a

class of auxiliary techniques which clearly serve the end of entirely

detaching  the  hearer’s  attention  from  the  joking  process,  and  of

allowing that process to run its course automatically. I deliberately say

‘automatically’ and not ‘unconsciously’, because the latter description

would be misleading. It is only a question here of holding back an

increased cathexis of attention from the psychical process when the

joke is heard; and the usefulness of these auxiliary techniques rightly

leads us to suspect that precisely the cathexis of attention has a great

share in the supervision and fresh employment of liberated cathectic

energy.

    ¹ The notion of the status nascendi has been used by Heymans (1896) in a somewhat

different connection.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1739

 

   It appears to be far from easy to avoid the endopsychic employment

of  cathexes  that  have  become  superfluous,  for  in  our  thought-

processes we are constantly in the habit of displacing such cathexes

from  one  path  to  another  without  losing  any  of  their  energy  by

discharge. Jokes make use of the following methods with that aim in

view. Firstly, they try to keep their expression as short as possible, so

as  to  offer  fewer  points  of  attack  to  the  attention.  Secondly,  they

observe the condition of being easy to understand (see above); as

soon as they call for intellectual work which would demand a choice

between different paths of thought, they would endanger their effect

not only by the unavoidable expenditure of thought but also by the

awakening of attention. But besides this they employ the device of

distracting attention by putting forward something in the joke’s form of

expression which catches it, so that in the meantime the liberation of

the  inhibitory  cathexis  and  its  discharge  may  be  completed  without

interruption. This aim is already fulfilled by the omissions in the joke’s

wording; they offer an incitement to filling up the gaps and in that way

succeed in withdrawing the joking process from attention. Here the

technique of riddles, which attract the attention, is, as it were, brought

into  the  service  of  the  joke-work.  Far  more  effective  even  are  the

façades  which  we  have  found  especially  in  some  groups  of

tendentious jokes (p. 1699 ff.). The syllogistic façades admirably fulfil

the  aim  of  holding  the  attention  by  setting  it  a  task.  While  we  are

beginning to wonder what was wrong with the reply, we are already

laughing; our attention has been caught unawares and the discharge

of the liberated inhibitory cathexis has been completed. The same is

true of jokes with a comic façade, in which the comic comes to the

help  of  the  joke-technique.  A  comic  façade  encourages  the

effectiveness of a joke in more than one way; not only does it make

the  automatism  of  the  joking  process  possible,  by  holding  the

attention, but it also facilitates the discharge by the joke, by sendingon ahead a discharge of a comic kind. The comic is here operating

exactly like a bribing fore-pleasure, and we can in this way understand

how  some  jokes  are  able  to  renounce  entirely  the  fore-pleasure

produced by the ordinary methods of joking and make use only of the

comic  for  fore-pleasure.  Among  the  joke-techniques  proper,  it  is  in

particular  displacement  and  representation  by  something  absurd

which,  apart  from  their  other  qualifications,  give  rise,  too,  to  a

distraction of the attention which is desirable for the automatic course

of the joking process.¹

 

    ¹ I  should  like  to  discuss  yet  another  interesting  characteristic  of  joke-technique,  in

connection with an example of a displacement joke. Once when Gallmeyer, that actress of
genius, was asked the unwelcome question ‘Your age?’ she is said to have replied ‘in the tone
of voice of a Gretchen and with her eyes bashfully cast down: "at Brünn".’ This is a model
displacement. When she was asked her age she replied by giving the place of her birth. She
was thus anticipating the next question and was letting it be understood that she would be
glad to know that this one question had been passed over. Yet we feel that in this instance the
characteristic of jokes is not expressed in all its purity. It is too clear that the question is being
evaded, the displacement is too obvious. Our attention understands at once that what is in
question is an intentional displacement. In the other displacement jokes the displacement is
disguised; our attention is held by the effort to detect it. In the displacement joke recorded on
p. 1658, in the reply made to a recommendation of a riding horse ‘What should I be doing in
Pressburg at half-past six?’ the displacement is also prominent. But to make up for this it has
a confusing effect on the attention through its nonsensical nature, whereas in the actress’s
examination we are able to recognize her displacement-reply immediately. - [Added 1912]
What  are  known  as  ‘Scherzfragen  [facetious  questions]’  deviate  from  jokes  in  another
direction,  though  apart  from  this  they  may  make  use  of  the  best  techniques.  Here  is  an
example of one of them, which uses the technique of displacement: ‘What is a cannibal who
has eaten his father and his mother?’ - ‘An orphan.’ - ‘And if he, has eaten all his other
relations as well?’ - ‘The sole heir.’ - ‘And where will a monster of that kind find sympathy?’ -
‘In the dictionary under "S".’ ‘Facetious questions’ of this kind are not proper jokes because
the joking answers that they call for cannot be guessed in the same way as are the allusions,
omissions, etc. of jokes.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1740

 

   As we can already guess, and as we shall see more clearly later on,

we have discovered in the condition of distracting the attention a by no

means unessential feature of the psychical process in the hearer of a

joke. In connection with this there are still other things that we can

understand. Firstly, there is the question why we scarcely ever knowwhat we are laughing at in a joke, though we can discover it by an

analytic  investigation.  The  laughter  is  in  fact  the  product  of  an

automatic  process  which  is  only  made  possible  by  our  conscious

attention’s  being  kept  away  from  it.  Secondly,  we  are  able  to

understand the peculiar fact about jokes that they only produce their

full  effect  on  the  hearer  if  they  are  new  to  him,  if  they  come  as  a

surprise  to  him.  This  characteristic  of  jokes  (which  determines  the

shortness of their life and stimulates the constant production of new

jokes) is evidently due to the fact that the very nature of surprising

someone  or  taking  him  unawares  implies  that  it  cannot  succeed  a

second time. When a joke is repeated, the attention is led back to the

first occasion of hearing it as the memory of it arises. And from this we

are carried on to an understanding of the urge to tell a joke one has

heard  to  other  people  who  have  not  yet  heard  it.  One  probably

recovers from the impression the joke makes on a new-comer some of

the  possibility  of  enjoyment  that  has  been  lost  owing  to  its  lack  of

novelty. And it may be that it was an analogous motive that drove the

creator of the joke in the first instance to tell it to someone else.

      In  the  third  place  I  shall  bring  forward  -  but  this  time  not  as

necessary conditions but only as encouragements to the process of

joking  -  the  auxiliary  technical  methods  of  the  joke-work  which  are

calculated to increase the quota which obtains discharge and in that

way intensify the effect of the joke. These, it is true, also for the most

part increase the attention that is paid to the joke, but they make this

effect innocuous once more by simultaneously holding it and inhibiting

its mobility. Anything that provokes interest and bewilderment works in

these two directions - thus, in particular, nonsense, and contradiction,

too, the ‘contrast of ideas’ which some authorities have tried to make

into the essential characteristic of jokes, but which I can only regard

as a means of intensifying their effect. Anything that bewilders calls up

in the hearer the state of distribution of energy which Lipps has called

‘psychical damming up’; and he is no doubt also correct in supposing

that the discharge is the more powerful, the higher was the preceding

damming up. Lipps’s account, it is true, does not relate specifically to

jokes  but  to  the  comic  in  general;  but  we  may  regard  it  as  most

probable that in jokes, too, the discharge of an inhibitory cathexis is

similarly increased by the height of the damming up. 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1741

 

   It now begins to dawn on us that the technique of jokes is in general

determined  by  two  sorts  of  purposes  -  those  that  make  the

construction of the joke possible in the first person and those that are

intended to guarantee the joke the greatest possible pleasurable effect

on the third person. The Janus-like, two-way-facing character of jokes,

which  protects  their  original  yield  of  pleasure  from  the  attacks  of

critical reason, and the mechanism of fore-pleasure belong to the first

of these purposes; the further complication of the technique by the

conditions that have been enumerated in the present chapter takes

place out of regard for the joke’s third person. A joke is thus a double-

dealing rascal who serves two masters at once. Everything in jokes

that is aimed at gaining pleasure is calculated with an eye to the third

person, as though there were internal and unsurmountable obstacles

to it in the first person. And this gives us a full impression of how

indispensable  this  third  person  is  for  the  completion  of  the  joking

process.  But  whereas  we  have  been  able  to  obtain  a  fairly  good

insight  into  the  nature  of  this  process  in  the  third  person,  the

corresponding process in the first person seems still to be veiled in

obscurity.  Of  the  two  questions  we  asked,  ‘Why  are  we  unable  to

laugh at a joke we have made ourselves?’ and ‘Why are we driven to

tell our own joke to someone else?’, the first has so far evaded our

reply.  We  can  only  suspect  that  there  is  an  intimate  connection

between  the  two  facts  that  have  to  be  explained:  that  we  are

compelled to tell our joke to someone else because we are unable to

laugh at it ourselves. Our insight into the conditions for obtaining and

discharging pleasure which prevail in the third person enables us to

infer  as  regards  the first  person  that  in  him  the  conditions  for

discharge  are  lacking  and  those  for  obtaining  pleasure  only

incompletely  fulfilled.  That  being  so,  it  cannot  be  disputed  that  we

supplement our pleasure by attaining the laughter that is impossible

for us by the roundabout path of the impression we have of the person

who has been made to laugh. As Dugas has put it, we laugh as it were‘par ricochet [on the rebound]’. Laughter is among the highly infectious

expressions of psychical states. When I make the other person laugh

by telling him my joke, I am actually making use of him to arouse my

own  laughter;  and  one  can  in  fact  observe  that  a  person  who  has

begun by telling a joke with a serious face afterwards joins in the other

person’s laughter with a moderate laugh. Accordingly, telling my joke

to another person would seem to serve several purposes: first, to give

me  objective  certainty  that  the  joke-work  has  been  successful;

secondly, to complete my own pleasure by a reaction from the other

person upon myself; and thirdly - where it is a question of repeating a

joke that one has not produced oneself - to make up for the loss of

pleasure owing to the joke’s lack of novelty.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1742

 

 

   At the conclusion of these discussions of the psychical processes in

jokes  in  so  far  as  they  take  place  between  two  persons,  we  may

glance back at the factor of economy, which has been in our mind as

being of importance in arriving at a psychological view of jokes ever

since  our  first  explanation  of  their  technique.  We  have  long  since

abandoned the most obvious but simplest view of this economy - that

it is a question of an avoidance of psychical expenditure in general,

such as would be involved by the greatest possible restriction in the

use of words and in the establishment of chains of thought. Even at

that stage we told ourselves that being concise or laconic was not

enough to make a joke. A joke’s brevity is of a peculiar kind - ‘joking’

brevity.  It  is  true  that  the  original  yield  of  pleasure,  produced  by

playing with words and thoughts, was derived from mere economy in

expenditure; but with the development of play into a joke the tendency

to  economy  too  must  alter  its  aims,  for  the  amount  that  would  be

saved by the use of the same word or the avoidance of a new way of

joining ideas together would certainly count for nothing as compared

with  the  immense  expenditure  on  our  intellectual  activity.  I  may

perhaps venture on a comparison between psychical economy and abusiness enterprise. So long as the turnover in the business is very

small, the important thing is that outlay in general shall be kept low

and  administrative  costs  restricted  to  the  minimum.  Economy  is

concerned with the absolute height of expenditure. Later, when the

business  has  expanded,  the  importance  of  the  administrative  cost

diminishes; the height reached by the amount of expenditure is no

longer of significance provided that the turnover and profits can be

sufficiently  increased.  It  would  be  niggling,  and  indeed  positively

detrimental, to be conservative over expenditure on the administration

of the business. Nevertheless it would be wrong to assume that when

expenditure was absolutely great there would be no room left for the

tendency to economy. The mind of the manager, if it is inclined to

economy,  will  now  turn  to  economy  over  details.  He  will  feel

satisfaction if a piece of work can be carried out at smaller cost than

previously, however small the saving may seem to be in comparison

with the size of the total expenditure. In a quite analogous fashion, in

our  complex  psychical  business  too,  economy  in  detail  remains  a

source  of  pleasure,  as  may  be  seen  from  everyday  happenings.

Anyone who used to have his room lighted by gas and has now had

electricity installed will for quite a time be aware of a definite feeling of

pleasure when he switches on the electric light; he will feel it as long

as the memory is revived in him at that moment of the complicated

manoeuvres that were necessary for lighting the gas. Similarly, the

economies in psychical inhibitory expenditure brought about by a joke

-  though  they  are  small  in  comparison  with  our  total  psychical

expenditure - will remain a source of pleasure for us because they

save us a particular expenditure which we have been accustomed to

make and which we were already prepared to make on this occasion

as well. The factor of the expenditure’s being one that was expected

and prepared for moves unmistakably into the foreground.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1743

 

   A localized economy, such as we have just been considering, will

not fail to give us momentary pleasure; but it will not bring a lastingrelief so long as what has been saved at this point can be put to use

elsewhere. It is only if this disposal elsewhere can be avoided that this

specialized economy is transformed into a general relief of psychical

expenditure.  Thus,  as  we  come  to  a  better  understanding  of  the

psychical processes of jokes, the factor of relief takes the place of

economy.  It  is  obvious  that  the  former  gives  a  greater  feeling  of

pleasure. The process in the joke’s first person produces pleasure by

lifting inhibition and diminishing local expenditure; but it seems not to

come to rest until, through the intermediary of the interpolated third

person, it achieves general relief through discharge.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1744

 

                              C.  THEORETIC PART

 

                                            VI

 

        THE RELATION OF JOKES TO DREAMS AND TO THE

                                    UNCONSCIOUS

 

At the end of the chapter in which I was concerned with discovering

the technique of jokes, I remarked (p. 1686 f.) that the processes of

condensation,  with  or  without  the  formation  of  substitutes,  of

representation  by  nonsense  and  by  the  opposite,  of  indirect

representation,  and  so  on,  which,  as  we  found,  play  a  part  in

producing  jokes,  show  a  very  far-reaching  agreement  with  the

processes of the ‘dream-work’. I further promised on the one hand that

we would study these similarities more closely and on the other hand

that  we  would  examine  the  common  element  in  jokes  and  dreams

which seems to be thus suggested. It would be much easier for me to

carry out this comparison if I could assume that one of the two objects

of comparison - the ‘dream-work’ - was already familiar to my readers.

But it will probably be wiser not to make that assumption. I have an

impression  that  my Interpretation  of  Dreams,  published  in  1900,

provoked more ‘bewilderment’ than ‘enlightenment’ among my fellow-specialists; and I know that wider circles of readers have been content

to reduce the contents of the book to a catch-word (‘wish-fulfilment’)

which can be easily remembered and conveniently misused.

   Continued concern with the problems treated there - for which my

medical  practice  as  a  psychotherapist  has  given  me  abundant

opportunity - has not brought me up against anything that might have

called for alterations or improvements in my lines of thought; I can

therefore wait quietly till my readers’ understanding catches up with

me or till judicious criticism has shown me the fundamental errors in

my view. For the purpose of making the comparison with jokes, I will

now repeat, briefly and concisely, the most essential information about

dreams and the dream-work.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

 1745

 

      We  know  a  dream  from  what  seems  as  a  rule  a  fragmentary

memory of it which we have after waking. It appears as a mesh-work

of  sense-impressions,  mostly  visual  but  also  of  other  kinds,  which

have  simulated  an  experience,  and  with  which  thought-processes

(‘knowledge’ in the dream) and expressions of affect may be mingled.

What  we  thus  remember  of  the  dream  I  call  ‘the dream’s manifest

content’. It is often entirely absurd and confused - sometimes only the

one or the other. But even if it is quite coherent, as it is in the case of

some anxiety-dreams, it confronts our mental life as something alien,

for whose origin one cannot in any way account. The explanation of

these characteristics of dreams has hitherto been looked for in dreams

themselves,  by  regarding  them  as  indications  of  a  disordered,

dissociated and so to say ‘sleepy’ activity of the nervous elements.

   I have on the contrary shown that this strange ‘manifest’ content of

the dream can regularly be made intelligible as a mutilated and altered

transcript  of  certain  rational  psychical  structures  which  deserve  the

name of ‘latent dream-thoughts’. We arrive at a knowledge of these by

dividing the dream’s manifest content into its component parts, without

considering any apparent meaning it may have, and by then following

the associative threads which start from each of what are now isolatedelements.  These  interweave  with  one  another  and  finally  lead  to  a

tissue of thoughts which are not only perfectly rational but can also be

easily fitted into the known context of our mental processes. In the

course of this ‘analysis’, the content of the dream will have cast off all

the peculiarities that puzzled us. But if the analysis is to succeed, we

must, while it proceeds, firmly reject the critical objections which will

unceasingly  arise  to  the  reproduction  of  the  various  intermediary

associations.

   A comparison of the recollected manifest content of the dream with

the latent dream-thoughts thus discovered gives rise to the concept of

the ‘dream-work’. The dream-work is the name for the whole sum of

transforming processes which have converted the dream-thoughts into

the manifest dream. The surprise with which we formerly regarded the

dream now attaches to the dream-work.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1746

 

   The achievements of the dream-work can, however, be described as

follows. A tissue of thoughts, usually a very complicated one, which

has been built up during the day and has not been completely dealt

with - ‘a day’s residue’ - continues during the night to retain the quota

of energy - the ‘interest’- claimed by it, and threatens to disturb sleep.

This ‘day’s residue’ is transformed by the dream-work into a dream

and made innocuous to sleep. In order to provide a fulcrum for the

dream-work,  the  ‘day’s  residue’  must  be  capable  of  constructing  a

wish - which is not a very hard condition to fulfil. The wish arising from

the dream-thoughts forms the preliminary stage and later the core of

the dream. Experience derived from analyses - and not the theory of

dreams - informs us that in children any wish left over from waking life

is  sufficient  to  call  up  a  dream,  which  emerges  as  connected  and

ingenious but usually short, and which is easily recognized as a ‘wish-

fulfilment’. In the case of adults it seems to be a generally binding

condition that the wish which creates the dream shall be one that is

alien to conscious thinking - a repressed wish - or will possibly at least

have  reinforcements  that  are  unknown  to  consciousness.  Withoutassuming  the  existence  of  the  unconscious  in  the  sense  explained

above, I should not be able to develop the theory of dreams further or

to interpret the material met with in dream-analyses. The action of this

unconscious wish upon the consciously rational material of the dream-

thoughts produces the dream. While this happens, the dream is, as it

were,  dragged  down  into  the  unconscious,  or,  more  precisely,  is

submitted  to  a  treatment  such  as  is  met  with  at  the  level  of

unconscious  thought-processes  and  is  characteristic  of  that  level.

Hitherto it is only from the results of the ‘dream-work’ that we are in

fact acquainted with the characteristics of unconscious thinking and its

differences  from  thinking  that  is  capable  of  becoming  conscious  -

‘preconscious’ thinking.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1747

 

      A  theory  which  is  novel,  which  lacks  simplicity  and  which  runs

counter to our habits of thought, can scarcely gain in clarity from a

concise presentation. All I can aim at in these remarks, therefore, is to

draw  attention  to  the  fuller  treatment  of  the  unconscious  in  my

Interpretation of Dreams and to the writings of Lipps, which seem to

me of the highest importance. I am aware that anyone who is under

the spell of a good academic philosophical education, or who takes his

opinions at long range from some so-called system of philosophy, will

be opposed to the assumption of an ‘unconscious psychical’ in the

sense in which Lipps and I use the term, and will prefer to prove its

impossibility  on  the  basis  of  a  definition  of  the  psychical.  But

definitions are a matter of convention and can be altered. I have often

found that people who dispute the unconscious as being something

absurd  and  impossible  have  not  formed  their  impressions  from  the

sources  from  which  I  at  least  was  brought  to  the  necessity  of

recognizing  it.  These  opponents  of  the  unconscious  had  never

witnessed the effect of a post-hypnotic suggestion, and when I have

told them examples from my analyses with non-hypnotized neurotics

they have been filled with the greatest astonishment. They had never

realized the idea that the unconscious is something which we really donot  know,  but  which  we  are  obliged  by  compelling  inferences  to

supply;  they  had  understood  it  as  being  something  capable  of

becoming  conscious  but  which  was  not  being  thought  of  at  the

moment, which did not occupy ‘the focal point of attention’. Nor had

they ever tried to convince themselves of the existence in their own

minds of unconscious thoughts like these by analysing one of their

own dreams; and when I attempted to do so with them they could only

greet their own associations with surprise and confusion. I have also

formed an impression that fundamental emotional resistances stand in

the way of accepting the ‘unconscious’, and that these are based on

the fact that no one wants to get to know his unconscious and that the

most convenient plan is to deny its possibility altogether.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1748

 

      The  dream-work,  then  -  to  which  I  return  after  this  digression  -

submits the thought-material, which is brought forward in the optative

mood,  to  a  most  strange  revision.  First,  it  takes  the  step  from  the

optative to the present indicative; it replaces ‘Oh! if only . . .’ by ‘It is’.

The ‘It is’ is then given a hallucinatory representation; and this I have

called the ‘regression’ in the dream-work - the path that leads from

thoughts to perceptual images, or, to use the terminology of the still

unknown topography of the mental apparatus (which is not to be taken

anatomically), from the region of thought-structures to that of sensory

perceptions.  On  this  path,  which  is  in  the  reverse  direction  to  that

taken  by  the  course  of  development  of  mental  complications,  the

dream-thoughts  are  given  a  pictorial  character;  and  eventually  a

plastic situation is arrived at which is the core of the manifest ‘dream-

picture’. In order for it to be possible for the dream-thoughts to be

represented  in  sensory  form,  their  expression  has  to  undergo  far-

reaching  modifications.  But  while  the  thoughts  are  being  changed

back into sensory images still further alterations occur in them, some

of which can be seen to be necessary while others are surprising. We

can understand that, as a subsidiary result of regression, almost all

the internal relations between the thoughts which linked them togetherwill be lost in the manifest dream. The dream-work, as we might say,

only undertakes to represent the raw material of the ideas and not the

logical relations in which they stand to one another; or at all events it

reserves the liberty to disregard the latter. On the other hand, there is

another  part  of  the  dream-work  which  we  cannot  attribute  to

regression, to the change back into sensory images; and it is precisely

this  part  which  has  an  important  bearing  on  our  analogy  with  the

formation of jokes. In the course of the dream-work the material of the

dream-thoughts is subjected to a quite extraordinary compression or

condensation.  A  starting  point  for  it  is  provided  by  any  common

elements  that  may  be  present  in  the  dream-thoughts,  whether  by

chance or from the nature of their content. Since these are not as a

rule  sufficient  for  any  considerable  condensation,  new  artificial  and

transient common elements are created in the dream-work, and to this

end there is actually a preference for the use of words the sound of

which  expresses  different  meanings.  The  newly-created  common

elements of condensation enter the manifest content of the dream as

representatives  of  the  dream-thoughts,  so  that  an  element  in  the

dream corresponds to a nodal point or junction in the dream-thoughts,

and, as compared with these latter, must quite generally be described

as  ‘overdetermined’.  The  fact  of  condensation  is  the  piece  of  the

dream-work which can be most easily recognized; it is only necessary

to compare the text of a dream as it is noted down with the record of

the  dream-thoughts  arrived  at  by  analysis  in  order  to  get  a  good

impression of the extensiveness of dream-condensation.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1749

 

   It is less easy to convince oneself of the second great modification

of the dream-thoughts that is brought about by the dream-work - the

process that I have named ‘dream-displacement’. This is exhibited in

the fact that things that lie on the periphery of the dream-thoughts and

are of minor importance occupy a central position and appear with

great sensory intensity in the manifest dream, and vice versa. This

gives the dream the appearance of being displaced in relation to thedream-thoughts,  and  this  displacement  is  precisely  what  brings  it

about that the dream confronts waking mental life as something alien

and incomprehensible. In order that a displacement of this kind may

occur,  it  must  be  possible  for  the  cathectic  energy  to  pass  over

uninhibited from the important ideas to the unimportant ones - which,

in normal thought that is capable of being conscious, can only give an

impression of ‘faulty reasoning’.

      Transformation  with  a  view  to  the  possibility  of  representation,

condensation and displacement are the three major achievements that

may be ascribed to the dream-work. A fourth, which was perhaps too

shortly considered in The Interpretation of Dreams, is not relevant for

our  present  purposes.  If  the  ideas  of  a  ‘topography  of  the  mental

apparatus’ and of ‘regression’ are consistently followed up (and only in

that way could these working hypotheses come to have any value),

we must attempt to determine the stages of regression at which the

various  transformations  of  the  dream-thoughts  take  place.  This

attempt has not yet been seriously undertaken; but it can at least be

stated with certainty that displacement must take place in the thought-

material while it is at the stage of the unconscious processes, while

condensation must probably be pictured as a process stretching over

the whole course of events till the perceptual region is reached. But in

general we must be content to assume that all the forces which take

part in the formation of dreams operate simultaneously. Though one

must,  as  will  be  realized,  exercise  reserve  in  dealing  with  such

problems, and though there are fundamental doubts, which cannot be

entered into here, as to whether the question should be framed in this

manner, yet I should like to venture on the assertion that the process

of the dream-work preparatory to the dream must be located in the

region of the unconscious. Thus, speaking roughly, there would in all

be three stages to be distinguished in the formation of a dream: first,

the  transplanting  of  the  preconscious  day’s  residues  into  the

unconscious, in which the conditions governing the state of sleep must

play  a  part;  then,  the  dream-work  proper  in  the  unconscious;  and

thirdly,  the  regression  of  the  dream-material,  thus  revised,  to

perception, in which form the dream becomes conscious.

                 Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1750

 

   The following forces may be recognized as having a share in the

formation of dreams: the wish to sleep, the cathexis of energy that still

remains in the day’s residues after it has been lowered by the state of

sleep,  the  psychical  energy  of  the  dream-constructing  unconscious

wish  and  the  opposing  force  of  the  ‘censorship’,  which  dominates

daytime  life  and  is  not  completely  lifted  during  sleep.  The  task  of

dream-formation  is  above  all  to  overcome  the  inhibition  from  the

censorship;  and  it  is  precisely  this  task  which  is  solved  by  the

displacements of psychical energy within the material of the dream-

thoughts.

   Let us now recall what it was during our investigation of jokes that

gave us occasion to think of dreams. We found that the characteristics

and  effects  of  jokes  are  linked  with  certain  forms  of  expression  or

technical methods, among which the most striking are condensation,

displacement and indirect representation. Processes, however, which

lead  to  the  same  results  -  condensation,  displacement  and  indirect

representation  -  have  become  known  to  us  as  peculiarities  of  the

dream-work.  Does  not  this  agreement  suggest  the  conclusion  that

joke-work and dream-work must, at least in some essential respect,

be  identical?  The  dream-work  has,  I  think,  been  revealed  to  us  as

regards its most important characteristics. Of the psychical processes

in jokes the part that is hidden from us is precisely the one that may

be compared to the dream-work - namely, what happens during the

formation  of  a  joke  in  the  first  person.  Shall  we  not  yield  to  the

temptation to construct that process on the analogy of the formation of

a dream? A few of the characteristics of dreams are so alien to jokes

that the part of the dream-work corresponding to those characteristics

cannot be transferred to the formation of jokes. There is no doubt that

the regression of the train of thought to perception is absent in jokes.

But  the  other  two  stages  of  dream-formation,  the  sinking  of  a

preconscious  thought  into  the  unconscious  and  its  unconscious

revision, if they could be supposed to occur in joke-formation, would

present  the  precise  outcome  that  we  can  observe  in  jokes.  Let  us

decide,  then,  to  adopt  the  hypothesis  that  this  is  the  way  in  whichjokes are formed in the first person: a preconscious thought is given

over for a moment to unconscious revision and the outcome of this is

at once grasped by conscious perception.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1751

 

   Before we examine this hypothesis in detail, we will consider an

objection which might threaten our premiss. We have started from the

fact that the techniques of jokes indicate the same processes that are

known  to  us  as  peculiarities  of  the  dream-work.  Now  it  is  easy  to

argue against this that we should not have described the techniques

of  jokes  as  condensation,  displacement,  etc.,  and  should  not  have

arrived  at  such  far  reaching  conformities  between  the  methods  of

representation in jokes and dreams, if our previous knowledge of the

dream-work had not prejudiced our view of the technique of jokes; so

that  at  bottom  we  are  only  finding  in  jokes  a  confirmation  of  the

expectations with which we approached them from dreams. If this was

the basis of the conformity, there would be no certain guarantee of its

existence  apart  from  our  prejudice.  Nor  indeed  have  condensation,

displacement  and  indirect  representation  been  taken  by  any  other

author as explaining the forms of expression of jokes. This would be a

possible  objection,  but  not  on  that  account  a  just  one.  It  would  be

equally  possible  that  it  was  indispensable  for  our  views  to  be

sharpened  by  a  knowledge  of  the  dream-work  before  we  could

recognize the real conformity. A decision will after all depend only on

whether  a  critical  examination  can  prove  on  the  basis  of  individual

examples that this view of the technique of jokes is a forced one in

whose favour other more plausible and deeper-going views have been

suppressed, or whether such an examination is obliged to admit that

the  expectations  derived  from  dreams  can  really  be  confirmed  in

jokes.  I  am  of  the  opinion  that  we  have  nothing  to  fear  from  such

criticism and that our procedure of ‘reduction’ (p. 1629) has shown us

reliably in what forms of expression to look for the techniques of jokes.

And if we gave those techniques names which already anticipated the

discovery of the conformity between joke-technique and dream-work,we had a perfect right to do so and it was in fact nothing more than an

easily justifiable simplification.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1752

 

      There  is  another  objection  which  would  not  affect  our  case  so

seriously but which is also not so open to a fundamental disproof. It

might be said that, while it is true that these techniques of joking which

fit  in  so  well  with  our  scheme  deserve  to  be  recognized,  they  are

nevertheless not the only possible techniques of joking nor the only

ones used in practice. It might be argued that under the influence of

the model of the dream-work we have only looked for techniques of

joking  which  fitted  in  with  it,  while  others,  overlooked  by  us,  would

have proved that this conformity was not invariably present. I really

cannot  venture  to  assert  that  I  have  succeeded  in  elucidating  the

technique of every joke in circulation; and I must therefore leave open

the possibility that my enumeration of joke-techniques will show some

incompleteness. But I have not intentionally excluded from discussion

any kind of technique that was clear to me, and I can declare that the

commonest, most important and most characteristic methods of joking

have not escaped my attention.

   Jokes possess yet another characteristic which fits satisfactorily into

the view of the joke-work which we have derived from dreams. We

speak, it is true, of ‘making’ a joke; but we are aware that when we do

so  our  behaviour  is  different  from  what  it  is  when  we  make  a

judgement or make an objection. A joke has quite outstandingly the

characteristic of being a notion that has occurred to us ‘involuntarily’.

What happens is not that we know a moment beforehand what joke

we are going to make, and that all it then needs is to be clothed in

words.  We  have  an  indefinable  feeling,  rather,  which  I  can  best

compare with an ‘absence’¹, a sudden release of intellectual tension,

and  then  all  at  once  the  joke  is  there  -  as  a  rule  ready-clothed  in

words. Some of the techniques of jokes can be employed apart from

them in the expression of a thought - for instance, the techniques of

analogy or allusion. I can deliberately decide to make an allusion. Insuch a case I begin by having a direct expression of my thought in my

mind (in my inner ear); I inhibit myself from expressing it owing to a

misgiving related to the external situation, and can almost be said to

make up my mind to replace the direct expression by another form of

indirect expression; and I then produce an allusion. But the allusion

which arises in this way and which is formed under my continuous

supervision is never a joke, however serviceable it may be in other

ways. A joking allusion, on the other hand, emerges without my being

able to follow these preparatory stages in my thoughts. I will not attach

too much importance to this behaviour; it is scarcely decisive, though

it agrees well with our hypothesis that in the formation of a joke one

drops  a  train  of  thought  for  a  moment  and  that  it  then  suddenly

emerges from the unconscious as a joke.

 

   ¹ [The French term.]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1753

 

   Jokes show a special way of behaving, too, in regard to association.

Often they are not at the disposal of our memory when we want them;

but at other times, to make up for this, they appear involuntarily, as it

were, and at points in our train of thought where we cannot see their

relevance.  These,  again,  are  only  small  features,  but  nevertheless

indicate their origin from the unconscious.

   Let us now bring together those characteristics of jokes which can

be referred to their formation in the unconscious. First and foremost

there is the peculiar brevity of jokes - not, indeed, an essential, but an

extremely distinctive feature. When we first came across it, we were

inclined to regard it as an expression of the tendency to economy, but

abandoned this view ourselves owing to obvious objections. It now

seems to us rather a mark of the unconscious revision to which the

joke-thought  has  been  subjected.  For  we  cannot  connect  what

corresponds to it in dreams, condensation, with any factor other than

localization  in  the  unconscious;  and  we  must  suppose  that  the

determinants  for  such  condensations,  which  are  absent  in  the

preconscious, are present in the unconscious thought-process.¹ It is tobe expected that in the process of condensation a few of the elements

subjected to it will be lost, while others, which take over the cathectic

energy  of  the  former,  will  become  intensified  or  over-intensified

through  the  condensation.  Thus  the  brevity  of  jokes,  like  that  of

dreams,  would  be  a  necessary  concomitant  of  the  condensations

which occur in both of them - in both cases a result of the process of

condensation. This origin would also account for the special character

of the brevity of jokes, a character that cannot be further defined but

which is felt as a striking one.

 

   ¹ Apart from the dream-work and the technique of jokes, there is another kind of mental

event in which I have been able to show that condensation is a regular and important process:
namely  the  mechanism  of  normal  (non-tendentious)  forgetting.  Unique  impressions  offer
difficulties  to  forgetting;  those  that  are  analogous  in  any  way  are  forgotten  by  being
condensed  in  regard  to  their  points  of  resemblance.  Confusion  between  analogous
impressions is one of the preliminary stages of forgetting.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1754

 

   In an earlier passage (p. 1715) we regarded one of the outcomes of

condensation - multiple use of the same material, play upon words,

and similarity of sound - as a localized economy, and the pleasure

produced by an (innocent) joke as derived from that economy, and

later we inferred that the original intention of jokes was to obtain a

yield of pleasure of this kind from words - a thing which had been

permitted at the stage of play but had been dammed up by rational

criticism  in  the  course  of  intellectual  development.  We  have  now

adopted the hypothesis that condensations of this kind, such as serve

the  technique  of  jokes,  arise  automatically,  without  any  particular

intention, during thought-processes in the unconscious. Have we not

before  us  here  two  different  views  of  the  same  fact  which  seem

incompatible with each other? I do not think so. It is true that they are

two different views, and that they need to be brought into harmony

with each other; but they are not contradictory. One of them is merely

foreign  to  the  other;  and  when  we  have  established  a  connection

between  them,  we  shall  probably  have  made  some  advance  in

knowledge. The fact that such condensations are sources for a yieldof pleasure is far from incompatible with the hypothesis that conditions

for their production are easily found in the unconscious. We can, on

the contrary, see a reason for the plunge into the unconscious in the

circumstance that the pleasure-yielding condensations of which jokes

are in need arise there easily. There are, moreover, two other factors

which at a first glance seem to be completely foreign to each other

and to have come together as though by some undesired chance, but

which  on  deeper  investigation  turn  out  to  be  intimately  linked  and

indeed essentially one. I have in mind the two assertions that, on the

one hand, jokes during their development at the stage of play (that is,

during  the  childhood  of  reason)  are  able  to  bring  about  these

pleasurable  condensations  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  at  higher

stages they accomplish the same effect by plunging the thought into

the unconscious. For the infantile is the source of the unconscious,

and the unconscious thought-processes are none other than those -

the  one  and  only  ones  -  produced  in  early  childhood.  The  thought

which,  with  the  intention  of  constructing  a  joke,  plunges  into  the

unconscious is merely seeking there for the ancient dwelling-place of

its former play with words. Thought is put back for a moment to the

stage of childhood so as once more to gain possession of the childish

source of pleasure. If we did not already know it from research into the

psychology of the neuroses, we should be led by jokes to a suspicion

that the strange unconscious revision is nothing else than the infantile

type of thought-activity. It is merely that it is not very easy for us to

catch a glimpse in children of this infantile way of thinking, with its

peculiarities that are retained in the unconscious of adults, because it

is for the most part corrected, as it were, in statu nascendi. But in a

number of cases we succeed in doing so, and we then laugh at the

children’s ‘silliness’. Any uncovering of unconscious material of this

kind strikes us in general as ‘comic’.¹

 

   ¹ Many of my neurotic patients who are under psycho-analytic treatment are regularly in the

habit of confirming the fact by a laugh when I have succeeded in giving a faithful picture of
their hidden unconscious to their conscious perception; and they laugh even when the content
of what is unveiled would by no means justify this. This is subject, of course, to their having
arrived close enough to the unconscious material to grasp it after the doctor has detected it
and presented it to them.
                 Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1755

 

      It  is  easier  to  perceive  the  characteristics  of  these  unconscious

thought-processes  in  the  remarks  made  by  sufferers  from  certain

mental  diseases.  We  should  most  probably  be  able  (as  Griesinger

suggested long ago) to understand the deliria of the insane and to

make use of them as pieces of information, if we ceased to apply the

demands of conscious thinking to them and if we treated them, like

dreams, with our interpretative technique.¹ Indeed we have confirmed

the fact that ‘there is a return of the mind in dreams to an embryonic

point of view’.²

   We have entered so closely, in connection with the processes of

condensation, into the importance of the analogy between jokes and

dreams  that  we  may  be  briefer  in  what  follows.  As  we  know,  the

displacements  in  the  dream-work  point  to  the  operation  of  the

censorship  of  conscious  thinking,  and  accordingly,  when  we  come

across  displacement  among  the  techniques  of  jokes,  we  shall  be

inclined  to  suppose  that  an  inhibitory  force  plays  a  part  in  the

formation  of  jokes  as  well.  And  we  already  know  that  this  is  quite

generally  the  case.  The  effort  made  by  jokes  to  recover  the  old

pleasure in nonsense or the old pleasure in words finds itself inhibited

in normal moods by objections raised by critical reason; and in every

individual case this has to be overcome. But the manner in which the

joke-work  accomplishes  this  task  shows  a  sweeping  distinction

between  jokes  and  dreams.  In  the  dream-work  it  is  habitually

accomplished by displacements, by the selection of ideas which are

sufficiently remote from the objectionable one for the censorship to

allow them to pass, but which are nevertheless derivatives of that idea

and have taken over its psychical cathexis by means of a complete

transference.  For  this  reason  displacements  are  never  absent  in  a

dream and are far more comprehensive.

   Among displacements are to be counted not merely diversions from

a train of thought but every sort of indirect representation as well, and

in  particular  the  replacement  of  an  important  but  objectionable

element by one that is indifferent and that appears innocent to the

censorship, something that seems like a very remote allusion to theother one - substitution by a piece of symbolism, or an analogy, or

something small. It cannot be disputed that portions of such indirect

representation  are  already  present  in  the  dream’s  preconscious

thoughts  -  for  instance,  representation  by  symbols  or  analogies  -

because otherwise the thought would not have reached the stage of

preconscious expression at all. Indirect representations of this kind,

and  allusions  whose  reference  to  the  thing  intended  is  easy  to

discover,  are  indeed  permissible  and  much-used  methods  of

expression  in  our  conscious  thinking  as  well.  The  dream-work,

however, exaggerates this method of indirect expression beyond all

bounds. Under the pressure of the censorship, any sort of connection

is good enough to serve as a substitute by allusion, and displacement

is  allowed  from  any  element  to  any  other.  Replacement  of  internal

associations (similarity, causal connection, etc.) by what are known as

external ones (simultaneity in time, contiguity in space, similarity of

sound) is quite specially striking and characteristic of the dream-work.

 

   ¹ In doing so we should not forget to take into account the distortion due to the censorship

which is still at work even in psychoses.

    ² The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a).

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1756

 

      All  these  methods  of  displacement  appear  too  as  techniques  of

joking. But when they appear, they usually respect the limits imposed

on  their  employment  in  conscious  thinking;  and  they  may  be

altogether  absent,  although  jokes  too  have  invariably  a  task  to

accomplish  of  dealing  with  an  inhibition.  We  can  understand  the

subordinate place taken by displacements in the joke-work when we

recall that jokes always have another technique at their command for

keeping off inhibition and indeed that we have found nothing more

characteristic of them than precisely this technique. For jokes do not,

like dreams, create compromises; they do not evade the inhibition, but

they insist on maintaining play with words or with nonsense unaltered.

They restrict themselves, however, to a choice of occasions in which

this play or this nonsense can at the same time appear allowable (injests) or sensible (in jokes), thanks to the ambiguity of words and the

multiplicity of conceptual relations. Nothing distinguishes jokes more

clearly from all other psychical structures than this double-sidedness

and  this  duplicity  in  speech.  From  this  point  of  view  at  least  the

authorities come closest to an understanding of the nature of jokes

when they lay stress on ‘sense in nonsense’.

      In  view  of  the  universal  predominance  in  jokes  of  this  peculiar

technique  for  overcoming  their  inhibitions,  it  might  be  thought

superfluous  for  them  ever  to  make  use  in  particular  cases  of  the

technique of displacement. But, on the one hand, certain species of

that technique remain of value to jokes as aims and as sources of

pleasure - for instance, displacement proper (diversion of thoughts),

which indeed partakes of the nature of nonsense. On the other hand,

it should not be forgotten that the highest stage of jokes, tendentious

jokes, often have to overcome two kinds of inhibition, those opposed

to the joke itself and those opposed to its purpose (p. 1696), and that

allusions and displacements are well qualified to make this latter task

possible.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1757

 

   The abundant and unrestrained use in the dream-work of indirect

representation, of displacements, and especially of allusions, has a

result  which  I  mention  not  for  its  own  importance  but  because  it

became my subjective reason for taking up the problem of jokes. If

one gives an account to an uninformed or unaccustomed person of a

dream-analysis, in which are set out, therefore, the strange processes

of allusions and displacements - processes so obnoxious to waking

life - of which the dream-work has made use, the reader receives an

uncomfortable impression and declares that these interpretations are

‘in  the  nature  of  a  joke’.  But  he  clearly  does  not  regard  them  as

successful jokes, but as forced, and in some way violating the rules of

jokes. It is easy to explain this impression. It arises from the fact that

the dream-work operates by the same methods as jokes, but in its use

of them it transgresses the limits that are respected by jokes. We shallpresently learn that, as a result of the part played by the third person,

jokes  are  bound  by  a  certain  condition  which  does  not  apply  to

dreams.

 

   Among the techniques common to jokes and dreams, representation

by the opposite and the use of nonsense claim some amount of our

interest. The former is one of the more effective methods employed in

jokes,  as  may  be  seen  among  others  by  the  examples  of

‘overstatement jokes’ (p. 1670 f.). Incidentally, representation by the

opposite  is  not  able,  like  most  other  joke-techniques,  to  escape

conscious  attention.  A  person  who  tries  to  bring  the  joke-work  into

operation in himself as deliberately as possible - a professional wag -

soon  discovers  as  a  rule  that  the  easiest  way  of  replying  to  an

assertion by a joke is by asserting its contrary and by leaving it to the

inspiration  of  the  moment  to  get  rid  of  the  objection  which  his

contradiction is likely to provoke, by giving what he has said a fresh

interpretation. It may be that representation by the opposite owes the

favour it enjoys to the fact that it forms the core of another pleasurable

way of expressing a thought, which can be understood without any

need  for  bringing  in  the  unconscious.  I  am  thinking  of irony, which

comes very close to joking and is counted among the sub-species of

the comic. Its essence lies in saying the opposite of what one intends

to  convey  to  the  other  person,  but  in  sparing  him  contradiction  by

making  him  understand  -  by  one’s  tone  of  voice,  by  some

accompanying gesture, or (where writing is concerned) by some small

stylistic indications - that one means the opposite of what one says.

Irony can only be employed when the other person is prepared to hear

the opposite, so that he cannot fail to feel an inclination to contradict.

As a result of this condition, irony is exposed particularly easily to the

danger of being misunderstood. It brings the person who uses it the

advantage of enabling him readily to evade the difficulties of direct

expression, for instance in invectives. It produces comic pleasure in

the  hearer,  probably  because  it  stirs  him  into  a  contradictory

expenditure  of  energy  which  is  at  once  recognized  as  being

unnecessary.  A  comparison  like  this  between  jokes  and  a  closely

related type of the comic may confirm our assumption that what is

peculiar to jokes is their relation to the unconscious and that this mayperhaps distinguish them from the comic as well.¹

      In  the  dream-work,  representation  by  the  opposite  plays  a  far

greater  part  even  than  in  jokes.  Dreams  are  not  merely  fond  of

representing two contraries by one and the same composite structure,

but  they  so  often  change  something  in  the  dream-thoughts  into  its

opposite  that  this  leads  to  a  great  difficulty  in  the  work  of

interpretation. ‘There is no way of deciding at a first glance whether

any element that admits of a contrary is present in the dream-thoughts

as a positive or as a negative.’²

 

   ¹ The characteristic of the comic which is described as its ‘dryness’ depends likewise on the

distinction  between  a  statement  and  the  gestures  (in  the  widest  sense  of  the  word)
accompanying it.

   ² The Interpretation of Dreams.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1758

 

   I must state emphatically that this fact has not up to now met with

any recognition. But it seems to point to an important characteristic of

unconscious  thinking,  in  which  in  all  probability  no  process  that

resembles ‘judging’ occurs. In the place of rejection by a judgement,

what  we  find  in  the  unconscious  is  ‘repression’.  Repression  may,

without  doubt,  be  correctly  described  as  the  intermediate  stage

between a defensive reflex and a condemning judgement.¹

   Nonsense, absurdity, which appears so often in dreams and has

brought  them  into  so  much  undeserved  contempt,  never  arises  by

chance through the ideational elements being jumbled together, but

can  always  be  shown  to  have  been  admitted  by  the  dream-work

intentionally and to be designed to represent embittered criticism and

contemptuous contradiction in the dream-thoughts. Thus the absurdity

in the content of the dream takes the place of the judgement ‘this is a

piece of nonsense’ in the dream-thoughts. I laid great stress on the

evidence of this in my Interpretation of Dreams because I thought that

in  this  way  I  could  make  the  most  forcible  attack  on  the  error  of

believing that the dream is not a psychical phenomenon at all - an

error which blocks the way to a knowledge of the unconscious. Wehave now learned, in the course of solving certain tendentious jokes

(p. 1660 ff.), that nonsense in jokes is made to serve the same aims of

representation.  We  know  too  that  a  senseless  façade  to  a  joke  is

particularly well suited to increase the hearer’s psychical expenditure

and  so  to  raise  the  quota  liberated  for  discharge  by  laughing.  But

besides this, it must not be forgotten that the nonsense in a joke is an

end  in  itself,  since  the  intention  of  recovering  the  old  pleasure  in

nonsense is among the joke-work’s motives. There are other ways of

recovering the nonsense and of deriving pleasure from it: caricature,

exaggeration, parody and travesty make use of them and so create

‘comic  nonsense’.  If  we  submit  these  forms  of  expression  to  an

analysis similar to the one we have applied to jokes, we shall find that

in  none  of  these  cases  is  there  any  occasion  for  bringing  in

unconscious processes in our sense in order to explain them. We can

now understand too how it is that the characteristic of being a joke can

come as an extra addition to a caricature, exaggeration or parody;

what makes this possible is a difference in the ‘psychical scene of

action’.²

 

   ¹ The highly remarkable and still insufficiently appreciated behaviour of the relation between

contraries in the unconscious is no doubt likely to help our understanding of ‘negativism’ in
neurotic and insane patients. (Cf. the two last works on the subject: Bleuler, 1904 and Gross,
1904.  [Added  1912:]  See  also  my  review  of  ‘The  Antithetical  Meaning  of  Primal  Words’
(1910e).)

   ² An expression used by Fechner which has acquired importance as a support for my

views.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1759

 

   The assignment of the joke-work to the system of the unconscious

has, I think, become of considerably greater importance to us now that

it has enabled us to understand the fact that the techniques to which

jokes  admittedly  cling  are,  on  the  other  hand,  not  their  exclusive

property. Some doubts which we were obliged to hold over until later

in our original examination of these techniques now find a comfortable

solution. For that very reason another doubt that arises is all the more

deserving  of  our  consideration.  This  suggests  that  the  undeniablerelation  of  jokes  to  the  unconscious  is  in  fact  only  valid  for  certain

categories of tendentious jokes, whereas we are prepared to extend it

to every species and every developmental stage of jokes. We must

not evade an examination of this objection.

      It  can  be  assumed  with  certainty  that  jokes  are  formed  in  the

unconscious  when  it  is  a  question  of  jokes  in  the  service  of

unconscious purposes or of purposes reinforced by the unconscious -

that  is,  of  most  ‘cynical’  jokes.  For  in  such  cases  the  unconscious

purpose drags the preconscious thought down into the unconscious

and there gives it a new shape - a process to which the study of the

psychology of the neuroses has taught us numerous analogies. In the

case, however, of tendentious jokes of other kinds, of innocent jokes

and  of  jests,  this  downward  dragging  force  seems  absent  and  the

relation of jokes to the unconscious is accordingly called in question.

   But let us now consider the case in which a thought, not worthless in

itself, arises in the course of a train of thought and is expressed as a

joke.  In  order  to  enable  this  thought  to  be  turned  into  a  joke,  it  is

clearly  necessary  to  select  from  among  the  possible  forms  of

expression the precise one which brings along with it a yield of verbal

pleasure.  We  know  from  self-observation  that  this  selection  is  not

made by conscious attention; but it will certainly help the selection if

the cathexis of the preconscious thought is reduced to an unconscious

one, for, as we have learnt from the dream-work, the connecting paths

which start out from words are in the unconscious treated in the same

way as connections between things. An unconscious cathexis offers

far more favourable conditions for selecting the expression. Moreover,

we can immediately assume that the possible form of expression that

involves a yield of verbal pleasure exercises the same downward drag

on the still unsettled wording of the preconscious thought as did the

unconscious purpose in the earlier case. To meet the simpler case of

the jest, we may suppose that an intention which is all the time on the

look-out  to  achieve  a  yield  of  verbal  pleasure  grasps  the  occasion

offered in the preconscious for dragging the cathectic process down

into the unconscious according to the familiar pattern.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious                                                                                      1760

 

   I should be very glad if it were possible for me on the one hand to

give a clearer exposition of this single decisive point in my view of

jokes and on the other hand to reinforce it with conclusive arguments.

But in fact what I am faced with here is not a two-fold failure but one

and  the  same  failure.  I  cannot  give  a  clearer  exposition  because  I

have no further proof of my view. I arrived at it on the basis of a study

of the technique and of a comparison with the dream-work, and on no

other basis; and I then found that on the whole it fits in excellently with

the  characteristics  of  jokes.  Thus  this  view  has  been  arrived  at  by

inference; and if from an inference of this kind one is led, not to a

familiar region, but on the contrary, to one that is alien and new to

one’s  thought,  one  calls  the  inference  a  ‘hypothesis’  and  rightly

refuses to regard the relation of the hypothesis to the material from

which  it  was  inferred  as  a  ‘proof’  of  it.  It  can  only  be  regarded  as

‘proved’ if it is reached by another path as well and if it can be shown

to be the nodal point of still other connections. But proof of this sort is

not to be had, in view of the fact that our knowledge of unconscious

processes has scarcely begun. In the realization that we are standing

upon  ground  which  has  never  before  been  trodden,  we  are  thus

content, from our point of observation, to take one single, short and

uncertain step forward into the unexplored region.

   On such a foundation we cannot build a great deal. If we bring the

various stages of the joke into relation to the mental states that are

favourable  to  them  we  can  perhaps  proceed  as  follows.  The jest

springs from a cheerful mood, which seems to be characterized by an

inclination  to  diminish  mental  cathexes.  It  already  employs  all  the

characteristic techniques of jokes and already fulfils their fundamental

condition  by  selecting  verbal  material  or  connections  of  thoughts

which will meet both the demands for a yield of pleasure and those

made by rational criticism. We shall conclude that the lowering of the

thought cathexis to the unconscious level, facilitated by the cheerful

mood, is present already in jests. In the case of innocent jokes that

are linked to the expression of a valuable thought, the encouraging

effect  of  mood  no  longer  applies.  Here  we  must  presume  the

occurrence of a special personal aptitude, which is manifested in theease with which the preconscious cathexis is dropped and exchanged

for a moment for the unconscious one. A purpose that is all the time

on the watch for renewing the original yield of pleasure from jokes

exercises  a  downward  drag  on  the  still  unsettled  preconscious

expression  of  the  thought.  No  doubt  most  people  are  capable  of

producing jests when they are in a cheerful mood; the aptitude for

making jokes is present in only a few people independently of their

mood. Lastly, the joke-work receives its most powerful stimulus when

strong  purposes  reaching  down  into  the  unconscious  are  present,

which  represent  a  special  aptitude  for  the  production  of  jokes  and

which may explain to us how it is that the subjective determinants of

jokes are so often fulfilled in neurotic people. Under the influence of

strong purposes even those who otherwise have the least aptitude for

it become capable of making jokes.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1761

 

   With this last contribution, however, which explains, even though still

only hypothetically, the joke-work in the first person, our interest in

jokes  is,  strictly  speaking,  at  an  end.  It  remains  for  us  to  make  a

further short comparison between jokes and the better-known dream;

and we may expect that, apart from the single conformity we have

already  considered,  two  such  dissimilar  mental  functions  will  only

reveal differences. The most important difference lies in their social

behaviour.  A  dream  is  a  completely  asocial  mental  product;  it  has

nothing to communicate to anyone else; it arises within the subject as

a compromise between the mental forces struggling in him, it remains

unintelligible  to  the  subject  himself  and  is  for  that  reason  totally

uninteresting to other people. Not only does it not need to set any

store  by  intelligibility,  it  must  actually  avoid  being  understood,  for

otherwise it would be destroyed; it can only exist in masquerade. For

that reason it can without hindrance make use of the mechanism that

dominates unconscious mental processes, to the point of a distortion

which can no longer be set straight. A joke, on the other hand, is the

most social of all the mental functions that aim at a yield of pleasure. Itoften  calls  for  three  persons  and  its  completion  requires  the

participation  of  someone  else  in  the  mental  process  it  starts.  The

condition of intelligibility is, therefore, binding on it; it may only make

use  of  possible  distortion  in  the  unconscious  through  condensation

and displacement up to the point at which it can be set straight by the

third  person’s  understanding.  Moreover,  jokes  and  dreams  have

grown up in quite different regions of mental life and must be allotted

to points in the psychological system far remote from each other. A

dream  still  remains  a  wish,  even  though  one  that  has  been  made

unrecognizable; a joke is developed play. Dreams, in spite of all their

practical nonentity, retain their connection with the major interests of

life; they seek to fulfil needs by the regressive detour of hallucination,

and they are permitted to occur for the sake of the one need that is

active during the night - the need to sleep. Jokes, on the other hand,

seek  to  gain  a  small  yield  of  pleasure  from  the  mere  activity,

untrammelled  by  needs,  of  our  mental  apparatus.  Later  they  try  to

catch hold of that pleasure as a by-product during the activity of that

apparatus  and  thus  arrive secondarily  at  not  unimportant  functions

directed  to  the  external  world.  Dreams  serve  predominantly  for  the

avoidance of unpleasure, jokes for the attainment of pleasure; but all

our mental activities converge in these two aims.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1762

 

                                          VII

 

                JOKES AND THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC

 

We have approached the problems of the comic in an unusual way. It

seemed  to  us  that  jokes,  which  are  ordinarily  regarded  as  a  sub-

species of the comic, offer enough peculiarities to be attacked directly;

thus we have avoided their relation to the more inclusive category of

the comic so long as that was possible, though we have not failed to

pick out en passant a few hints that might throw light on the comic. We

have had no difficulty in discovering that socially the comic behavesdifferently from jokes. It can be content with two persons: a first who

finds  what  is  comic  and  a  second  in  whom  it  is  found.  The  third

person, to whom the comic thing is told, intensifies the comic process

but adds nothing new to it. In a joke this third person is indispensable

for the completion of the pleasure-producing process; but on the other

hand the second person may be absent, except where a tendentious,

aggressive joke is concerned. A joke is made, the comic is found - and

first  and  foremost  in  people,  only  by  a  subsequent  transference  in

things, situations, and so on, as well. As regards jokes, we know that

the sources of the pleasure that is to be fostered lie in the subject

himself and not in outside people. We have seen, too, that jokes can

sometimes  re-open  sources  of  the  comic  which  have  become

inaccessible, and that the comic often serves as a façade for a joke

and replaces the fore-pleasure which has otherwise to be produced by

the familiar technique (p. 1739). None of this precisely suggests that

the relations between jokes and the comic are very simple. On the

other hand, the problems of the comic have proved so complicated

and all the efforts of the philosophers at solving them have been so

unsuccessful that we cannot hold out any prospect that we shall be

able to master them in a sudden onslaught, as it were, by approaching

them  from  the  direction  of  jokes.  Moreover,  for  our  investigation  of

jokes  we  brought  with  us  an  instrument  of  which  no  one  else  had

hitherto  made  use  -  a  knowledge  of  the  dream-work.  We  have  no

similar advantage at our command to help us to understand the comic,

and we must therefore expect that we shall discover no more about

the nature of the comic than what we have already found in jokes, in

so far as they form part of the comic and possess in their own nature

certain of its features unchanged or merely modified.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1763

 

 

   The type of the comic which stands nearest to jokes is the naïve.

Like the comic in general, the naïve is ‘found’ and not, like a joke,

‘made’. Indeed, the naïve cannot be made at all, whereas alongsidethe  pure  comic  we  have  to  take  into  account  the  case  in  which

something is made comic - an evocation of the comic. The naïve must

arise, without our taking any part in it, in the remarks and actions of

other people, who stand in the position of the second person in the

comic or in jokes. The naïve occurs if someone completely disregards

an inhibition because it is not present in him - if, therefore, he appears

to  overcome  it  without  any  effort.  It  is  a  condition  for  the  naïve’s

producing its effect that we should know that the person concerned

does not possess the inhibition; otherwise we call him not naïve but

impudent. We do not laugh at him but are indignant at him. The effect

produced by the naïve is irresistible, and seems simple to understand.

An inhibitory expenditure which we usually make suddenly becomes

unutilizable  owing  to  our  hearing  the  naïve  remark,  and  it  is

discharged by laughter. There is no need here for the attention to be

distracted, probably because the lifting of the inhibition occurs directly

and  not  through  the  intermediary  of  an  operation  that  has  been

provoked. In this we are behaving like the third person in a joke, who

is presented with the economy in inhibition without any effort on his

own part.

   In view of the insight we have gained into the genesis of inhibitions

from following the course of development from play to jokes, it will not

surprise us to find that the naïve occurs far the most often in children,

and is then carried over to uneducated adults, whom we may regard

as childish so far as their intellectual development is concerned. Naive

remarks are, of course, better suited for comparison with jokes than

naïve actions, since remarks and not actions are the usual form in

which jokes are expressed. It is illuminating to find that naïve remarks

like those made by children may also be described as ‘naïve jokes’.

The conformity between jokes and naïveté, as well as the reasons for

their dissimilarity, will be made clearer to us by a few examples.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1764

 

   A three-and-a-half-year-old girl gave this warning to her brother: ‘I

say, don’t eat so much of that pudding or you’ll get ill and have to havesome "Bubizin".’ ‘"Bubizin"?’ asked her mother, ‘What’s that?’ ‘When I

was ill’, answered the child in self-justification, ‘I had to have some

Medizin.’ The child thought that what the doctor prescribed was called

‘Mädi-zin’ when it was for a ‘Mädi’ [little girl] and concluded that if it

was  for  a  ‘Bubi’  [little  boy]  it  would  be  called  ‘Bubi-zin’.  This  is

constructed like a verbal joke working with the technique of similarity

of sound, and indeed it might have occurred as a real joke, in which

case we should have greeted it, half-unwillingly, with a smile. As an

example  of naïveté  it  strikes  us  as  quite  excellent  and  it  raises  a

laugh. What is it that makes the difference here between a joke and

something naïve? Evidently not the wording or the technique, which

would be the same for both possibilities, but a factor, rather, which at

first  sight  seems  quite  remote  from  both  of  them.  It  is  merely  a

question  of  whether  we  assume  that  the  speaker  has  intended  to

make a joke or whether we suppose that he - the child - has tried in

good faith to draw a serious conclusion on the basis of his uncorrected

ignorance. Only the latter case is one of naïveté. Here for the first time

our  attention  is  drawn  to  the  other  person  putting  himself  into  the

psychical process that occurs in the person who produces the remark.

      This  view  will  be  confirmed  if  we  examine  another  example.  A

brother  and  sister  -  a  twelve-year-old  girl  and  a  ten-year-old  boy  -

were  performing  a  drama  composed  by  themselves  before  an

audience of uncles and aunts. The scene represented a hut by the

sea-shore. In the first act the two author-actors, a poor fisherman and

his honest wife, are complaining about the hard times and their small

earnings. The husband decides to cross the wide seas in his boat to

seek his fortune elsewhere, and, after tender farewells between the

two of them, the curtain falls. The second act takes place a few years

later. The fisherman has returned a wealthy man with a big bag of

money; and he tells his wife, who awaits his arrival outside the hut,

what good fortune he has met with in foreign lands. His wife interrupts

him proudly: ‘I too have not been idle.’ And thereupon she opens the

door of the hut and reveals to his eyes twelve large dolls lying asleep

on the floor. . . . At this point in the drama the actors were interrupted

by a storm of laughter from the audience, which they were unable to

understand. They stared disconcerted at their fond relatives, who had

behaved properly till then and had listened with eager attention. Thelaughter is explained on the supposition that the audience assumed

that the young authors still knew nothing of the conditions governing

the origin of children and were therefore able to believe that a wife

could boast of the offspring born during her husband’s long absence

and that a husband could rejoice with her over them. What the authors

produced  on  the  basis  of  this  ignorance  might  be  described  as

nonsense or absurdity.

      A  third  example  will  show  us  yet  another  technique,  the

acquaintance of which we have made in jokes, in the service of the

naïve. A ‘Frenchwoman’¹ was engaged as governess for a little girl,

but  did  not  meet  with  her  personal  approval.  Scarcely  had  the

newcomer left the room when the little girl gave voice to loud criticism:

‘That a Frenchwoman? She may call herself one because she once

lay  beside  a  Frenchman!’  This  might  have  been  a  joke  -  even  a

tolerably good one (double meaning or allusion, with double entendre)

if the child had had the slightest notion of the possibility of the double

meaning.  In  fact  she  had  merely  transferred  to  the  stranger  she

disliked a facetious way of describing a thing as ungenuine which she

had often heard: ‘That genuine gold? It may once have lain beside

gold.’ Owing to the child’s ignorance, which so completely altered the

psychical process in her understanding hearers, her remark became a

naïve one. In consequence of this condition, there is the possibility of

a misleading naïveté. We may assume in the child an ignorance that

no longer exists; and children often represent themselves as naïve, so

as to enjoy a liberty that they would not otherwise be granted.

 

   ¹ [‘Französin.’ The ordinary term for a French governess in Austria.]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1765

 

   We can illustrate from these examples the position occupied by the

naïve between jokes and the comic. The naïve (in speech) agrees

with jokes as regards wording and content: it brings about a misuse of

words, a piece of nonsense, or a piece of smut. But the psychical

process in the first person, who produces it, which raised so many

interesting and puzzling questions for us in regard to jokes, is herecompletely absent. A naïve person thinks he has used his means of

expression and trains of thought normally and simply, and he has no

arrière pensée in mind; nor does he derive any yield of pleasure from

producing something naïve. None of the characteristics of the naïve

exist except in the apprehension of the person who hears it - a person

who coincides with the third person in jokes. Moreover the person who

produces  it  does  so  without  any  effort.  The  complicated  technique,

which  in  jokes  is  designed  to  paralyse  the  inhibition  arising  from

rational criticism, is absent in him; he does not possess this inhibition

as  yet,  so  that  he  can  produce  nonsense  and  smut  directly  and

without compromise. In that respect the naïve is a marginal case of

the joke; it arises if in the formula for the construction of jokes we

reduce the value of the censorship to zero.

   Whereas it was a condition for the effectiveness of a joke that both

persons should be subject to approximately the same inhibitions or

internal resistances, it will be seen that it is a condition for the naïve

that  the  one  person  should  possess  inhibitions  which  the  other  is

without. The apprehension of the naïve lies with the person provided

with inhibitions, and he alone obtains the yield of pleasure which the

naïve brings about. We have come near to guessing that that pleasure

arises from the lifting of inhibitions. Since the pleasure from jokes has

the  same  origin  -  a  core  of  verbal  pleasure  and  pleasure  from

nonsense, and a casing of pleasure in the lifting of inhibitions or in the

relief  of  psychical  expenditure  -  this  similar  relation  to  inhibition

explains the internal kinship between the naïve and jokes. In both of

them the pleasure arises through the lifting of internal inhibition.

   The psychical process in the receptive person, however, is as much

more  complicated  in  the  case  of  the  naïve  as  it  is  simplified  in

comparison with jokes in the productive person. (In the case of the

naïve, incidentally, our own self invariably coincides with the receptive

person, while in the case of jokes we may equally occupy the position

of the productive one.) When the receptive person hears something

naïve,  it  must  on  the  one  hand  affect  him  like  a  joke  -  and  our

examples give evidence precisely of this - for, as with a joke, the lifting

of the censorship is made possible for him by no more than the effort

of listening. But only a part of the pleasure created by the naïve can

be explained in this way; and even this might be endangered in certaininstances - for example, at hearing a naïve piece of smut. We might

react  to  this  at  once  with  the  same  indignation  that  might  be  felt

against a real piece of smut, if it were not that another factor spares us

this indignation and at the same time offers us the more important part

of our pleasure in the naïve. This other factor is the condition already

mentioned that, in order to recognize the naïve, we must know that the

internal inhibition is absent in the producing person. Only when this is

certain  do  we  laugh  instead  of  being  indignant.  Thus  we  take  the

producing person’s psychical state into consideration, put ourselves

into it and try to understand it by comparing it with our own. It is these

processes of empathy and comparison that result in the economy in

expenditure which we discharge by laughing.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1766

 

   It would be possible to prefer a simpler account - that our indignation

is made superfluous by the fact that the other person has had no need

to overcome a resistance; in that case the laughter would occur at the

cost of the economy in indignation. In order to discourage this view,

which is on the whole misleading, I will make a sharper distinction

between two cases which I have treated together above. The naïve

which we come across can either be in the nature of a joke, as it was

in our examples, or in the nature of smut (or of what is in general

objectionable); and the latter will occur especially when it is expressed

not  in  speech  but  in  action.  This  second  alternative  is  really

misleading:  one  could  suppose,  as  far  as  it  is  concerned,  that  the

pleasure arises from the economized and transformed indignation. But

the first alternative throws more light on things. A naïve remark - e.g.

‘Bubizin  -  can  in  itself  act  like  a  minor  joke  and  give  no  cause  for

indignation. This alternative is certainly the less frequent; but it is the

purer  and  by  far  the  more  instructive.  In  so  far  as  what  we  are

concerned  with  is  the  fact  that  the  child  has  seriously  and  without

arrière pensée believed that the syllable ‘Medi’ in ‘Medizin’ is identical

with her own name ‘Mädi’, our pleasure in what we hear receives an

increase which has no longer anything to do with pleasure in a joke.We now look at what has been said from two points of view - once in

the way it happened in the child and once in the way it would have

happened to us; and in making this comparison we see that the child

has found an identity and that she has overcome a barrier that exists

for us; and we then seem to go further and say to ourselves: ‘If you

choose  to  understand  what  you’ve  heard,  you  can  economize  the

expenditure on keeping up this barrier.’ The expenditure liberated in a

comparison like this is the source of pleasure in the naïve and it is

discharged by laughter; and it is, incidentally, the same pleasure that

we should otherwise have transformed into indignation, if this had not

been excluded by our understanding of the producing person and, in

this case, by the nature of what was said as well. But if we take the

instance  of  a  naïve  joke  as  a  model  for  the  other  alternative,  of

something naïve that is objectionable, we shall see that there too the

economy  in  inhibition  can  arise  directly  from  the  comparison,  that

there is no necessity for us to assume an indignation that begins and

is  then  stifled,  and  that  this  indignation  in  fact  only  corresponds  to

using the liberated expenditure in another way - against which in the

case of jokes complicated protective arrangements were necessary.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1767

 

      This  comparison,  and  this  economy  in  expenditure  by  putting

oneself  into  the  mental  process  of  the  producing  person,  can  only

claim to be of significance for the naïve, however, if it is not in it alone

that  they  are  found.  A  suspicion  occurs  to  us,  in  fact,  that  this

mechanism, which is wholly alien to jokes, may be a part and perhaps

an essential part of the psychical process in the comic. Looked at from

this point of view - and this is undoubtedly the most important aspect

of the naïve - the naïve thus presents itself as a species of the comic.

The extra element in our examples of naïve speeches that is added to

the pleasure of a joke is ‘comic’ pleasure. We should be inclined to

assume  of  it  quite  generally  that  it  arises  from  expenditure

economized in a comparison of someone else’s remarks with our own.

But  since  this  leads  us  to  far-reaching  considerations,  we  will  firstconclude our discussion of the naïve. The naïve, then, would be a

species  of  the  comic  in  so  far  as  its  pleasure  springs  from  the

difference  in  expenditure  which  arises  in  trying  to  understand

someone else; and it would approach the joke in being subject to the

condition that the expenditure economized in the comparison must be

an inhibitory expenditure.¹

      Let  us  hastily  add  a  few  points  of  agreement  and  of  difference

between  the  concepts  that  we  have  just  reached  and  those  which

have long been familiar in the psychology of the comic. The putting of

oneself in the other person’s place and trying to understand him is

clearly nothing other than the ‘comic lending’ which since Jean Paul

has  played  a  part  in  the  analysis  of  the  comic;  the  ‘comparing’  of

someone else’s mental process with one’s own corresponds to the

‘psychological contrast’ which we can at last find a place for here, after

not knowing what to do with it in jokes. But we differ in our explanation

of comic pleasure from many authorities who regard it as arising from

the  oscillation  of  attention  backwards  and  forwards  between

contrasting  ideas.  A  mechanism  of  pleasure  like  this  would  seem

incomprehensible to us;² but we may point out that in a comparison

between contrasts a difference in expenditure occurs which, if it is not

used for some other purpose, becomes capable of discharge and may

thus become a source of pleasure.

 

   ¹ In what I have written, I have all the time identified the naïve with the naïve-comic, which

is  certainly  not  in  every  case  admissible.  But  it  is  enough  for  our  purposes  to  study  the
character of the naïve in ‘naïve jokes’ and in ‘naïve smut’. Any further investigation would
imply an intention on my part of using this as a basis for my explanation of the comic.

   ² Bergson, too, rejects the idea of comic pleasure having any such derivation, which is

evidently influenced by an effort to establish an analogy with the laughter caused by tickling;
and he supports his view with some good arguments (1900, 99). - The explanation of comic
pleasure given by Lipps is on a quite different plane: in accordance with his view of the comic,
he would regard it as something that is ‘unexpectedly small’.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1768

 

 

   It is only with misgivings that I venture to approach the problem ofthe comic itself. It would be presumptuous to expect that my efforts

would be able to make any decisive contribution to its solution when

the  works  of  a  great  number  of  eminent  thinkers  have  failed  to

produce a wholly satisfactory explanation. My intention is in fact no

more than to pursue the lines of thought that have proved valuable

with jokes a short distance further into the sphere of the comic.

   The comic arises in the first instance as an unintended discovery

derived from human social relations. It is found in people - in their

movements,  forms,  actions  and  traits  of  character,  originally  in  all

probability only in their physical characteristics but later in their mental

ones  as  well  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  in  the  expression  of  those

characteristics. By means of a very common sort of personification,

animals become comic too, and inanimate objects. At the same time,

the comic is capable of being detached from people, in so far as we

recognize the conditions under which a person seems comic. In this

way the comic of situation comes about, and this recognition affords

the possibility of making a person comic at one’s will by putting him in

situations in which his actions are subject to these comic conditions.

The discovery that one has it in one’s power to make someone else

comic opens the way to an undreamt-of yield of comic pleasure and is

the  origin  of  a  highly  developed  technique.  One  can  make oneself

comic, too, as easily as other people. The methods that serve to make

people comic are: putting them in a comic situation, mimicry, disguise,

unmasking, caricature, parody, travesty, and so on. It is obvious that

these  techniques  can  be  used  to  serve  hostile  and  aggressive

purposes.  One  can  make  a  person  comic  in  order  to  make  him

become  contemptible,  to  deprive  him  of  his  claim  to  dignity  and

authority.  But  even  if  such  an  intention  habitually  underlies  making

people  comic,  this  need  not  be  the  meaning  of  what  is  comic

spontaneously.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1769

 

   This irregular survey of the occurrences of the comic will already

show us that a very extensive field of origin is to be ascribed to it andthat such specialized conditions as we found, for instance, in the naïve

are  not  to  be  expected  in  it.  In  order  to  get  on  the  track  of  the

determining condition that is valid for the comic, the most important

thing is the choice of an introductory case. We shall choose the comic

of  movement,  because  we  recollect  that  the  most  primitive  kind  of

stage performance - the pantomime - uses that method for making us

laugh. The answer to the question of why we laugh at the clown’s

movements is that they seem to us extravagant and inexpedient. We

are laughing at an expenditure that is too large. Let us look now for

the  determining  condition  outside  the  comic  that  is  artificially

constructed - where it can be found unintended. A child’s movements

do not seem to us comic, although he kicks and jumps about. On the

other hand, it is comic where a child who is learning to write follows

the  movements  of  his  pen  with  his  tongue  stuck  out;  in  these

associated motions we see an unnecessary expenditure of movement

which we should spare ourselves if we were carrying out the same

activity.  Similarly,  other  such  associated  motions,  or  merely

exaggerated expressive movements, seem to us comic in adults too.

Pure  examples  of  this  species  of  the  comic  are  to  be  seen,  for

instance, in the movements of someone playing skittles who, after he

has  released  the  ball,  follows  its  course  as  though  he  could  still

continue  to  direct  it.  Thus,  too,  all  grimaces  are  comic  which

exaggerate the normal expression of the emotions, even if they are

produced involuntarily as in sufferers from St. Vitus’s dance (chorea).

And  in  the  same  way,  the  passionate  movements  of  a  modern

conductor  seem  comic  to  any  unmusical  person  who  cannot

understand their necessity. Indeed, it is from this comic of movement

that the comic of bodily shapes and facial features branches off; for

these  are  regarded  as  though  they  were  the  outcome  of  an

exaggerated  or  pointless  movement.  Staring  eyes,  a  hooked  nose

hanging down to the mouth, ears sticking out, a hump-back - all such

things probably only produce a comic effect in so far as movements

are imagined which would be necessary to bring about these features;

and here the nose, the ears and other parts of the body are imagined

as more movable than they are in reality. There is no doubt that it is

comic if someone can ‘waggle his ears’, and it would certainly be still

more comic if he could move his nose up and down. A good deal ofthe  comic  effect  produced  on  us  by  animals  comes  from  our

perceiving in them movements such as these which we cannot imitate

ourselves.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1770

 

   But how is it that we laugh when we have recognized that some

other  person’s  movements  are  exaggerated  and  inexpedient?  By

making a comparison, I believe, between the movement I observe in

the other person and the one that I should have carried out myself in

his place. The two things compared must of course be judged by the

same standard, and this standard is my expenditure of innervation,

which is linked to my idea of the movement in both of the two cases.

This statement calls for elucidation and expansion.

      What  we  are  here  comparing  is  on  the  one  hand  the  psychical

expenditure while we are having a certain idea and on the other hand

the content of the thing that we are having the idea of. Our statement

says that the former is not in general and in theory independent of the

latter,  the  content  of  the  idea,  and  in  particular  that  the  idea  of

something  large  demands  more  expenditure  than  the  idea  of

something small. So long as it is only a matter of the idea of different

large movements, there should be no difficulties over the theoretical

grounds for our statement or over proving it by observation. We shall

see that in this case an attribute of the idea in fact coincides with an

attribute of what we have an idea of, though psychology warns us as a

rule against such a confusion.

      I  have  acquired  the  idea  of  a  movement  of  a  particular  size  by

carrying the movement out myself or by imitating it, and through this

action I have learnt a standard for this movement in my innervatory

sensations.¹

   When, now, I perceive a movement like this of greater or lesser size

in  someone  else,  the  securest  way  to  an  understanding  (an

apperception) of it will be for me to carry it out by imitation, and I can

then  decide  from  the  comparison  on  which  of  the  movements  my

expenditure was the greater. An impulsion of this kind to imitation isundoubtedly present in perceptions of movements. But actually I do

not carry the imitation through, any more than I still spell words out if I

learnt to read by spelling. Instead of imitating the movement with my

muscles, I have an idea of it though the medium of my memory-traces

of  expenditures  on  similar  movements.  Ideation  or  ‘thinking’  differs

from  acting  or  performing  above  all  in  the  fact  that  it  displaces  far

smaller cathectic energies and holds back the main expenditure from

discharge.

 

   ¹ The memory of this innervatory expenditure will remain the essential part of my idea of

this movement, and there will always be modes of thinking in my mental life in which the idea
will be represented by nothing else than this expenditure. In other circumstances, indeed, this
element  may  be  replaced  by  another  -  for  instance,  by  visual  images  of  the  aim  of  the
movement or by a verbal image; and in certain kinds of abstract thinking a token will suffice
instead of the full content of the idea.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1771

 

   But how is the quantitative factor - the greater or lesser size - of the

perceived movement to be given expression in the idea? And if there

can be no representation of quantity in the idea, which is made up of

qualities, how can I distinguish the ideas of movements of different

sizes? - how can I make the comparison on which everything here

depends? The way is pointed out by physiology, for it teaches us that

even  during  the  process  of  ideation  innervations  run  out  to  the

muscles,  though  these,  it  is  true,  correspond  to  a  very  modest

expenditure of energy. Now it becomes very plausible to suppose that

this innervatory energy that accompanies the process of ideation is

used to represent the quantitative factor of the idea: that it is larger

when there is an idea of a large movement than when it is a question

of a small one. Thus the idea of the larger movement would in this

case  in  fact  be  the  larger  one  -  that  is,  it  would  be  the  idea

accompanied by the larger expenditure of energy.

      Direct  observation  shows  that  human  beings  are  in  the  habit  of

expressing the attributes of largeness and smallness in the contents of

their ideas by means of a varying expenditure in a kind of ideational

mimetics. If a child or a man from the common people, or a member ofcertain races, narrates or describes something, it is easy to see that

he is not content to make his idea plain to the hearer by the choice of

clear  words,  but  that  he  also  represents  its  subject-matter  in  his

expressive  movements:  he  combines  the  mimetic  and  the  verbal

forms  of  representation.  And  he  especially  demonstrates  quantities

and intensities: ‘a high mountain’ - and he raises his hand over his

head, ‘a little dwarf’ - and he holds it near the ground. He may have

broken  himself  of  the  habit  of  painting  with  his  hands,  yet  for  that

reason he will do it with his voice; and if he exercises self-control in

this too, it may be wagered that he will open his eyes wide when he

describes something large and squeeze them shut when he comes to

something  small.  What  he  is  thus  expressing  is  not  his  affects  but

actually the content of what he is having an idea of.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1772

 

   Are we to suppose, then, that this need for mimetics is only aroused

by the requirements of communicating something, in spite of the fact

that a good part of this method of representation altogether escapes

the hearer’s attention? On the contrary, I believe that these mimetics

exist, even if with less liveliness, quite apart from any communication,

that  they  occur  as  well  when  the  subject  is  forming  an  idea  of

something  for  his  own  private  benefit  and  is  thinking  of  something

pictorially, and that he then expresses ‘large’ and ‘small’ in his own

body  just  as  he  does  in  speech,  at  all  events  by  a  change  in  the

innervation of his features and sense organs. I can even believe that

the somatic innervation which is commensurate with the content of

what he is having an idea of may have been the beginning and origin

of  mimetics  for  purposes  of  communication;  it  only  needed  to  be

intensified and made noticeable to other people in order to be able to

serve  that  end.  If  I  support  the  view  that  to  the  ‘expression  of  the

emotions’, which is well known as the physical concomitant of mental

processes, there should be added the ‘expression of the ideational

content’,  I  can  see  quite  clearly  that  my  remarks  relating  to  the

category of large and small do not exhaust the subject. I might myselfadd  a  variety  of  points  even  before  arriving  at  the  phenomena  of

tension by which a person indicates somatically the concentration of

his attention and the level of abstraction at which his thinking is at the

moment proceeding. I regard the matter as a really important one, and

I believe that if ideational mimetics are followed up, they may be as

useful  in  other  branches  of  aesthetics  as  they  are  here  for  an

understanding of the comic.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1773

 

      To  return  now  to  the  comic  of  movement.  When,  I  repeat,  a

particular movement is perceived, the impulsion is given to forming an

idea of it by means of a certain expenditure of energy. In ‘trying to

understand’,  therefore,  in  apperceiving  this  movement,  I  make  a

certain expenditure, and in this portion of the mental process I behave

exactly as though I were putting myself in the place of the person I am

observing. But at the same moment, probably, I bear in mind the aim

of this movement, and my earlier experience enables me to estimate

the scale of expenditure required for reaching that aim. In doing so I

disregard the person whom I am observing and behave as though I

myself  wanted  to  reach  the  aim  of  the  movement.  These  two

possibilities in my imagination amount to a comparison between the

observed movement and my own. If the other person’s movement is

exaggerated and inexpedient, my increased expenditure in order to

understand i| is inhibited in statu nascendi, as it were in the act of

being  mobilized;  it  is  declared  superfluous  and  is  free  for  use

elsewhere or perhaps for discharge by laughter. This would be the

way  in  which,  other  circumstances  being  favourable,  pleasure  in  a

comic movement is generated - an innervatory expenditure which has

become  an  unusable  surplus  when  a  comparison  is  made  with  a

movement of one’s own.

   It will be seen that our discussions must proceed in two different

directions: first, to establish the conditions governing the discharge of

the surplus, and second, to examine whether the other cases of the

comic can be looked at in the same way as the comic of movement.   We will take the second question first and will turn from the comic of

movement and action to the comic which is found in the intellectual

functions and the character traits of other people.

   As a sample of this class we may choose comic nonsense, as it is

produced  by  ignorant  candidates  in  an  examination;  it  is  no  doubt

more difficult to give a simple example of character traits. We should

not be confused if we find that nonsense and stupidity, which so often

produce a comic effect, are nevertheless not felt as comic in every

case,  just  as  the  same  characters  which  on  one  occasion  can  be

laughed  at  as  comic  may  on  another  occasion  strike  one  as

contemptible or hateful. This fact, of which we must not lose sight,

merely points out that other factors are concerned in producing the

comic effect besides the comparison we know about - factors which

we may be able to trace out in another connection.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1774

 

   The comic that is found in someone else’s intellectual and mental

characteristics is evidently once again the outcome of a comparison

between  him  and  my  own  self,  though,  curiously  enough,  a

comparison which has as a rule produced the opposite result to that in

the case of a comic movement or action. In this latter case it was

comic  if  the  other  person  had  made  a  greater  expenditure  than  I

thought  I  should  need.  In  the  case  of  a  mental  function,  on  the

contrary,  it  becomes  comic  if  the  other  person  has  spared  himself

expenditure  which  I  regard  as  indispensable  (for  nonsense  and

stupidity  are  inefficiencies  of  function).  In  the  former  case  I  laugh

because he has taken too much trouble, in the latter because he has

taken too little. The comic effect apparently depends, therefore, on the

difference between the two cathectic expenditures - one’s own and the

other person’s as estimated by ‘empathy’ - and not on which of the

two  the  difference  favours.  But  this  peculiarity,  which  at  first  sight

confuses  our  judgement,  vanishes  when  we  bear  in  mind  that  a

restriction  of  our  muscular  work  and  an  increase  of  our  intellectual

work  fit  in  with  the  course  of  our  personal  development  towards  ahigher level of civilization. By raising our intellectual expenditure we

can  achieve  the  same  result  with  a  diminished  expenditure  on  our

movements.  Evidence  of  this  cultural  success  is  provided  by  our

machines.¹

   Thus a uniform explanation is provided of the fact that a person

appears comic to us if, in comparison with ourselves, he makes too

great an expenditure on his bodily functions and too little on his mental

ones; and it cannot be denied that in both these cases our laughter

expresses  a  pleasurable  sense  of  the  superiority  which  we  feel  in

relation to him. If the relation in the two cases is reversed - if the other

person’s  physical  expenditure  is  found  to  be  less  than  ours  or  his

mental expenditure greater - then we no longer laugh, we are filled

with astonishment and admiration.²

 

   ¹ As the proverb says: ‘Was man nicht im Kopfe hat, muss man in den Beinen haben.’

[Literally: ‘What one hasn’t in one’s head one must have in one’s legs,’]

   ² The contradictoriness with which the determining conditions of the comic are pervaded -

the fact that sometimes an excess and sometimes an insufficiency seems to be the source of
comic pleasure - has contributed no little to the confusion of the problem. Cf. Lipps (1898, 47).
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1775

 

   The origin of comic pleasure which has been discussed here - its

derivation from a comparison of another person with our self, from the

difference  between  our  own  psychical  expenditure  and  the  other

person’s as estimated by empathy - is probably the most important

genetically. It is certain, however, that it has not remained the only

one. We have learnt at one time or other to disregard this comparison

between the other person and ourself and to derive the pleasurable

difference from the one side only, whether from the empathy or from

the processes in ourself - which proves that the feeling of superiority

bears  no  essential  relation  to  comic  pleasure.  A  comparison  is

indispensable  for  the  generation  of  this  pleasure.  We  find  that  it  is

made  between  two  cathectic  expenditures  that  occur  in  rapid

succession  and  are  concerned  with  the  same  function,  and  these

expenditures  are  either  brought  about  in  us  through  empathy  intosomeone else or, without any such relation, are discovered in our own

mental processes.

   The first of these cases - in which, therefore, the other person still

plays a part, though no longer in comparison with our own self - arises

when the pleasurable difference in cathectic expenditures is brought

about by external influences, which we may sum up as a ‘situation’.

For that reason, this species of the comic is also known as ‘the comic

of situation’. The characteristics of the person who provides the comic

effect do not in this case play an essential part: we laugh even if we

have  to  confess  that we  should  have  had  to  do  the  same  in  that

situation. We are here extracting the comic from the relation of human

beings to the often over-powerful external world; and so far as the

mental processes of a human being are concerned, this external world

also comprises social conventions and necessities and even his own

bodily needs. A typical instance of the latter kind is provided if, in the

middle  of  an  activity  which  makes  demands  on  a  person’s  mental

powers, he is suddenly interrupted by a pain or an excretory need.

The contrast which, through empathy, offers us the comic difference is

that  between  the  high  degree  of  interest  taken  by  him before  the

interruption and the minimal one that he has left over for his mental

activity when the interruption has occurred. The person who offers us

this difference becomes comic to us once again for his inferiority; but

he  is  inferior  only  in  comparison  with  his  earlier  self  and  not  in

comparison with us, for we know that in the same circumstances we

could not have behaved otherwise. But it is noteworthy that we only

find someone’s being put in a position of inferiority comic where there

is  empathy  -  that  is,  where  someone  else  is  concerned:  if  we

ourselves  were  in  similar  straits  we  should  be  conscious  only  of

distressing feelings. It is probably only by keeping such feelings away

from ourselves that we are able to enjoy pleasure from the difference

arising out of a comparison between these changing cathexes.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1776

 

   The other source of the comic, which we find in the transformationsof our own cathexes, lies in our relations with the future, which we are

accustomed to anticipate with our expectant ideas. I assume that a

quantitatively  definite  expenditure  underlies  each  of  our  ideas  -  an

expenditure  which,  in  the  event  of  a  disappointment,  is  therefore

diminished by a definite difference. Here I may once again recall the

remarks I made earlier on ‘ideational mimetics’. But it seems to me to

be easier to prove a real mobilization of cathectic energy in the case

of expectation. It is quite obviously true of a number of cases that

motor  preparations  are  what  form  the  expression  of  expectation  -

above all in all cases in which the expected event makes demands on

my motility - and that these preparations can be at once determined

quantitatively. If I am expecting to catch a ball which is being thrown to

me, I put my body into tensions which will enable it to meet the impact

of the ball; and, should the ball when it is caught turn out to be too

light, my superfluous movements make me comic to the spectators. I

have  let  myself  be  enticed  by  my  expectation  into  an  exaggerated

expenditure of movement. The same is true if, for instance, I lift a fruit

which I have judged to be heavy out of a basket, but which, to my

disappointment, turns out to be a sham one, hollow and made of wax.

My  hand,  by  jumping  up,  betrays  the  fact  that  I  had  prepared  an

innervation too large for the purpose - and I am laughed at for it. There

is at least one case in which the expenditure on expectation can be

directly  demonstrated  measurably  by  physiological  experiments  on

animals. In Pavlov’s experiments on salivary secretions, various kinds

of  food  are  set  before  dogs  in  whom  a  salivary  fistula  has  been

opened;  the  amounts  of  saliva  secreted  then  vary  according  to

whether the experimental conditions confirm or disappoint the dogs’

expectations of being fed with the food set before them.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1777

 

   Even when what is expected makes demands on my sense organs

and  not  on  my  motility,  I  may  assume  that  the  expectation  is

expressed in a certain motor expenditure towards making the senses

tense  and  towards  holding  back  other  impressions  that  are  notexpected;  and,  in  general,  I  may  regard  an  attitude  of  attention  as

being  a  motor  function  equivalent  to  a  certain  expenditure.  I  may

further take it as a premiss that the preparatory activity of expectation

will  not  be  independent  of  the  magnitude  of  the  impression  that  is

expected,  but  that  I  shall  represent  its  largeness  or  smallness

mimetically by a larger or smaller preparatory expenditure, as in the

case  of  making  a  communication  and  in  the  case  of  thinking

unaccompanied  by  expectation.  The  expenditure  on  expectation  is,

however, put together from several components, and in the case of

my  disappointment,  too,  various  points  will  be  involved  -  not  only

whether what happens is perceptually greater or smaller than what is

expected, but also whether it is worthy of the great interest which I had

expended on the expectation. In this way I shall perhaps be led to take

into account, besides the expenditure on the representation of large

and small (the ideational mimetics), the expenditure on tightening the

attention (the expenditure on expectation), and beyond this in other

cases  the  expenditure  on  abstraction.  But  these  other  kinds  of

expenditure can easily be traced back to that on large and small, since

what is more interesting, more sublime and even more abstract are

only special cases, with particular qualities, of what is larger. If we

consider  in  addition  that,  according  to  Lipps  and  other  writers,

quantitative (and not qualitative) contrast is to be regarded primarily as

the source of comic pleasure, we shall on the whole feel glad that we

chose the comic of movement as the starting-point of our enquiry.

   Lipps, in the volume which has been so often quoted in these pages,

has attempted, as an amplification to Kant’s statement that the comic

is ‘an expectation that has turned to nothing’, to derive comic pleasure

quite  generally  from  expectation.  In  spite,  however,  of  the  many

instructive  and  valuable  findings  which  this  attempt  has  brought  to

light, I should like to support the criticism made by other authorities

that Lipps has taken the field of origin of the comic far too narrowly

and  has  been  obliged  to  use  great  violence  in  order  to  bring  its

phenomena within the scope of his formula.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1778 

 

   Mankind have not been content to enjoy the comic where they have

come upon it in their experience; they have also sought to bring it

about intentionally, and we can learn more about the nature of the

comic if we study the means which serve to make things comic. First

and foremost, it is possible to produce the comic in relation to oneself

in order to amuse other people - for instance, by making oneself out

clumsy or stupid. In that way one produces a comic effect exactly as

though one really were these things, by fulfilling the condition of the

comparison which leads to the difference in expenditure. But one does

not in this way make oneself ridiculous or contemptible, but may in

some  circumstances  even  achieve  admiration.  The  feeling  of

superiority does not arise in the other person if he knows that one has

only  been  pretending;  and  this  affords  fresh  evidence  of  the

fundamental independence of the comic from the feeling of superiority.

   As regards making other people comic, the principal means is to put

them in situations in which a person becomes comic as a result of

human dependence on external events, particularly on social factors,

without  regard  to  the  personal  characteristics  of  the  individual

concerned - that is to say, by employing the comic of situation. This

putting of someone in a comic situation may be a real one (a practical

joke¹) - by sticking out a leg so that someone trips over it as though he

were clumsy, by making him seem stupid by exploiting his credulity, or

trying to convince him of something nonsensical, and so on - or it may

be simulated by speech or play. The aggressiveness, to which making

a person comic usually ministers, is much assisted by the fact that the

comic pleasure is independent of the reality of the comic situation, so

that everyone is in fact exposed, without any defence, to being made

comic.

 

   ¹ [In English in the original.]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1779

 

   But there are yet other means of making things comic which deservespecial consideration and also indicate in part fresh sources of comic

pleasure.  Among  these,  for  instance,  is mimicry,  which  gives  quite

extraordinary pleasure to the hearer and makes its object comic even

if it is still far from the exaggeration of a caricature. It is much easier to

find a reason for the comic effect of caricature than for that of mere

mimicry.  Caricature,  parody  and  travesty  (as  well  as  their  practical

counterpart,  unmasking)  are  directed  against  people  and  objects

which lay claim to authority and respect, which are in some sense

‘sublime’. They are procedures for Herabsetzung, as the apt German

expression has it.¹ What is sublime is something large in the figurative,

psychical sense; and I should like to suggest, or rather to repeat my

suggestion, that, like what is somatically large, it is represented by an

increased expenditure. It requires little observation to establish that

when  I  speak  of  something  sublime  I  innervate  my  speech  in  a

different way, I make different facial expressions, and I try to bring the

whole way in which I hold myself into harmony with the dignity of what

I am having an idea of. I impose a solemn restraint upon myself - not

very different from what I should adopt if I were to enter the presence

of an exalted personality, a monarch, or a prince of science. I shall

hardly  be  wrong  in  assuming  that  this  different  innervation  in  my

ideational  mimetics  corresponds  to  an  increased  expenditure.  The

third instance of an increased expenditure of this kind is no doubt to

be found when I proceed in abstract trains of thought instead of in the

habitual concrete and plastic ones. When, therefore, the procedures

that I have discussed for the degradation of the sublime allow me to

have  an  idea  of  it  as  though  it  were  something  commonplace,  in

whose presence I need not pull myself together but may, to use the

military  formula,  ‘stand  easy’,  I  am  being  spared  the  increased

expenditure of the solemn restraint; and the comparison between this

new  ideational  method  (instigated  by  empathy)  and  the  previously

habitual one, which is simultaneously trying to establish itself - this

comparison once again creates the difference in expenditure which

can be discharged by laughter.

 

   ¹ ‘Degradation’ [in English in the original]. Bain (1865, 248) writes: ‘The occasion of the

Ludicrous is the Degradation of some person or interest, possessing dignity, in circumstances
that excite no other strong emotion.’
                 Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1780

 

     Caricature,  as  is  well  known,  brings  about  degradation  by

emphasizing in the general impression given by the exalted object a

single trait which is comic in itself but was bound to be overlooked so

long as it was only perceivable in the general picture. By isolating this,

a comic effect can be attained which extends in our memory over the

whole object. This is subject to the condition that the actual presence

of the exalted object himself does not keep us in a reverential attitude.

If  a  comic  trait  of  this  kind  that  has  been  overlooked  is  lacking  in

reality, a caricature will unhesitatingly create it by exaggerating one

that is not comic in itself; and the fact that the effect of the caricature is

not essentially diminished by this falsification of reality is once again

an indication of the origin of comic pleasure.

   Parody and travesty achieve the degradation of something exalted

in another way: by destroying the unity that exists between people’s

characters  as  we  know  them  and  their  speeches  and  actions,  by

replacing either the exalted figures or their utterances by inferior ones.

They  are  distinguished  from  caricature  in  this,  but  not  in  the

mechanism  of  their  production  of  comic  pleasure.  The  same

mechanism  is  also  used  for unmasking,  which  only  applies  where

someone has seized dignity and authority by a deception and these

have to be taken from him in reality. We have already met with a few

examples of the comic effect of unmasking in jokes - for instance, in

the story of the aristocratic lady who, at the first onset of her labour-

pains,  exclaimed  ‘Ah!  mon  Dieu!’  but  whom  the  doctor  would  not

assist  till  she  cried  out  ‘Aa-ee,  aa-ee!’.  Having  come  to  know  the

characteristics  of  the  comic,  we  can  no  longer  dispute  that  this

anecdote  is  in  fact  an  example  of  comic  unmasking  and  has  no

justifiable claim to be called a joke. It only recalls jokes by its setting

and  by  the  technical  method  of  ‘representation  by  something  very

small’  -  in  this  case  the  patient’s  cry,  which  is  found  sufficient  to

establish the indication for treatment. It nevertheless remains true that

our linguistic sense, if we call on it for a decision, raises no objection

to our calling a story like this a joke. We may explain this by reflecting

that  linguistic  usage  is  not  based  on  the  scientific  insight  into  thenature of jokes that we have arrived at in this laborious investigation.

Since one of the functions of jokes is to make hidden sources of comic

pleasure accessible once more (p. 1698), any device that brings to

light something that is not manifestly comic may, by a loose analogy,

be termed a joke. This applies preferably, however, to unmasking as

well as to other methods of making people comic.¹

 

   ¹ ‘Thus  every  conscious  and  ingenious  evocation  of  the  comic  (whether  the  comic  of

contemplation or of situation) is in general described as a joke. We, of course, cannot here
make use of this concept of the joke either.’ (Lipps, 1898, 78.)
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1781

 

   Under the heading of ‘unmasking’ we may also include a procedure

for making things comic with which we are already acquainted - the

method of degrading the dignity of individuals by directing attention to

the frailties which they share with all humanity, but in particular the

dependence of their mental functions on bodily needs. The unmasking

is equivalent here to an admonition: such and such a person, who is

admired as a demigod, is after all only human like you and me. Here,

too,  are  to  be  placed  the  efforts  at  laying  bare  the  monotonous

psychical  automatism  that  lies  behind  the  wealth  and  apparent

freedom  of  psychical  functions.  We  came  across  examples  of

‘unmasking’ of this kind in the marriage-broker jokes, and felt a doubt

at the time whether these anecdotes have a right to be counted as

jokes.  We  are  now  able  to  decide  with  greater  certainty  that  the

anecdote  of  the  echo  who  reinforced  all  the  assertions  of  the

marriage-broker and finally confirmed his admission that the bride had

a hump with the exclamation ‘And what a hump!’ - that this anecdote

is  essentially  a comic  story,  an  example  of  the  unmasking  of  a

psychical automatism. Here, however, the comic story is only serving

as a façade. For anyone who will attend to the hidden meaning of the

marriage-broker  anecdotes,  the  whole  thing  remains  an  admirably

staged joke; anyone who does not penetrate so far is left with a comic

story. The same thing applies to the other joke, about the marriage-

broker who, in order to answer an objection, ended by confessing thetruth  with  a  cry  of  ‘But  I  ask  you,  who  would  lend  such  people

anything?’. Here again we have a comic unmasking as the façade for

a joke, though in this instance the characteristic of a joke is much

more unmistakable, since the marriage-broker’s remark is at the same

time  a  representation  by  the  opposite.  In  trying  to  prove  that  the

people are rich he at the same time proves that they are not rich, but

very poor. Here a joke and the comic are combined, and teach us that

the same remark can be both things at once.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

 1782

 

   We are glad to seize the opportunity of returning to jokes from the

comic of unmasking, since our true problem is not to determine the

nature of the comic but to throw light on the relation between jokes

and  the  comic.  We  have  discussed  the  uncovering  of  psychical

automatism, in a case in which our feeling as to whether something is

comic or a joke left us in the lurch. And we will now add another case

in which there is a similar confusion between jokes and the comic - the

case of nonsensical jokes. But our investigation will show us in the

end that as regards this second case the convergence between jokes

and the comic can be theoretically accounted for.

   In discussing the techniques of jokes we found that giving free play

to modes of thought which are usual in the unconscious but which can

only be judged as examples of ‘faulty reasoning’ in the conscious is

the technical method adopted in many jokes; and about these, once

again, we felt doubts whether they possessed the true character of

jokes,  so  that  we  were  inclined  to  classify  them  simply  as  comic

stories.  We  were  unable  to  reach  a  decision  about  our  doubts

because at the time we were ignorant of the essential characteristic of

jokes.  Subsequently,  led  by  an  analogy  with  the  dream-work,  we

discovered  that  it  lay  in  the  compromise  effected  by  the  joke-work

between  the  demands  of  reasonable  criticism  and  the  urge  not  to

renounce the ancient pleasure in words and nonsense. What came

about in this way as a compromise, when the preconscious start of the

thought was left for a moment to unconscious revision, satisfied bothclaims  in  every  instance,  but  presented  itself  to  criticism  in  various

forms  and  had  to  put  up  with  various  judgements  at  its  hands.

Sometimes a joke would succeed in slipping on the appearance of an

insignificant  but  nevertheless  permissible  assertion,  another  time  it

would smuggle itself in as the expression of a valuable thought. But, in

the  marginal  case  of  effecting  a  compromise,  it  would  give  up

attempting to satisfy criticism. Boasting of the sources of pleasure at

its command, it would appear before criticism as sheer nonsense and

not be afraid to provoke contradiction from it; for the joke could reckon

on  the  hearer  straightening  out  the  disfigurement  in  the  form  of  its

expression by unconscious revision and so giving it back its meaning.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1783

 

      In  what  instances,  then,  will  a  joke  appear  before  criticism  as

nonsense? Particularly when it makes use of the modes of thought

which are usual in the unconscious but are proscribed in conscious

thought - faulty reasoning, in fact. For certain modes of thought proper

to the unconscious have also been retained by the conscious - for

instance, some kinds of indirect representation, allusion, and so on -

even though their conscious employment is subject to considerable

restrictions. When a joke makes use of these techniques it will raise

little or no objection on the part of criticism; objections will only appear

if  it  also  makes  use  for  its  technique  of  the  methods  with  which

conscious thought will have nothing more to do. A joke can still avoid

objection, if it conceals the faulty reasoning it has used and disguises

it under a show of logic, as happened in the anecdotes of the cake

and the liqueur, of the salmon mayonnaise, and similar ones. But if it

produces  the  faulty  reasoning  undisguised,  then  the  objections  of

criticism will follow with certainty.

   In such cases the joke has another resource. The faulty reasoning,

which it uses for its technique as one of the modes of thought of the

unconscious,  strikes  criticism  -  even  though  not  invariably  so  -  as

being comic. Consciously giving free play to unconscious modes of

thought (which have been rejected as faulty) is a means of producingcomic pleasure; and it is easy to understand this, since it certainly

requires a greater expenditure of energy to establish a preconscious

cathexis  than  to  give  free  play  to  an  unconscious  one.  When,  on

hearing  a  thought  which  has,  as  it  were,  been  formed  in  the

unconscious,  we  compare  it  with  its  correction,  a  difference  in

expenditure emerges for us from which comic pleasure arises. A joke

which makes use of faulty reasoning like this for its technique, and

therefore appears nonsensical, can thus produce a comic effect at the

same time. If we fail to detect the joke, we are once again left with

only the comic or funny story.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1784

 

   The story of the borrowed kettle which had a hole in it when it was

given back (p. 1664) is an excellent example of the purely comic effect

of  giving  free  play  to  the  unconscious  mode  of  thought.  It  will  be

recalled that the borrower, when he was questioned, replied firstly that

he had not borrowed a kettle at all, secondly that it had had a hole in it

already when he borrowed it, and thirdly that he had given it back

undamaged and without a hole. This mutual cancelling-out by several

thoughts, each of which is in itself valid, is precisely what does not

occur in the unconscious. In dreams, in which the modes of thought of

the unconscious are actually manifest, there is accordingly no such

thing  as  an  ‘either-or’,¹  only  a  simultaneous  juxtaposition.  In  the

example of a dream, which, in spite of its complication, I chose in my

Interpretation of Dreams as a specimen of the work of interpretation, I

tried to rid myself of the reproach of having failed to relieve a patient of

her  pains  by  psychical  treatment.  My  reasons  were:  (1)  that  she

herself was responsible for her illness because she would not accept

my  solution,  (2)  that  her  pains  were  of  organic  origin  and  were

therefore no concern of mine, (3) that her pains were connected with

her widowhood, for which I was evidently not responsible and (4) that

her pains were due to an injection from a contaminated syringe, which

had been given her by someone else. All these reasons stood side by

side,  as  though  they  were  not  mutually  exclusive.  I  was  obliged  toreplace the ‘and’ of the dream by an ‘either-or’ in order to escape a

charge of nonsense.

   There is a similar comic story of a Hungarian village in which the

blacksmith  had  been  guilty  of  a  capital  offence.  The  burgomaster,

however, decided that as a penalty a tailor should be hanged and not

the blacksmith, because there were two tailors in the village but no

second blacksmith, and the crime must be expiated. A displacement

of this kind from the figure of the guilty person to another naturally

contradicts every law of conscious logic but by no means the mode of

thought of the unconscious. I do not hesitate to call this story comic,

and yet I have included the one about the kettle among the jokes. I will

now admit that this latter story too is far more correctly described as

‘comic’ rather than as a joke. But I now understand how it is that my

feeling,  which  is  as  a  rule  so  sure,  can  leave  me  in  doubt  as  to

whether this story is comic or a joke. This is a case in which I cannot

come to a decision on the basis of my feeling - when, that is, the

comic  arises  from  the  uncovering  of  a  mode  of  thought  that  is

exclusively proper to the unconscious. A story like this may be comic

and a joke at the same time; but it will give me the impression of being

a  joke,  even  if  it  is  merely  comic,  because  the  use  of  the  faulty

reasoning  of  the  unconscious  reminds  me  of  jokes,  just  as  did  the

manoeuvres for uncovering what is not manifestly comic (p. 1781).

      I  set  great  store  by  clarifying  this  most  delicate  point  in  my

arguments  -  the  relation  of  jokes  to  the  comic;  and  I  will  therefore

supplement what I have said with a few negative statements. I may

first draw attention to the fact that the instance of the convergence of

jokes and the comic which I am dealing with here is not identical with

the  former  one  (p.  1781).  It  is  true  that  the  distinction  is  a  rather

narrow one, but it can be made with certainty. In the earlier case the

comic  arose  from  the  uncovering  of  psychical  automatism.  This,

however, is by no means peculiar to the unconscious alone, nor does

it  play  any  striking  part  in  the  technique  of  jokes.  Unmasking  only

comes into relation with jokes accidentally, when it serves some other

joke-technique,  such  as  representation  by  the  opposite.  But  in  the

case  of  giving  free  play  to  unconscious  modes  of  thought  the

convergence of jokes and the comic is a necessary one, since the

same method which is used here by the first person of the joke as atechnique for releasing pleasure must from its very nature produce

comic pleasure in the third person.

 

   ¹ At the most, it is introduced by the narrator by way of interpretation.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1785

 

   One might be tempted to generalize from this last case and look for

the relation of jokes to the comic in the notion that the effect of jokes

on the third person takes place according to the mechanism of comic

pleasure. But there is no question of this being so. Contact with the

comic is by no means to be found in all jokes or even in the majority of

them; in most cases, on the contrary, a clear distinction is to be made

between jokes and the comic. Whenever a joke succeeds in escaping

the appearance of nonsense - that is, in most jokes accompanied by

double meaning and allusion - there is no trace to be found in the

hearer of any effect resembling the comic. This may be tested in the

examples I have given earlier, or on a few new ones that I can bring

up:

   Telegram of congratulations to a gambler on his seventieth Birthday:

‘Trente et quarante.’ (Dividing-up with allusion.)

   Hevesi somewhere describes the process of tobacco manufacture:

‘The bright yellow leaves . . . were dipped in a sauce and were sauced

in this dip.’ (Multiple use of the same material).

   Madame de Maintenon was known as ‘Madame de Maintenant’.

(Modification of a name.)

   Professor Kästner said to a prince who stood in front of a telescope

during a demonstration: ‘Your Highness, I know quite well that you are

"durchläuchtig  [illustrious]",¹  but  you  are  not  "durchsigtig

[transparent]."'

   Count Andrássy was known as ‘ Minister of the Fine Exterior’.

   It might further be thought that at any rate all jokes with a façade of

nonsense  will  seem  comic  and  must  produce  a  comic  affect.  But  I

must  recall  that  jokes  of  this  kind  very  often  affect  the  hearer  in

another way and provoke bewilderment and a tendency to repudiation

(see p. 1727 n.). Thus it evidently depends on whether the nonsenseof a joke appears as comic or as sheer ordinary nonsense - and we

have not yet investigated what determines this. We therefore stick to

our  conclusion  that  jokes  are  from  their  nature  to  be  distinguished

from the comic and only converge with it, on the one hand in certain

special cases, and on the other hand in their aim of obtaining pleasure

from intellectual sources.

      During  these  enquiries  into  the  relations  between  jokes  and  the

comic  the  distinction  has  become  plain  to  us  which  we  must

emphasize as the most important and which points at the same time

to  a  main  psychological  characteristic  of  the  comic.  We  found

ourselves obliged to locate the pleasure in jokes in the unconscious;

no reason is to be found for making the same localization in the case

of the comic. On the contrary, all the analyses we have hitherto made

have  pointed  to  the  source  of  comic  pleasure  being  a  comparison

between  two  expenditures  both  of  which  must  be  ascribed  to  the

preconscious.  Jokes  and  the  comic  are  distinguished  first  and

foremost in their psychical localization; the joke, it may be said, is the

contribution made to the comic from the realm of the unconscious.

 

     ¹ [An  adjective  derived  from  ‘Durchlaucht’,  a  title  applied  to  minor  royalty:  ‘Serene

Highness’.]
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1786

 

 

   There is no need to apologize for this digression, since the relation

of  jokes  to  the  comic  was  the  reason  for  our  being  forced  into  an

investigation of the comic. But it is certainly time we returned to our

previous topic - the discussion of the methods which serve for making

things comic. We considered caricature and unmasking first, because

we can derive some indications from these two for the analysis of the

comic  of mimicry.  As  a  rule,  no  doubt,  mimicry  is  permeated  with

caricature - the exaggeration of traits that are not otherwise striking -,

and it also involves the characteristic of degradation. But this does not

seem to exhaust its nature. It cannot be disputed that it is in itself an

extraordinarily  fertile  source  of  comic  pleasure,  for  we  laughparticularly at the faithfulness of a piece of mimicry. It is not easy to

give a satisfactory explanation of this unless one is prepared to adopt

the view held by Bergson (1900), which approximates the comic of

mimicry to the comic due to the discovery of psychical automatism.

Bergson’s opinion is that everything in a living person that makes one

think of an inanimate mechanism has a comic effect. His formula for

this runs ‘mécanisation de la vie’. He explains the comic of mimicry by

starting out from a problem raised by Pascal in his Pensées of why it

is that one laughs when one compares two similar faces neither of

which  has  a  comic  effect  by  itself.  ‘What  is  living  should  never,

according to our expectation, be repeated exactly the same. When we

find  such  a  repetition  we  always  suspect  some  mechanism  lying

behind the living thing.’ When one sees two faces that resemble each

other closely, one thinks of two impressions from the same mould or

of some similar mechanical procedure. In short, the cause of laughter

in  such  cases  would  be  the  divergence  of  the  living  from  the

inanimate, or, as we might say, the degradation of the living to the

inanimate (ibid., 35). If, moreover, we were to accept these plausible

suggestions of Bergson’s, we should not find it difficult to include his

view  under  our  own  formula.  Experience  has  taught  us  that  every

living  thing  is  different  from  every  other  and  calls  for  a  kind  of

expenditure by our understanding; and we find ourselves disappointed

if, as a result of complete conformity or deceptive mimicry, we need

make no fresh expenditure. But we are disappointed in the sense of a

relief,  and  the  expenditure  on  expectation  which  has  become

superfluous is discharged by laughter. The same formula would also

cover  all  the  cases  which  Bergson  considers  of  comic  rigidity

(‘raideur’), of professional customs, fixed ideas, and turns of speech

repeated on every possible occasion. All these cases would go back

to  a  comparison  between  the  expenditure  on  expectation  and  the

expenditure actually required for an understanding of something that

has  remained  the  same;  and  the  larger  amount  needed  for

expectation  would  be  based  on  observation  of  the  multiplicity  and

plasticity  of  living  things.  In  the  case  of  mimicry,  accordingly,  the

source of the comic pleasure would be not the comic of situation but of

expectation.

                 Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1787

 

   Since we derive comic pleasure in general from a comparison, it is

incumbent on us to examine the comic of comparison itself; and this,

indeed, serves as a method of making things comic. Our interest in

this  question  will  be  increased  when  we  recall  that  in  the  case  of

analogies, too, we often found that our ‘feeling’ left us in the lurch as

to  whether  something  was  to  be  called  a  joke  or  merely  comic

(p. 1680 f.).

      The  subject  would,  it  must  be  admitted,  deserve  more  careful

treatment than our interests can devote to it. The main attribute that

we enquire after in an analogy is whether it is apt - that is, whether it

draws attention to a conformity which is really present in two different

objects. The original pleasure in rediscovering the same thing (Groos,

1899, 153) is not the only motive that favours the use of analogies;

there  is  the  further  fact  that  analogies  are  capable  of  a  use  which

brings with it a relief of intellectual work - if, that is to say, one follows

the usual practice of comparing what is less known with what is better

known  or  the  abstract  with  the  concrete,  and  by  the  comparison

elucidates  what  is  more  unfamiliar  or  more  difficult.  Every  such

comparison,  especially  of  something  abstract  with  something

concrete,  involves  a  certain  degradation  and  a  certain  economy  in

expenditure on abstraction (in the sense of ideational mimetics), but

this is of course not sufficient to allow the characteristic of the comic to

come  clearly  into  prominence.  It  does  not  emerge  suddenly  but

gradually  from  the  pleasure  of  the  relief  brought  about  by  the

comparison.  There  are  plenty  of  cases  which  merely  fringe  on  the

comic  and  in  which  doubt  might  be  felt  whether  they  show  the

characteristic  of  the  comic.  The  comparison  becomes  undoubtedly

comic  if  there  is  a  rise  in  the  level  of  difference  between  the

expenditure on abstraction in the two things that are being compared,

if something serious and unfamiliar, especially if it is of an intellectual

or  moral  nature,  is  brought  into  comparison  with  something

commonplace and inferior. The previous pleasure of the relief and the

contribution from the determinants of ideational mimetics may perhaps

explain the gradual transition, conditioned by quantitative factors, fromgeneral pleasure to comic pleasure during the comparison. I shall no

doubt avoid misunderstandings if I stress the fact that I do not trace

the comic pleasure in analogies to the contrast between the two things

compared  but  to  the  difference  between  the  two  expenditures  on

abstraction. When an unfamiliar thing that is hard to take in, a thing

that is abstract and in fact sublime in an intellectual sense, is alleged

to tally with something familiar and inferior, in imagining which there is

a  complete  absence  of  any  expenditure  on  abstraction,  then  that

abstract thing is itself unmasked as something equally inferior. The

comic of comparison is thus reduced to a case of degradation.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1788

 

   A comparison can, however, as we have already seen, be in the

nature of a joke, without a trace of comic admixture - precisely, that is,

when it avoids degradation. Thus the comparison of truth with a torch

that cannot be carried through a crowd without singeing someone’s

beard is purely in the nature of a joke, because it takes a watered-

down turn of speech (‘the torch of truth’) at its full value, and it is not

comic, because a torch as an object, though it is a concrete thing, is

not without a certain distinction. But a comparison can just as easily

be a joke and comic as well, and can be each independently of the

other,  since  a  comparison  can  be  of  help  to  certain  techniques  of

jokes, such as unification or allusion. In this way Nestroy’s comparison

of memory to a ‘warehouse’ (p. 1683) is at once comic and a joke - the

former  because  of  the  extraordinary  degradation  which  the

psychological  concept  has  to  put  up  with  in  being  compared  to  a

‘warehouse’,  and  the  latter  because  the  person  making  use  of  the

comparison is a clerk, who thus establishes in the comparison a quite

unexpected  unification  between  psychology  and  his  profession.

Heine’s phrase ‘till at last all the buttons burst on the breeches of my

patience’  seems  at  first  sight  to  be  no  more  than  a  remarkable

example  of  a  comically  degrading  comparison;  but  on  further

consideration we must also allow it the characteristics of a joke, since

the comparison, as a means of allusion, impinges on the region of theobscene and so succeeds in liberating pleasure in the obscene. The

same  material,  by  what  is  admittedly  not  an  entirely  chance

coincidence,  provides  us  with  a  yield  of  pleasure  which  is

simultaneously comic and of the character of a joke. If the conditions

of  the  one  favour  the  generation  of  the  other,  their  union  has  a

confusing effect on the ‘feeling’ which is supposed to tell us whether

we are being offered a joke or something comic, and a decision can

only be arrived at by an attentive investigation that has been freed

from any predisposition to a particular kind of pleasure.

      However  attractive  it  may  be  to  follow  up  these  more  intimate

determinants of the yield of comic pleasure, the author must bear in

mind  that  neither  his  education  nor  his  daily  occupation  justify  his

extending his enquiries far beyond the sphere of jokes; and he must

confess that the topic of comic comparisons makes him particularly

aware of his inability.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1789

 

   We therefore readily recall that many authorities do not recognize

the sharp conceptual and material distinction between jokes and the

comic to which we have found ourselves led, and that they regard

jokes as simply ‘the comic of speech’ or ‘of words’. In order to test this

view we will choose one example each of something intentionally and

of something involuntarily comic in words to compare with jokes. We

have  remarked  earlier  that  we  believe  ourselves  very  well  able  to

distinguish a comic remark from a joke:

 

                                                                ‘With a fork and much to-do
                                                                His mother dragged him from the stew’

 

is  merely  comic;  Heine’s  remark  about  the  four  castes  among  the

inhabitants  of  Göttingen  -  ‘professors,  students,  philistines  and

donkeys’ is par excellence a joke.

      For  something  intentionally  comic  I  will  take  as  a  model

Stettenheim’s  ‘Wippchen’.  People  speak  of  Stettenheim  as  ‘witty’

because  he  possesses  to  a  special  degree  the  gift  of  evoking  thecomic. This capacity does in fact aptly determine the ‘wit’ that one

‘has’ in contrast to the ‘joke’ that one ‘makes’.¹ It cannot be disputed

that the letters of Wippchen, the Correspondent from Bernau, are also

‘witty’ in so far as they are abundantly sprinkled with jokes of every

kind,  among  them  some  that  are  genuinely  successful  (e.g.  of  a

display  by  savages:  ‘in  ceremonial  undress’).  But  what  gives  these

productions their peculiar character is not these separate jokes but the

almost  too  abundant  comic  of  speech  which  flows  through  them.

‘Wippchen’ was no doubt originally intended as a satirical figure, a

modification of Gustav Freytag’s ‘Schmock’, one of those uneducated

people who misuse and trade away the nation’s store of culture; but

the author’s enjoyment of the comic effects achieved in his picture of

this character has evidently pushed the satirical purpose little by little

into  the  background.  Wippchen’s  productions  are  for  the  most  part

‘comic nonsense’. The author has made use of the pleasurable mood

brought  about  by  the  piling  up  of  these  successes  to  introduce

(justifiably, it must be said), alongside perfectly permissible material,

all  kinds  of  insipidities  which  could  not  be  tolerated  on  their  own

account. Wippchen’s nonsense produces a specific effect on account

of a peculiar technique. If one looks more closely at these ‘jokes’ one

is specially struck by a few kinds which give the whole production its

stamp.  Wippchen  makes  use  predominantly  of  combinations

(amalgamations),  modifications  of  familiar  turns  of  speech  and

quotations and replacements of a few commonplace elements in them

by more pretentious and weighty forms of expression. This incidentally

is coming near to the techniques of jokes.

 

   ¹ [The same German word ‘Witz’ is used here for both ‘wit’ and ‘joke’.]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1790

 

   Here, for instance, are some amalgamations (taken from the preface

and the first pages of the whole series):

   ‘Turkey has money wie Heu am Meere.’ This is made up of the two

expressions: ‘Money wie Heu’ and ‘Money wie Sand am Meer '.¹

   Or, ‘I am no more than a column stripped of its leaves,² which bearswitness to its vanished glory’ - condensed from ‘a tree stripped of its

leaves’ and ‘a column which . . . etc.’

   Or, ‘Where is the thread of Ariadne which will lead me from the

Scylla  of  this  Augean  stable?’  to  which  three  Greek  legends  have

each contributed an element.

      The  modifications  and  substitutions  can  be  summarized  without

much difficulty. Their nature can be seen from the following examples,

which are characteristic of Wippchen and behind which we have a

glimpse  of  another,  more  current  and  usually  more  commonplace

wording, which has been reduced to a cliché:

   ‘Mier Papier und Tinte höher zu hängen.’ We use the phrase ‘einem

den Brotkorb höher hängen ' metaphorically for ‘to put someone in

more  difficult  circumstances’.  So  why  should  not  the  metaphor  be

extended to other material?

 

   ¹ [These are two common expressions in German, equivalent to ‘money like dirt’ or ‘oceans

of money’.]

   ² [‘Eine entlaubte Säule’ - an echo of ‘Eine entleibte Seele’, ‘a disembodied spirit’.]

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1791

 

      ‘Battles  in  which  the  Russians  sometimes  draw  the  shorter  and

sometimes  the  longer.’  Only  the  first  of  these  expressions  [‘den

Kürzeren ziehen’, ‘draw the shorter’] is in common use; but in view of

its derivation there would be no absurdity in bringing the second into

use as well.

   ‘While I was still young, Pegasus stirred within me.’ If we put back

‘the poet’ instead of ‘Pegasus’ we find an autobiographical cliché well-

worn  by  frequent  use.  It  is  true  that  ‘Pegasus’  is  not  a  suitable

substitute for ‘the poet’, but it has a conceptual relation with it and is a

high-sounding word.

   ‘Thus I lived through the thorny shoes of childhood.’ A simile instead

of a simple statement. ‘Die Kinderschuhe austreten’ [‘to wear out the

shoes of childhood’, ‘to leave the nursery behind’] is one of the images

connected with the concept of childhood.

   From the profusion of Wippchen’s other productions some can bestressed as pure examples of the comic. For instance, as a comic

disappointment: ‘For hours the fight fluctuated, until at last it remained

undecided.’  Or,  as  a  comic  unmasking  (of  ignorance):  ‘Clio,  the

Medusa  of  History.’  Or  quotations  such  as:  ‘Habent  sua  fata

morgana.’¹  But  our  interest  is  more  aroused  by  the  amalgamations

and modifications, because they repeat familiar joke-techniques. We

may, for instance, compare with the modifications such jokes as ‘he

has a great future behind him’, or ‘er hat ein Ideal vor dem Kopf’, or

Lichtenberg’s modification joke ‘new spas cure well’, and so on. Are

Wippchen’s productions which have the same technique now to be

called jokes? or how do they differ from these?

 

   ¹ [Habent sua fata libelli (books have their destinies)' is a Latin saying attributed to Terence.

‘Fata Morgana’  is  the  Italian  name  for  a  particular  kind  of  mirage  seen  in  the  Straits  of
Messina: from Morgan le Fey (fairy), King Arthur’s sister.]
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1792

 

   It is not difficult to answer. Let us recall that jokes present a double

face to their hearer, force him to adopt two different views of them. In

a nonsense joke, like the ones last mentioned, the one view, which

only takes the wording into account, regards it as nonsense; the other

view, following the hints that are given, passes through the hearer’s

unconscious and finds an excellent sense in it. In Wippchen’s joke-like

productions  one  face  of  the  joke  is  blank,  as  though  it  were

rudimentary: a Janus head but with only one face developed on it. If

we allow the technique to lure us into the unconscious, we come upon

nothing. The amalgamations lead us to no instance in which the two

things that are amalgamated really yield a new meaning; if we attempt

an  analysis,  they  fall  completely  apart.  The  modifications  and

substitutions lead, as they do in jokes, to a usual and familiar wording;

but the modification or substitution itself tells us nothing fresh and as a

rule,  indeed,  nothing  possible  or  serviceable.  So  that  only  the  one

view of these ‘jokes’ is left over - that they are nonsense. We can

merely  decide  whether  we  choose  to  call  such  productions,  which

have freed themselves from one of the most essential characteristicsof jokes, ‘bad’ jokes or not jokes at all.

   Rudimentary jokes of this kind undoubtedly produce a comic effect,

which we can account for in more than one way. Either the comic

arises  from  the  uncovering  of  the  modes  of  thought  of  the

unconscious,  as  in  cases  we  considered  earlier,  or  the  pleasure

comes from the comparison with a complete joke. Nothing prevents

our  supposing  that  both  these  ways  of  generating  comic  pleasure

converge here. It is not impossible that here the inadequacy of support

from  a  joke  is  precisely  what  makes  the  nonsense  into  comic

nonsense.

   For there are other easily intelligible cases in which inadequacy of

this  kind  as  compared  with  what  ought  to  be  effected  makes  the

nonsense irresistibly comic. The counterpart of jokes - riddles - can

perhaps offer us better examples of this than jokes themselves. For

instance, here is a ‘facetious question’: ‘What is it that hangs on the

wall and that one can dry one’s hands on?’ It would be a stupid riddle

if the answer were ‘a hand-towel’. But that answer is rejected. - ‘No, a

herring.’  -  ‘But  for  heaven’s  sake’,  comes  the  infuriated  protest  ‘a

herring doesn’t hang on the wall.’ - ‘You can hang it up there.’ - ‘But

who in the world is going to dry his hands on a herring?’ - ‘Well’, is the

soothing reply, ‘you don’t have to.’ This explanation, given by means

of two typical displacements, shows how far this question falls short of

a genuine riddle; and on account of its absolute inadequacy it strikes

us as being - instead of simply nonsensically stupid - irresistibly comic.

In  this  way,  by  failing  to  comply  with  essential  conditions,  jokes,

riddles,  and  other  things,  which  do  not  produce  comic  pleasure  in

themselves, are made into sources of comic pleasure.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1793

 

      There  is  still  less  difficulty  in  understanding  the  case  of  the

involuntary comic of speech, which we can find realized as often as

we please in, for instance, the poems of Friederike Kempner (1891):

 
                                                                Against Vivisection
                                                 Ein unbekanntes Band der Seelen kettet
                                                Den Menschen an das arme Tier.
                                                Das Tier hat einen Willen - ergo Seele -

                                                Wenn auch 'ne kleinere als wir.¹

 

Or a conversation between a loving married couple:

 

                                                                The Contrast
 
                                                ‘Wie glücklich bin ich’, ruft sie leise,
                                                ‘Auch ich’, sagt lauter ihr Gemahl,
                                                ‘Es macht mich deine Art und Weise

                                                Sehr stolz auf meine gute Wahl!’ ²

 

   There is nothing here to make us think of jokes. But there is no

doubt  that  it  is  the  inadequacy  of  these  ‘poems’  that  makes  them

comic - the quite extraordinary clumsiness of their expression, which

is linked with the tritest or most journalistic turns of phrase, the simple-

minded limitation of their thought, the absence of any trace of poetic

matter or form. In spite of all this, however, it is not obvious why we

find Kempner’s poems comic. We find many similar products nothing

but shockingly bad; they do not make us laugh but annoy us. But it is

precisely the greatness of the distance that separates them from what

we  expect  of  a  poem  that  imposes  the  comic  view  on  us;  if  this

difference struck us as smaller we should be more inclined to criticize

than to laugh. Furthermore, the comic effect of Kempner’s poems is

assured by a subsidiary circumstance - the authoress’s unmistakably

good intentions and a peculiar sincerity of feeling which disarms our

ridicule or our annoyance and which we sense behind her helpless

phrases.

   Here we are reminded of a problem whose consideration we have

postponed.  Difference  in  expenditure  is  undoubtedly  the  basic

determining condition of comic pleasure; but observation shows that

this difference does not invariably give rise to pleasure. What further

conditions must be present or what disturbances must be kept back, in

order that comic pleasure may actually arise from the difference in

expenditure?  Before  we  turn  to  answering  this  question,  we  will

conclude  this  discussion  with  a  clear  assertion  that  the  comic  of

speech does not coincide with jokes, and that jokes must therefore besomething other than the comic of speech.

 

   ¹ [ Between mankind and poor dumb beasts there stretches

       A chain of souls impossible to see.
       Poor dumb beasts have a will - ergo a soul too -
       E’en though they have a soul smaller than we.]
 

   ² [ ‘How fortunate am I!’ she softly cried.

       ‘I too’, declared her husband’s louder voice:
       ‘Your many qualities fill me with pride
       At having made so excellent a choice.’]
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1794

 

 

   Now that we are on the point of approaching an answer to our last

question, as to the necessary conditions for the generating of comic

pleasure from the difference in expenditure, we may allow ourselves a

relief which cannot fail to give us pleasure. An accurate reply to the

question would be identical with an exhaustive account of the nature

of the comic, for which we can claim neither capacity nor authority. We

shall once more be content to throw light on the problem of the comic

only so far as it contrasts clearly with the problem of jokes.

   Every theory of the comic is objected to by its critics on the score

that its definition overlooks what is essential to the comic; ‘The comic

is based on a contrast between ideas.’ ‘Yes, in so far as the contrast

has  a  comic  and  not  some  other  effect.’  ‘The  feeling  of  the  comic

arises from the disappointment of an expectation.’ ‘Yes, unless the

disappointment is in fact a distressing one.’ No doubt the objections

are justified; but we shall be over-estimating them if we conclude from

them  that  the  essential  feature  of  the  comic  has  hitherto  escaped

detection. What impairs the universal validity of these definitions are

conditions  which  are  indispensable  for  the  generating  of  comic

pleasure; but we do not need to look for the essence of the comic in

them.  In  any  case,  it  will  only  become  easy  for  us  to  dismiss  the

objections and throw light on the contradictions to the definitions of the

comic  if  we  suppose  that  the  origin  of  comic  pleasure  lies  in  acomparison  of  the  difference  between  two  expenditures.  Comic

pleasure and the effect by which it is known - laughter - can only come

about if this difference is unutilizable and capable of discharge. We

obtain no pleasurable effect but at most a transient sense of pleasure

in  which  the  characteristic  of  being  comic  does  not  emerge,  if  the

difference is put to another use as soon as it is recognized. Just as

special contrivances have to be adopted in the case of jokes in order

to prevent the use elsewhere of the expenditure that is recognized as

superfluous, so, too, comic pleasure can only appear in circumstances

that  guarantee  this  same  condition.  For  this  reason  occasions  on

which these differences in expenditure occur in our ideational life are

uncommonly  numerous,  but  the  occasions  on  which  the  comic

emerges from those differences are relatively quite rare.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1795

 

   Two observations force themselves on anyone who studies even

cursorily the conditions for the generation of the comic from difference

in expenditure. Firstly, there are cases in which the comic appears

habitually and as though by force of necessity, and on the contrary

others in which it seems entirely dependent on the circumstances and

on  the  standpoint  of  the  observer.  But  secondly,  unusually  large

differences very often break through unfavourable conditions, so that

the comic feeling emerges in spite of them. In connection with the first

of  these  points  it  would  be  possible  to  set  up  two  classes  -  the

inevitably  comic  and  the  occasionally  comic  -  though  one  must  be

prepared  from  the  first  to  renounce  the  notion  of  finding  the

inevitability of the comic in the first class free from exceptions. It would

be  tempting  to  enquire  into  the  determining  conditions  for  the  two

classes.

   The conditions, some of which have been brought together as the

‘isolation’ of the comic situation, apply essentially to the second class.

A closer analysis elicits the following facts:

      (a)  The  most  favourable  condition  for  the  production  of  comic

pleasure  is  a  generally  cheerful  mood  in  which  one  is  ‘inclined  tolaugh’.  In  a  toxic  mood  of  cheerfulness  almost  everything  seems

comic, probably by comparison with the expenditure in a normal state.

Indeed, jokes, the comic and all similar methods of getting pleasure

from mental activity are no more than ways of regaining this cheerful

mood - this euphoria - from a single point of approach, when it is not

present as a general disposition of the psyche.

   (b) A similarly favourable effect is produced by an expectation of the

comic,  by  being  attuned  to  comic  pleasure.  For  this  reason,  if  an

intention  to  make  something  comic  is  communicated  to  one  by

someone  else,  differences  of  such  a  low  degree  are  sufficient  that

they  would  probably  be  overlooked  if  they  occurred  in  one’s

experience  unintentionally.  Anyone  who  starts  out  to  read  a  comic

book or goes to the theatre to see a farce owes to this intention his

ability to laugh at things which would scarcely have provided him with

a case of the comic in his ordinary life. In the last resort it is in the

recollection of having laughed and in the expectation of laughing that

he laughs when he sees the comic actor come on to the stage, before

the latter can have made any attempt at making him laugh. For that

reason, too, one admits feeling ashamed afterwards over what one

has been able to laugh at the play.

   (c) Unfavourable conditions for the comic arise from the kind of

mental  activity  with  which  a  particular  person  is  occupied  at  the

moment.  Imaginative  or  intellectual  work  that  pursues  serious  aims

interferes with the capacity of the cathexes for discharge - cathexes

which  the  work  requires  for  its  displacements  -  so  that  only

unexpectedly  large  differences  in  expenditure  are  able  to  break

through to comic pleasure. What are quite specially unfavourable for

the comic are all kinds of intellectual processes which are sufficiently

remote from what is perceptual to bring ideational mimetics to a stop.

There  is  no  place  whatever  left  for  the  comic  in  abstract  reflection

except when that mode of thought is suddenly interrupted.

   (d) The opportunity for the release of comic pleasure disappears,

too, if the attention is focused precisely on the comparison from which

the comic may emerge. In such circumstances what would otherwise

have the most certain comic effect loses its comic force. A movement

or a function cannot be comic for a person whose interest is directed

to comparing it with a standard which he has clearly before his mind.Thus  the  examiner  does  not  find  the  nonsense  comic  which  the

candidate produces in his ignorance; he is annoyed by it, while the

candidate’s fellow students, who are far more interested in what luck

he will have than in how much he knows, laugh heartily at the same

nonsense. A gymnastic or dancing instructor seldom has an eye for

the  comic  in  his  pupils’  movements;  and  a  clergyman  entirely

overlooks  the  comic  in  the  human  weaknesses  which  the  writer  of

comedies can bring to light so effectively. The comic process will not

bear  being  hypercathected  by  attention;  it  must  be  able  to  take  its

course quite unobserved in this respect, incidentally, just like jokes. It

would,  however,  contradict  the  nomenclature  of  the  ‘processes  of

consciousness’  of  which  I  made  use,  with  good  reason,  in  my

Interpretation of Dreams if one sought to speak of the comic process

as  a  necessarily  unconscious  one.  It  forms  part,  rather,  of  the

preconscious;  and  such  processes,  which  run  their  course  in  the

preconscious  but  lack  the  cathexis  of  attention  with  which

consciousness is linked, may aptly be given the name of ‘automatic’.

The process of comparing expenditures must remain automatic if it is

to produce comic pleasure.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1796

 

   (e) The comic is greatly interfered with if the situation from which it

ought to develop gives rise at the same time to a release of strong

affect. A discharge of the operative difference is as a rule out of the

question in such a case. The affects, disposition and attitude of the

individual  in  each  particular  case  make  it  understandable  that  the

comic  emerges  and  vanishes  according  to  the  standpoint  of  each

particular  person,  and  that  an  absolute  comic  exists  only  in

exceptional  instances.  The  contingency  or  relativity  of  the  comic  is

therefore far greater than that of a joke, which never happens of its

own accord but is invariably made, and in which the conditions under

which it can find acceptance can be observed at the time at which it is

constructed.  The  generation  of  affect  is  the  most  intense  of  all  the

conditions  that  interfere  with  the  comic  and  its  importance  in  thisrespect has been nowhere overlooked.¹ For this reason it has been

said that the comic feeling comes easiest in more or less indifferent

cases where the feelings and interests are not strongly involved. Yet

precisely in cases where there is a release of affect one can observe a

particularly  strong  difference  in  expenditure  bring  about  the

automatism  of  release.  When  Colonel  Butler  answers  Octavio’s

warnings by exclaiming ‘with a bitter laugh’: ‘Thanks from the House of

Austria!’, his embitterment does not prevent his laughing. The laugh

applies  to  his  memory  of  the  disappointment  he  believes  he  has

suffered; and on the other hand the magnitude of the disappointment

cannot be portrayed more impressively by the dramatist than by his

showing  it  capable  of  forcing  a  laugh  in  the  midst  of  the  storm  of

feelings  that  have  been  released.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  this

explanation  would  apply  to  every  case  in  which  laughter  occurs  in

circumstances  other  than  pleasurable  ones  and  accompanied  by

intensely distressing or strained emotions.

   (f) If we add to this that the generating of comic pleasure can be

encouraged by any other pleasurable accompanying circumstance as

though by some sort of contagious effect (working in the same kind of

way as the fore-pleasure principle with tendentious jokes), we shall

have mentioned enough of the conditions governing comic pleasure

for our purposes, though certainly not all of them. We can then see

that these conditions, as well as the inconstancy and contingency of

the  comic  effect,  cannot  be  explained  so  easily  by  any  other

hypothesis  than  that  of  the  derivation  of  comic  pleasure  from  the

discharge  of  a  difference  which,  under  the  most  varying

circumstances, is liable to be used in ways other than discharge.

 

   ¹ ‘It is easy for you to laugh; it means nothing more to you.’

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1797

 

 

   The comic of sexuality and obscenity would deserve more detailed

consideration;  but  we  can  only  touch  upon  it  here  with  a  few

comments.  The  starting-point  would  once  more  be  exposure.  Achance exposure has a comic effect on us because we compare the

ease with which we have enjoyed the sight with the great expenditure

which  would  otherwise  be  required  for  reaching  this  end.  Thus  the

case  approaches  that  of  the  naïvely  comic,  but  is  simpler.  Every

exposure of which we are made the spectator (or audience in the case

of smut) by a third person is equivalent to the exposed person being

made comic. We have seen that it is the task of jokes to take the place

of smut and so once more to open access to a lost source of comic

pleasure. As opposed to this, witnessing an exposure is not a case of

the comic for the witness, because his own effort in doing so does

away with the determining condition of comic pleasure: nothing is left

but  the  sexual  pleasure  in  what  is  seen.  If  the  witness  gives  an

account  to  someone  else,  the  person  who  has  been  witnessed

becomes comic once more, because there is a predominant sense

that the latter has omitted the expenditure which would have been in

place  for  concealing  his  secret.  Apart  from  this,  the  spheres  of

sexuality  and  obscenity  offer  the  amplest  occasions  for  obtaining

comic pleasure alongside pleasurable sexual excitement; for they can

show  human  beings  in  their  dependence  on  bodily  needs

(degradation) or they can reveal the physical demands lying behind

the claim of mental love (unmasking).

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1798

 

 

   An invitation to us to look for an understanding of the comic in its

psychogenesis is also to be found, surprisingly enough, in Bergson’s

charming  and  lively  volume Le  rire.  We  have  already  made  the

acquaintance of Bergson’s formulas for grasping the characteristics of

the  comic:  ‘mécanisation  de  la  vie’,  ‘substitution  quelconque  de

l’artificial au naturel’.¹ He proceeds by a plausible train of thought from

automatism to automata, and tries to trace back a number of comic

effects to the faded recollection of a children’s toy. In this connection

he reaches for a moment a point of view, which, it is true, he soon

abandons: he endeavours to explain the comic as an after-effect ofthe  joys  of  childhood.  ‘Peut-être  même  devrions-nous  pousser  la

simplification  plus  loin  encore,  remonter  à  nos  souvenirs  les  plus

anciens, chercher dans les jeux qui amusèrent l’enfant la première

ébauche des combinaisons qui font rire l’homme . . . Trop souvent

surtout nous méconnaissons ce qu’il y a d’encore enfantin, pour ainsi

dire, dans la plupart de nos émotions joyeuses.’ (Bergson, 1900, 68

ff.)² Since we have traced back jokes to children’s play with words and

thoughts  which  has  been  frustrated  by  rational  criticism  we  cannot

help feeling tempted to investigate the infantile roots which Bergson

suspects in the case of the comic as well.

 

   ¹ [‘Mechanization of life’ - ‘some kind of substitution of the artificial for the natural.’]

   ² [‘Perhaps we should even carry simplification further still, go back to our oldest memories,

and trace in the games that amused the child the first sketch of the combinations which make
the grown man laugh . . . Above all, we too often fail to recognize how much of childishness,
so to speak, there still is in most of our joyful emotions.’]
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1799

 

   And, in fact, if we examine the relation of the comic to the child we

come upon a whole number of connections which seem promising.

Children themselves do not strike us as in any way comic, though their

nature fulfils all the conditions which, if we compare it with our own

nature,  yield  a  comic  difference:  the  excessive  expenditure  on

movement  as  well  as  the  small  intellectual  expenditure,  the

domination  of  the  mental  functions  by  the  bodily  ones,  and  other

features. A child only produces a comic effect on us when he conducts

himself not as a child but as a serious adult, and he produces it then in

the same way as other people who disguise themselves. But so long

as he retains his childish nature the perception of him affords us a

pure pleasure, perhaps one that reminds us slightly of the comic. We

call him naïve, in so far as he shows us his lack of inhibition, and we

describe as naïvely comic those of his utterances which in another

person we should have judged obscenities or jokes.

   On the other hand, children are without a feeling for the comic. This

assertion seems to say no more than that the comic feeling, like sucha number of other things, only starts at some point in the course of

mental  development;  and  this  would  be  by  no  means  surprising,

especially as it has to be admitted that the feeling already emerges

clearly at an age which has to be counted as part of childhood. But it

can nevertheless be shown that the assertion that children lack the

feeling of the comic contains more than something self-evident. In the

first place, it is easy to see that it could not be otherwise if our view is

correct  which  derives  the  comic  feeling  from  a  difference  in

expenditure that arises in the course of understanding another person.

Let us once again take the comic of movement as an example. The

comparison which provides the difference runs (stated in conscious

formulas): ‘That is how he does it’ and ‘This is how I should do it, how

I did it’. But a child is without the standard contained in the second

sentence; he understands simply by mimicry: he does it in just the

same way. The child’s upbringing presents him with a standard: ‘this is

how  you  ought  to  do  it.’  If  he  now  makes  use  of  this  standard  in

making the comparison, he will easily conclude: ‘he did not do it right’

and ‘I can do it better’. In this case he laughs at the other person, he

laughs at him in the feeling of his own superiority. There is nothing to

prevent our deriving this laughter too from a difference in expenditure;

but on the analogy of the cases of laughing at people that we have

come across we may infer that the comic feeling is not present in a

child’s superior laughter. It is a laughter of pure pleasure. In our own

case  when  we  have  a  clear  judgement  of  our  own  superiority,  we

merely smile instead of laughing, or, if we laugh, we can nevertheless

distinguish this becoming conscious of our superiority from the comic

that makes us laugh.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1800

 

   It is probably right to say that children laugh from pure pleasure in a

variety of circumstances that we feel as ‘comic’ and cannot find the

motive for, whereas a child’s motives are clear and can be stated. For

instance,  if  someone  slips  in  the  street  and  falls  down  we  laugh

because  the  impression  -  we  do  not  know  why  -  is  comic.  A  childlaughs  in  the  same  case  from  a  feeling  of  superiority  or  from

Schadenfreude:  ‘You’ve  fallen  down,  I  haven’t.’  Certain  motives  for

pleasure in children seem to be lost to us adults, and instead in the

same circumstances we have the ‘comic’ feeling as a substitute for the

lost one.

   If one might generalize, it would seem most attractive to place the

specific characteristic of the comic which we are in search of in an

awakening of the infantile - to regard the comic as the regained ‘lost

laughter of childhood’. One could then say: ‘I laugh at a difference in

expenditure  between  another  person  and  myself,  every  time  I

rediscover  the  child  in  him.’  Or,  put  more  exactly,  the  complete

comparison which leads to the comic would run: ‘That is how he does

it - I do it in another way - he does it as I used to do it as a child.’

   Thus the laughter would always apply to the comparison between

the adult’s ego and the child’s ego. Even the lack of uniformity in the

comic difference - the fact that what seems to me comic is sometimes

a greater and sometimes a smaller expenditure - would fit in with the

infantile  determinant;  actually  what  is  comic  is  invariably  on  the

infantile side.

   This is not contradicted by the fact that, when children themselves

are  the  object  of  the  comparison,  they  do  not  give  me  a  comic

impression  but  a  purely  pleasurable  one;  nor  is  it  contradicted

because  the  comparison  with  the  infantile  only  produces  a  comic

effect  if  any  other  use  of  the  difference  is  avoided.  For  these  are

matters concerned with the conditions governing discharge. Whatever

brings  a  psychical  process  into  connection  with  others  operates

against the discharge of the surplus cathexis and puts it to some other

use;  whatever  isolates  a  psychical  act  encourages  discharge.  A

conscious  attitude  to  children  as  objects  of  comparison  therefore

makes impossible the discharge that is necessary for comic pleasure.

Only when the cathexis is preconscious is there an approximation to

an  isolation  such  as,  incidentally,  we  may  ascribe  to  the  mental

processes in children as well. The addition to the comparison (‘I did it

like that as a child too’) from which the comic effect is derived would

thus only come into consideration, as far as differences of medium

magnitude are concerned, if no other nexus could gain control over

the liberated surplus.   If we pursue our attempt to discover the essence of the comic in a

preconscious link with the infantile, we must go a step further than

Bergson and admit that a comparison need not, in order to produce

the comic, arouse old childish pleasures and childish play; it will be

enough for it to touch upon childish nature in general, and perhaps

even on childish suffering. Here we shall be parting from Bergson but

remaining in agreement with ourselves if we connect comic pleasure

not with recollected pleasure but once more with a comparison. It may

be that cases of the former kind may coincide with the invariably and

irresistibly comic.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1801

 

   Let us at this point review the scheme which we drew up earlier of

the various comic possibilities. We remarked that the comic difference

was found either

   (a) by a comparison between another person and oneself, or

   (b) by a comparison entirely within the other person, or

   (c) by a comparison entirely within oneself.

In the first of these cases the other person would appear to me as a

child; in the second he would reduce himself to a child; and in the third

I should discover the child in myself.

   The first case would include the comic of movement and form, of

mental  functioning  and  of  character.  The  corresponding  infantile

factors would be the urge to movement and the child’s inferior mental

and moral development. So that, for instance, a stupid person would

be comic to me in so far as he reminded me of a lazy child and a bad

person in so far as he reminded me of a naughty child. There could

only be a question of a childish pleasure lost to adults in the single

instance in which the child’s own joy in movement was concerned.

   The second case, in which the comic depends entirely on ‘empathy’,

includes the most numerous possibilities - the comic of situation, of

exaggeration  (caricature),  of  mimicry,  of  degradation  and  of

unmasking. This is the case in which the introduction of the infantile

point of view proves most useful. For the comic of situation is mostlybased  on  embarrassments,  in  which  we  rediscover  the  child’s

helplessness. The worst of the embarrassments, the interference by

the  peremptory  demands  of  natural  needs  with  other  functions,

corresponds to the child’s incomplete control over his bodily functions.

Where the comic of situation operates by means of repetitions, it is

based  on  the  child’s  peculiar  pleasure  in  constant  repetition  (of

questions or of being told stories) which make him a nuisance to the

adult. Exaggeration, which still gives pleasure to adults in so far as it

can  find  justification  with  their  critical  faculty,  is  connected  with  the

child’s  peculiar  lack  of  a  sense  of  proportion,  his  ignorance  of  all

quantitative relations, which he comes to know later than qualitative

ones.  The  use  of  moderation  and  restraint,  even  in  the  case  of

permitted impulses, is a late fruit of education and is acquired by the

mutual inhibition of mental activities brought together in a combination.

Where  such  combinations  are  weakened,  as  in  the  unconscious  of

dreams or in the mono-ideism of psychoneuroses, the child’s lack of

moderation re-emerges.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1802

 

   We found relatively great difficulties in understanding the comic of

mimicry  so  long  as  we  left  the  infantile  factor  out  of  account.  But

mimicry is the child’s best art and the driving motive of most of his

games. A child’s ambition aims far less at excelling among his equals

than at mimicking the grown-ups. The relation of children to adults is

also the basis of the comic of degradation, which corresponds to the

condescension shown by adults in their attitude to the life of children.

There is little that gives children greater pleasure than when a grown-

up  lets  himself  down  to  their  level,  renounces  his  oppressive

superiority and plays with them as an equal. This relief, which gives

the child pure pleasure, becomes in adults, in the form of degradation,

a means of making things comic and a source of comic pleasure. As

regards unmasking, we know that it goes back to degradation.

   We come up against the most difficulties in finding the infantile basis

of the third case, the comic of expectation, which no doubt explainswhy those authorities who have put this case first in their discussion of

the comic have found no occasion for taking account of the infantile

factor in the comic. The comic of expectation is no doubt the remotest

in children; the capacity to grasp it is the latest to appear. In most of

the instances which seem comic to an adult a child would probably

feel only disappointment. We might, however, take the child’s power of

blissful expectation and credulity as a basis for understanding how we

appear to ourselves comic ‘as a child’ when we meet with a comic

disappointment.

 

   What we have said would seem to suggest a certain probability for a

translation of the comic feeling that might run; ‘Those things are comic

which  are  not  proper  for  an  adult.’  Nevertheless  I  do  not  feel  bold

enough, in virtue of my whole attitude to the problem of the comic, to

defend  this  last  assertion  with  as  much  seriousness  as  my  earlier

ones. I am unable to decide whether degradation to being a child is

only a special case of comic degradation, or whether everything comic

is based fundamentally on degradation to being a child.¹

 

   ¹ The fact that comic pleasure has its source in the ‘quantitative contrast’ of a comparison

between small and large, which after all also expresses the essential relation between a child
and  an  adult  -  this  would  certainly  be  a  strange  coincidence  if  the  comic  had  no  other
connection with the infantile.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1803

 

 

   An enquiry which deals with the comic, however cursorily, would be

seriously incomplete if it did not find room for at least a few remarks

about humour. The essential kinship between the two is so little open

to doubt that an attempt at explaining the comic is bound to make at

least  some  contribution  to  an  understanding  of  humour.  However

much that is pertinent and impressive may have been brought forward

in  the  appreciation  of  humour  (which,  itself  one  of  the  highest

psychical achievements, enjoys the particular favour of thinkers), yet

we cannot evade an attempt at giving expression to its nature by anapproach to the formulas for jokes and for the comic.

   We have seen that the release of distressing affects is the greatest

obstacle  to  the  emergence  of  the  comic.  As  soon  as  the  aimless

movement  does  damage,  or  the  stupidity  leads  to  mischief,  or  the

disappointment causes pain, the possibility of a comic effect is at an

end. This is true, at all events, for a person who cannot ward off such

unpleasure, who is himself its victim or is obliged to have a share in it;

whereas a person who is not concerned shows by his demeanour that

the situation involved contains everything that is required for a comic

effect. Now humour is a means of obtaining pleasure in spite of the

distressing affects that interfere with it; it acts as a substitute for the

generation of these affects, it puts itself in their place. The conditions

for its appearance are given if there is a situation in which, according

to our usual habits, we should be tempted to release a distressing

affect and if motives then operate upon us which suppress that affect

in statu nascendi.  In  the  cases  that  have  just  been  mentioned  the

person who is the victim of the injury, pain, and so on, might obtain

humorous pleasure, while the unconcerned person laughs from comic

pleasure.  The  pleasure  of  humour,  if  this  is  so,  comes  about  -  we

cannot say otherwise - at the cost of a release of affect that does not

occur: it arises from an economy in the expenditure of affect.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

 1804

 

   Humour is the most easily satisfied among the species of the comic.

It  completes  its  course  within  a  single  person;  another  person’s

participation  adds  nothing  new  to  it.  I  can  keep  to  myself  the

enjoyment of the humorous pleasure that has arisen in me, without

feeling obliged to communicate it. It is not easy to say what happens

in a person when humorous pleasure is generated; but we can obtain

some  insight  if  we  examine  the  cases  in  which  humour  is

communicated  or  sympathized  with,  cases  in  which,  by  an

understanding  of  the  humorous  person,  we  arrive  at  the  same

pleasure  as  his.  The  crudest  case  of  humour  -  what  is  known  as

Galgenhumor  - may be instructive in this connection. A rogue whowas  being  led  out  to  execution  on  a  Monday  remarked:  ‘Well,  this

week’s beginning nicely.’ This is actually a joke, since the remark is

quite apt in itself, but on the other hand, is misplaced in a nonsensical

way, since for the man himself there would be no further events that

week. But humour is concerned in the making of such a joke - that is,

in disregarding what it is that distinguishes the beginning of this week

from others, in denying the distinction which might give rise to motives

for quite special emotions. The case was the same when the rogue on

his way to execution asked for a scarf for his bare throat so as not to

catch cold - an otherwise laudable precaution but one which, in view

of  what  lay  in  store  so  shortly  for  the  neck,  was  remarkably

superfluous  and  unimportant.  It  must  be  confessed  that  there  is

something like magnanimity in this blague, in the man’s tenacious hold

upon his customary self and his disregard of what might overthrow

that  self  and  drive  it  to  despair.  This  kind  of  grandeur  of  humour

appears unmistakably in cases in which our admiration is not inhibited

by the circumstances of the humorous person.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1805

 

   In Victor Hugo’s Hernani, the bandit who has become involved in a

conspiracy against his King, Charles I of Spain (the Emperor Charles

V), has fallen into the hands of this powerful enemy. He foresees that,

convicted of high treason, it is his fate to lose his head. But this fore-

knowledge  does  not  prevent  his  letting  himself  be  known  as  a

Hereditary Grandee of Spain and declaring that he has no intention of

renouncing any of the privileges that are his due. A Grandee of Spain

might cover his head in the presence of his royal master. Very well,

then:

 

                                                                . . . . Nos têtes ont le droit

                                                                De tomber couvertes devant de toi.¹

 

This is humour on the grand scale, and if when we hear it we do not

laugh, that is because our admiration covers the humorous pleasure.

In  the  case  of  the  rogue  who  refuses  to  catch  cold  on  the  way  toexecution  we  laugh  heartily.  The  situation  that  ought  to  drive  the

criminal  to  despair  might  rouse  intense  pity  in  us;  but  that  pity  is

inhibited  because  we  understand  that  he,  who  is  more  closely

concerned,  makes  nothing  of  the  situation.  As  a  result  of  this

understanding,  the  expenditure  on  the  pity,  which  was  already

prepared, becomes unutilizable and we laugh it off. We are, as it were,

infected by the rogue’s indifference - though we notice that it has cost

him a great expenditure of psychical work.

   An economy of pity is one of the most frequent sources of humorous

pleasure. Mark Twain’s humour usually works with his mechanism. In

an account of his brother’s life, for instance, he tells us how he was at

one time employed on a great road-making enterprise. The premature

explosion of a mine blew him up into the air and he came down again

far away from the place where he had been working. We are bound to

have feelings of sympathy for the victim of the accident and would like

to ask whether he was injured by it. But when the story goes on to say

that his brother had a half-day’s wages deducted for being ‘absent

from his place of employment’ we are entirely distracted from our pity

and become almost as hard-hearted as the contractor and almost as

indifferent  to  possible  damage  to  the  brother’s  health.  On  another

occasion Mark Twain presents us with his family tree, which he traces

back to one of Columbus’s fellow-voyagers. He then describes this

ancestor’s  character  and  how  his  baggage  consisted  entirely  of  a

number of pieces of washing each of which had a different laundry-

mark - here we cannot help laughing at the cost of an economy of the

feelings of piety into which we were prepared to enter at the beginning

of this family history. The mechanism of the humorous pleasure is not

interfered with by our knowledge that this pedigree is a fictitious one

and  that  the  fiction  serves  the  satirical  purpose  of  exposing  the

embellishments  in  similar  accounts  by  other  people:  it  is  as

independent of the condition that it must be real as in the case of

making things comic. In yet another story, Mark Twain describes how

his brother constructed a subterranean dwelling, into which he brought

a bed, a table and a lamp and which he roofed over with a large piece

of sailcloth with a hole in the middle. At night, however, after the hut

was  finished,  a  cow  that  was  being  driven  home  fell  through  the

opening of the roof on to the table and put out the lamp. His brotherpatiently  helped  to  get  the  beast  out  and  put  the  establishment  to

rights again. Next night the same interruption was repeated and his

brother  behaved  as  before.  And  so  it  was  every  following  night.

Repetition makes the story comic, but Mark Twain ends it by reporting

that  on  the  forty-sixth  night,  when  the  cow  fell  through  again,  his

brother finally remarked: ‘The thing’s beginning to get monotonous.’ At

this our humorous pleasure cannot be kept back, for what we had long

expected  to  hear  was  that  this  obstinate  set  of  misfortunes  would

make his brother angry. And indeed the small contributions of humour

that we produce ourselves are as a rule made at the cost of anger -

instead of getting angry.²

 

   ¹ [‘Our heads have the right to fall before you covered.’]

   ² The grandiose humorous effect of a figure like that of the fat knight Sir John Falstaff rests

on  an  economy  in  contempt  and  indignation.  We  recognize  him  as  an  undeserving
gormandizer and swindler, but our condenmation is disarmed by a whole number of factors.
We can see that he knows himself as well as we do; he impresses us by his wit, and, besides
this, his physical misproportion has the effect of encouraging us to take a comic view of him
instead of a serious one, as though the demands of morality and honour must rebound from
so fat a stomach. His doings are on the whole harmless, and are almost excused by the comic
baseness of the people he cheats. We admit that the poor fellow has a right to try to live and
enjoy himself like anyone else, and we almost pity him because in the chief situations we find
him a plaything in the hands of someone far his superior. So we cannot feel angry with him
and we add all that we economize in indignation with him to the comic pleasure which he
affords us apart from this. Sir John’s own humour arises in fact from the superiority of an ego
which neither his physical nor his moral defects can rob of its cheerfulness and assurance.
   The ingenious knight Don Quixote de la Mancha is, on the contrary, a figure who possesses
no humour himself but who with his seriousness offers us a pleasure which could be called
humorous, though its mechanism shows an important divergence from that of humour. Don
Quixote  is  originally  a  purely  comic  figure,  a  big  child;  the  phantasies  from  his  books  of
chivalry have gone to his head. It is well known that to begin with the author intended nothing
else of him and that his creation gradually grew far beyond its creator’s first intentions. But
after the author had equipped this ridiculous figure with the deepest wisdom and the noblest
purposes and had made him into the symbolic representative of an idealism which believes in
the realization of its aims and takes duties seriously and takes promises literally, this figure
ceased to have a comic effect. Just as in other cases humorous pleasure arises from the
prevention of an emotion, so it does here from the interference with comic pleasure. But it is
clear  that  these  examples  have  already  carried  us  a  long  way  from  the  simple  cases  of
humour.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1806

    The species of humour are extraordinarily variegated according to

the  nature  of  the  emotion  which  is  economized  in  favour  of  the

humour:  pity,  anger,  pain,  tenderness,  and  so  on.  Their  number

seems  to  remain  uncompleted  because  the  kingdom  of  humour  is

constantly  being  enlarged  whenever  an  artist  or  writer  succeeds  in

submitting  some  hitherto  unconquered  emotions  to  the  control  of

humour, in making them, by devices like those in the examples we

have  given,  into  sources  of  humorous  pleasure.  The  artists  in

Simplicissismus,  for  instance,  have  had  astonishing  results  in

achieving humour at the cost of horror and disgust. The forms in which

humour is manifested are, moreover, determined by two peculiarities

which are connected with the conditions under which it is generated.

Humour may, in the first place, appear merged with a joke or some

other  species  of  the  comic;  in  that  case  its  task  is  to  get  rid  of  a

possibility  implicit  in  the  situation  that  an  affect  may  be  generated

which  would  interfere  with  the  pleasurable  outcome.  In  the  second

place, it may stop this generating of an affect entirely or only partially;

this last is actually the commoner case since it is easier to bring about,

and it produces the various forms of ‘broken’¹ humour - the humour

that smiles through tears. It withdraws a part of its energy from the

affect and in exchange gives it a tinge of humour.

   The humorous pleasure derived from sympathy originates, as can

be  seen  from  the  examples  above,  from  a  peculiar  technique

comparable to displacement, by means of which the release of affect

that is already in preparation is disappointed and the cathexis diverted

on to something else, often on to something of secondary importance.

But this does not help us at all to understand the process by which the

displacement away from the generating of affect takes place in the

humorous person himself. We can see that the receiver imitates the

creator of the humour in his mental processes, but this tells us nothing

of the forces which make the process possible in the latter.

 

   ¹ A term which is used in quite another sense in Vischer’s aesthetics.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1807

       We  can  only  say  that  if  someone  succeeds,  for  instance,  in

disregarding  a  painful  affect  by  reflecting  on  the  greatness  of  the

interests of the world as compared with his own smallness, we do not

regard this as an achievement of humour but of philosophical thought,

and if we put ourselves into his train of thought, we obtain no yield of

pleasure. Humorous displacement is thus just as impossible under the

glare of conscious attention as is comic comparison; like the latter, it is

tied to the condition of remaining preconscious or automatic.

   We can gain some information about humorous displacement if we

look at it in the light of a defensive process. Defensive processes are

the psychical correlative of the flight reflex and perform the task of

preventing  the  generation  of  unpleasure  from  internal  sources.  In

fulfilling this task they serve mental events as an automatic regulation,

which in the end, incidentally, turns out to be detrimental and has to

be  subjected  to  conscious  thinking.  I  have  indicated  one  particular

form  of  this  defence,  repression  that  has  failed,  as  the  operative

mechanism for the development of psychoneuroses. Humour can be

regarded as the highest of these defensive processes. It scorns to

withdraw  the  ideational  content  bearing  the  distressing  affect  from

conscious  attention  as  repression  does,  and  thus  surmounts  the

automatism  of  defence.  It  brings  this  about  by  finding  a  means  of

withdrawing the energy from the release of unpleasure that is already

in preparation and of transforming it, by discharge, into pleasure. It is

even  conceivable  that  once  again  it  may  be  a  connection  with  the

infantile that puts the means for achieving this at its disposal. Only in

childhood have there been distressing affects at which the adult would

smile  to-day  -  just  as  he  laughs,  as  a  humorist,  at  his  present

distressing affects. The exaltation of his ego, to which the humorous

displacement  bears  witness,  and  of  which  the  translation  would  no

doubt be ‘I am too big (too fine) to be distressed by these things’,

might  well  be  derived  from  his  comparing  his  present  ego  with  his

childish one. This view is to some extent supported by the part played

by the infantile in neurotic processes of repression.

 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1808 

   On the whole humour is closer to the comic than to jokes. It shares

with the former its psychical localization in the preconscious whereas

jokes,  as  we  have  had  to  suppose,  are  formed  as  a  compromise

between the unconscious and the preconscious. On the other hand

humour does not participate in a peculiar characteristic common to

jokes and the comic, on which we have perhaps not yet laid sufficient

stress. It is a necessary condition for generating the comic that we

should be obliged, simultaneously or in rapid succession, to apply to

one and the same act of ideation two different ideational methods,

between  which  the  ‘comparison’  is  then  made  and  the  comic

difference  emerges.  Differences  in  expenditure  of  this  kind  arise

between that belongs to someone else and to oneself, between what

is as usual and what has been changed, between what is expected

and what happens.¹ In the case of jokes, the difference between two

simultaneous  methods  of  viewing  things,  which  operate  with  a

different expenditure, applies to the process in the person who hears

the joke. One of these two views, following the hints contained in the

joke, passes along the path of thought through the unconscious; the

other stays on the surface and views the joke like any other wording

that has emerged from the preconscious and become conscious. We

should perhaps be justified in representing the pleasure from a joke

that is heard as being derived from the difference between these two

methods of viewing it.² Here we are saying of jokes what we described

as their possessing a Janus head, while the relation between jokes

and the comic had still to be cleared up.³

 

   ¹ If we are prepared to do a little violence to the concept of ‘expectation’, we can, following

Lipps, include a very large region of the comic under the comic of expectation. But what are
probably the most basic instances of the comic, those arising from a comparison between
someone else’s expenditure and one’s own, would be the very ones that fitted in least easily
to this grouping.

    ² We  can  accept  this  formula  without  question,  since  it  leads  to  nothing  that  would

contradict  our  earlier  discussions.  The  difference  between  the  two  expenditures  must  in
essence come down to the inhibitory expenditure that is saved. The lack of this economy in
inhibition in the case of the comic, and the absence of quantitative contrast in the case of
jokes, would determine the distinction between the comic feeling and the impression of a joke,
in spite of their agreeing in the characteristic of using two kinds of ideational activity for the
same view.

   ³ This peculiarity of the ‘double face’ [in French in the original] has naturally not escaped theauthorities. Mélinand (1895), from whom I have borrowed this phrase, states the determinants
of laughter in the following formula: ‘Ce qui fait rire c’est ce qui est à la fois, d’un côté, absurde
et de l’autre, familier.’ [‘What makes one laugh is what is on the one hand absurd, and on the
other familiar.’] This formula fits jokes better than the comic, but does not completely cover the
former either. - Bergson (1900, 98) defines the comic situation by the ‘interférence des séries’:
‘Une  situation  est  toujours  comique  quand  elle  appartient  en  même  temps  à  deux  séries
d’événements absolument indépendantes, et qu’elle peut s’interpréter à la fois dans deux
sens tout différents.’ [‘A situation is always comic when it belongs at the same time to two
series  of  events  that  are  absolutely  independent,  and  where  it  can  be  interpreted
simultaneously in two quite different senses.’] - Lipps regards the comic as ‘the bigness and
smallness of the same thing’.
 


                Jokes and Their Relation To The Unconscious

                                                                                      1809

 

   In the case of humour the characteristic which we have just brought

forward becomes effaced. It is true that we feel humorous pleasure

when an emotion is avoided which we should have expected because

it usually accompanies the situation, and to that extent humour too

comes under the extended concept of the comic of expectation. But

with  humour  it  is  no  longer  a  question  of  two  different  methods  of

viewing  the  same  subject  matter.  The  fact  that  the  situation  is

dominated  by  the  emotion  that  is  to  be  avoided,  which  is  of  an

unpleasurable character, puts an end to the possibility of comparing it

with  the  characteristics  of  the  comic  and  of  jokes.  Humorous

displacement is in fact a case of a liberated expenditure being used

elsewhere  -  a  case  which  has  been  shown  to  be  so  perilous  to  a

comic effect.

 

   We are now at the end of our task, having reduced the mechanism

of  humorous  pleasure  to  a  formula  analogous  to  those  for  comic

pleasure and for jokes. The pleasure in jokes has seemed to us to

arise from an economy in expenditure upon inhibition, the pleasure in

the  comic  from  an  economy  in  expenditure  upon  ideation  (upon

cathexis) and the pleasure in humour from an economy in expenditure

upon feeling. In all three modes of working of our mental apparatus

the  pleasure  is  derived  from  an  economy.  All  three  are  agreed  in

representing  methods  of  regaining  from  mental  activity  a  pleasure

which has in fact been lost through the development of that activity.For  the  euphoria  which  we  endeavour  to  reach  by  these  means  is

nothing  other  than  the  mood  of  a  period  of  life  in  which  we  were

accustomed to deal with our psychical work in general with a small

expenditure of energy - the mood of our childhood, when we were

ignorant of the comic, when we were incapable of jokes and when we

had no need of humour to make us feel happy in our life.

 