conscious reflections shows us that we follow a particular path in our

application of attention. If, as we follow this path, we come upon an

idea which will not bear criticism, we break off: we drop the cathexis of

attention. Now it seems that the train of thought which has thus been

initiated and dropped can continue to spin itself out without attention

being turned to it again, unless at some point or other it reaches a

specially high degree of intensity which forces attention to it. Thus, if a

train  of  thought  is  initially  rejected  (consciously,  perhaps)  by  a

judgement  that  it  is  wrong  or  that  it  is  useless  for  the  immediate

intellectual  purposes  in  view,  the  result  may  be  that  this  train  of

thought will proceed, unobserved by consciousness, until the onset of

sleep.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1021

 

      To  sum  up  -  we  describe  a  train  of  thought  such  as  this  as

‘preconscious’; we regard it as completely rational and believe that it

may either have been simply neglected or broken off and suppressed.

Let us add a frank account of how we picture the occurrence of a train

of  ideas.  We  believe  that,  starting  from  a  purposive  idea,  a  given

amount of excitation, which we term ‘cathectic energy’, is displaced

along the associative paths selected by that purposive idea. A train of

thought  which  is  ‘neglected’  is  one  which  has not  received  this

cathexis; a train of thought which is ‘suppressed’ or ‘repudiated’ is one

from which this cathexis has been withdrawn. In both cases they are

left to their own excitations. Under certain conditions a train of thought

with  a  purposive  cathexis  is  capable  of  attracting  the  attention  of

consciousness  to  itself  and  in  that  event,  through  the  agency  of

consciousness,  receives  a  ‘hypercathexis.’  We  shall  be  obliged

presently  to  explain  our  view  of  the  nature  and  function  of

consciousness.

      A  train  of  thought  that  has  been  set  going  like  this  in  the

preconscious may either cease spontaneously or persist. We picture

the first of these outcomes as implying that the energy attaching to the

train of thought is diffused along all the associative paths that radiatefrom it; this energy sets the whole network of thoughts in a state of

excitation which lasts for a certain time and then dies away as the

excitation  in  search  of  discharge  becomes  transformed  into  a

quiescent cathexis. If this first outcome supervenes, the process is of

no  further  significance  so  far  as  dream-formation  is  concerned.

Lurking  in  our  preconscious,  however,  there  are  other  purposive

ideas, which are derived from sources in our unconscious and from

wishes which are always on the alert. These may take control of the

excitation attaching to the group of thoughts which has been left to its

own  devices,  they  may  establish  a  connection  between  it  and  an

unconscious wish, and they may  ‘transfer’ to it the energy belonging

to the unconscious wish. Thenceforward the neglected or suppressed

train of thought is in a position to persist, though the reinforcement it

has received gives it no right of entry into consciousness. We may

express this by saying that what has hitherto been a preconscious

train of thought has now been ‘drawn into the unconscious.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1022

 

   There are other conjunctures which may lead to the formation of a

dream. The preconscious train of thought may have been linked to the

unconscious wish from the first and may for that reason have been

repudiated  by  the  dominant  purposive  cathexis;  or  an  unconscious

wish  may  become  active  for  other  reasons  (from  somatic  causes,

perhaps) and may seek to effect a transference on to the psychical

residues  that  are  uncathected  by  the  Pcs.  without  their  coming

halfway to meet it. But all three cases have the same final outcome: a

train of thought comes into being in the preconscious which is without

a  preconscious  cathexis  but  has  received  a  cathexis  from  an

unconscious wish.

   From this point onwards the train of thought undergoes a series of

transformations  which  we  can  no  longer  recognize  as  normal

psychical processes and which lead to a result that bewilders us - a

psychopathological  structure.  I  will  enumerate  these  processes  and

classify them.      (1)  The  intensities  of  the  individual  ideas  become  capable  of

discharge en bloc and pass over from one idea to another, so that

certain ideas are formed which are endowed with great intensity. And

since this process is repeated several times, the intensity of a whole

train of thought may eventually be concentrated in a single ideational

element. Here we have the fact of ‘compression’ or ‘condensation’,

which has become familiar in the dream-work. It is this that is mainly

responsible for the bewildering impression made on us by dreams, for

nothing  at  all  analogous  to  it  is  known  to  us  in  mental  life  that  is

normal and accessible to consciousness. In normal mental life too, we

find ideas which, being the nodal points or end results of whole chains

of thought, possess a high degree of psychical significance; but their

significance  is  not  expressed  by  any  feature  that  is  obvious  in  a

sensory manner to internal perception; their perceptual presentation is

not  in  any  respect  more  intense  on  account  of  their  psychical

significance. In the process of condensation, on the other hand, every

psychical interconnection is transformed into an intensification of its

ideational content. The case is the same as when, in preparing a book

for the press, I have some word which is of special importance for

understanding the text printed in spaced or heavy type; or in speech I

should pronounce the same word loudly and slowly and with special

emphasis. The first of these two analogies reminds us at once of an

example provided by the dream-work itself: the word ‘trimethylamin’ in

the dream of Irma’s injection. Art historians have drawn our attention

to  the  fact  that  the  earliest  historical  sculptures  obey  a  similar

principle: they express the rank of the persons represented by their

size.  A  king  is  represented  twice  or  three  times  as  large  as  his

attendants or as his defeated enemies. A sculpture of Roman date

would make use of subtler means for producing the same result. The

figure of the Emperor would be placed in the middle, standing erect,

and would be modelled with especial care, while his enemies would

be prostrate at his feet; but he would no longer be a giant among

dwarfs.  The  bows  with  which  inferiors  greet  their  superiors  among

ourselves  to-day  are  an  echo  of  the  same  ancient  principle  of

representation.

      The  direction  in  which  condensations  in  dreams  proceed  is

determined on the one hand by the rational preconscious relations ofthe dream-thoughts, and on the other by the attraction exercised by

visual memories in the unconscious. The outcome of the activity of

condensation is the achievement of the intensities required for forcing

a way through into the perceptual systems.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1023

 

   (2) Owing, once more, to the freedom with which the intensities can

be  transferred,  ‘intermediate  ideas’,  resembling  compromises,  are

constructed  under  the  sway  of  condensation.  (Cf.  the  numerous

instances I have given of this.) This is again something unheard-of in

normal chains of ideas, where the main stress is laid on the selection

and  retention  of  the  ‘right’  ideational  element.  On  the  other  hand,

composite  structures  and  compromises  occur  with  remarkable

frequency when we try to express preconscious thoughts in speech.

They are then regarded as species of ‘slips of the tongue.’

   (3) The ideas which transfer their intensities to each other stand in

the loosest mutual relations. They are linked by associations of a kind

that is scorned by our normal thinking and relegated to the use of

jokes.  In  particular,  we  find  associations  based  on  homonyms  and

verbal similarities treated as equal in value to the rest.

   (4)  Thoughts which are mutually contradictory make no attempt to

do away with each other, but persist side by side. They often combine

to  form  condensations,  just  as  though  there  were  no  contradiction

between  them,  or  arrive  at  compromises  such  as  our  conscious

thoughts would never tolerate but such as are often admitted in our

actions.

   These are some of the most striking of the abnormal processes to

which  the  dream-thoughts,  previously  constructed  on  rational  lines,

are subjected in the course of the dream-work. It will be seen that the

chief characteristic of these processes is that the whole stress is laid

upon making the cathecting energy mobile and capable of discharge;

the  content  and  the  proper  meaning  of  the  psychical  elements  to

which the cathexes are attached are treated as of little consequence.

It might have been supposed that condensation and the formation ofcompromises is only carried out for the sake of facilitating regression,

that is, when it is a question of transforming thoughts into images. But

the analysis - and still more the synthesis - of dreams which include

no  such  regression  to  images,  e.g.  the  dream  of  ‘Autodidasker’,

exhibits the same processes of displacement and condensation as the

rest.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1024

 

 

   Thus we are driven to conclude that two fundamentally different

kinds of psychical process are concerned in the formation of dreams.

One of these produces perfectly rational dream-thoughts, of no less

validity than normal thinking; while the other treats these thoughts in a

manner which is in the highest degree bewildering and irrational. We

have already in Chapter VI segregated this second psychical process

as being the dream-work proper. What light have we now to throw

upon its origin?

   It would not be possible for us to answer this question if we had not

made some headway in the study of the psychology of the neuroses,

and particularly of hysteria. We have found from this that the same

irrational psychical processes, and others that we have not specified,

dominate the production of hysterical symptoms. In hysteria, too, we

come across a series of perfectly rational thoughts, equal in validity to

our conscious thoughts; but to begin with we know nothing of their

existence in this form and we can only reconstruct them subsequently.

If they force themselves upon our notice at any point, we discover by

analysing the symptom which has been produced that these normal

thoughts have been submitted to abnormal treatment: they have been

transformed  into  the  symptom  by  means  of  condensation  and  the

formation of compromises, by way of superficial associations and in

disregard  of  contradictions,  and  also,  it  may  be,  along  the  path  of

regression. In view of the complete identity between the characteristic

features of the dream-work and those of the psychical activity which

issues in psychoneurotic symptoms, we feel justified in carrying overto dreams the conclusions we have been led to by hysteria.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1025

 

      We  accordingly  borrow  the  following  thesis  from  the  theory  of

hysteria: a  normal  train  of  thought  is  only  submitted  to  abnormal

psychical  treatment  of  the  sort  we  have  been  describing  if  an

unconscious wish, derived from infancy and in a state of repression

has been transferred on to it. In accordance with this thesis we have

constructed our theory of dreams on the assumption that the dream-

wish which provides the motive power invariably originates from the

unconscious - an assumption which, as I myself am ready to admit,

cannot  be  proved  to  hold  generally,  though  neither  can  it  be

disproved. But in order to explain what is meant by ‘repression’, a term

with which we have already made play so many times, it is necessary

to proceed a stage further with our psychological scaffolding.

 

      We  have  already  explored  the  fiction  of  a  primitive  psychical

apparatus  whose  activities  are  regulated  by  an  effort  to  avoid  an

accumulation  of  excitation  and  to  maintain  itself  so  far  as  possible

without excitation. For that reason it is built upon the plan of a reflex

apparatus. The power of movement, which is in the first instance a

means  of  bringing  about  internal  alterations  in  its  body,  is  at  its

disposal  as  the  path  to  discharge.  We  went  on  to  discuss  the

psychical consequences of an ‘experience of satisfaction’; and in that

connection we were already able to add a second hypothesis, to the

effect  that  the  accumulation  of  excitation  (brought  about  in  various

ways that need not concern us) is felt as unpleasure and that it sets

the  apparatus  in  action  with  a  view  to  repeating  the  experience  of

satisfaction, which involved a diminution of excitation and was felt as

pleasure.  A  current  of  this  kind  in  the  apparatus,  starting  from

unpleasure and aiming at pleasure, we have termed a ‘wish’; and we

have asserted that only a wish is able to set the apparatus in motion

and that the course of the excitation in it is automatically regulated by

feelings of pleasure and unpleasure. The first wishing seems to havebeen a hallucinatory cathecting of the memory of satisfaction. Such

hallucinations, however, if they were not to be maintained to the point

of exhaustion, proved to be inadequate to bring about the cessation of

the need or, accordingly, the pleasure attaching to satisfaction.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1026

 

   A second activity - or, as we put it, the activity of a second system -

became  necessary,  which  would  not  allow  the  mnemic  cathexis  to

proceed  as  far  as  perception  and  from  there  to  bind  the  psychical

forces; instead, it diverted the excitation arising from the need along a

roundabout path which ultimately, by means of voluntary movement,

altered the external world in such a way that it became possible to

arrive  at  a  real  perception  of  the  object  of  satisfaction.  We  have

already outlined our schematic picture of the psychical apparatus up

to  this  point;  the  two  systems  are  the  germ  of  what,  in  the  fully

developed apparatus, we have described as the Ucs. and Pcs.

      In  order  to  be  able  to  employ  the  power  of  movement  to  make

alterations in the external world that shall be effective, it is necessary

to accumulate a great number of experiences in the mnemic systems

and a multiplicity of permanent records of the associations called up in

this mnemic material by different purposive ideas. We can now carry

our  hypotheses  a  step  further.  The  activity  of  this  second  system,

constantly feeling its way, and alternately sending out and withdrawing

cathexes, needs on the one hand to have the whole of the material of

memory freely at its command; but on the other hand it would be an

unnecessary expenditure of energy if it sent out large quantities of

cathexis along the various paths of thought and thus caused them to

drain away to no useful purpose and diminish the quantity available for

altering the external world. I therefore postulate that for the sake of

efficiency the second system succeeds in retaining the major part of

its cathexes of energy in a state of quiescence and in employing only

a small part on displacement. The mechanics of these processes are

quite  unknown  to  me;  anyone  who  wished  to  take  these  ideas

seriously would have to look for physical analogies to them and find ameans  of  picturing  the  movements  that  accompany  excitation  of

neurones. All that I insist upon is the idea that the activity of the first Ψ-

system  is  directed  towards  securing  the free  discharge  of  the

quantities  of  excitation,  while  the second  system,  by  means  of  the

cathexes emanating from it, succeeds in inhibiting this discharge and

in  transforming  the  cathexis  into  a  quiescent  one,  no  doubt  with  a

simultaneous raising of its level. I presume, therefore, that under the

dominion of the second system the discharge of excitation is governed

by quite different mechanical conditions from those in force under the

dominion  of  the  first  system.  When  once  the  second  system  has

concluded its exploratory thought-activity, it releases the inhibition and

damming-up  of  the  excitations  and  allows  them  to  discharge

themselves in movement.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1027

 

      Some  interesting  reflections  follow  if  we  consider  the  relations

between  this  inhibition  upon  discharge  exercised  by  the  second

system and the regulation effected by the unpleasure principle. Let us

examine  the  antithesis  to  the  primary  experience  of  satisfaction  -

namely, the experience of an external fright. Let us suppose that the

primitive apparatus is impinged upon by a perceptual stimulus which is

a  source  of  painful  excitation.  Unco-ordinated  motor  manifestations

will  follow  until  one  of  them  withdraws  the  apparatus  from  the

perception  and  at  the  same  time  from  the  pain.  If  the  perception

reappears, the movement will at once be repeated (a movement of

flight, it may be) till the perception has disappeared once more. In this

case,  no  inclination  will  remain  to  recathect  the  perception  of  the

source  of  pain,  either  hallucinatorily  or  in  any  other  way.  On  the

contrary, there will be an inclination in the primitive apparatus to drop

the  distressing  mnemic  image  immediately,  if  anything  happens  to

revive it, for the very reason that if its excitation were to overflow into

perception  it  would  provoke  unpleasure  (or,  more  precisely,  would

begin to provoke it). The avoidance of the memory, which is no more

than  a  repetition  of  the  previous  flight  from  the  perception,  is  alsofacilitated by the fact that the memory, unlike the perception, does not

possess enough quality to excite consciousness and thus to attract

fresh cathexis to itself. This effortless and regular avoidance by the

psychical  process  of  the  memory  of  anything  that  had  once  been

distressing  affords  us  the  prototype  and  first  example  of psychical

repression. It is a familiar fact that much of this avoidance of what is

distressing - this ostrich policy - is still to be seen in the normal mental

life of adults.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1028

 

   As a result of the unpleasure principle, then, the first Ψ-system is

totally incapable of bringing anything disagreeable into the context of

its thought. It is unable to do anything but wish. If things remained at

that  point,  the  thought-activity  of  the  second  system  would  be

obstructed, since it requires free access to all the memories laid down

by experience. Two possibilities now present themselves. Either the

activity  of  the  second  system  might  set  itself  entirely  free  from  the

unpleasure principle and proceed without troubling about unpleasure

of memories; or it might find a method of cathecting unpleasurable

memories which would enable it to avoid releasing the unpleasure.

We  may  dismiss  the  first  of  these  possibilities,  for  the  unpleasure

principle  clearly  regulates  the  course  of  excitation  in  the  second

system  as  much  as  in  the  first.  We  are  consequently  left  with  the

remaining  possibility  that  the  second  system  cathects  memories  in

such  a  way  that  there  is  an  inhibition  of  their  discharge,  including,

therefore, an inhibition of discharge (comparable to that of a motor

innervation)  in  the  direction  of  the  development  of  unpleasure.  We

have  therefore  been  led  from  two  directions  to  the  hypothesis  that

cathexis by the second system implies a simultaneous inhibition of the

discharge  of  excitation:  we  have  been  led  to  it  by  regard  for  the

unpleasure principle and also by the principle of the least expenditure

of innervation. Let us bear this firmly in mind, for it is the key to the

whole theory of repression: the second system can only cathect an

idea if it is a position to inhibit any development of unpleasure thatmay proceed from it. Anything that could evade that inhibition would

be  inaccessible  to  the  second  system  as  well  as  to  the  first;  for  it

would promptly be dropped in obedience to the unpleasure principle.

The inhibition of unpleasure need not, however, be a complete one: a

beginning of it must be allowed, since that is what informs the second

system  of  the  nature  of  the  memory  concerned  and  of  its  possible

unsuitability for the purpose which the thought-process has in view.

   I propose to describe the psychical process of which the first system

alone admits as the ‘primary process’, and the process which results

from the inhibition imposed by the second system as the ‘secondary

process’.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1029

 

   There is yet another reason for which, as I can show, the second

system is obliged to correct the primary process. The primary process

endeavours to bring about a discharge of excitation in order that, with

the help of the amount of excitation thus accumulated, it may establish

a  ‘perceptual  identity’.  The  secondary  process,  however,  has

abandoned  this  intention  and  taken  on  another  in  its  place  -  the

establishment of a ‘thought identity’. All thinking is no more than a

circuitous path from the memory of a satisfaction (a memory which

has been adopted as a purposive idea) to an identical cathexis of the

same  memory  which  it  is  hoped  to  attain  once  more  through  an

intermediate stage of motor experiences. Thinking must concern itself

with the connecting paths between ideas, without being led astray by

the intensities of those ideas. But it is obvious that condensations of

ideas,  as  well  as  intermediate  and  compromise  structures,  must

obstruct the attainment of the identity aimed at. Since they substitute

one  idea  for  another,  they  cause  a  deviation  from  the  path  which

would  have  led  on  from  the  first  idea.  Processes  of  this  kind  are

therefore scrupulously avoided in secondary thinking. It is easy to see,

too, that the unpleasure principle, which in other respects supplies the

thought-process with its most important signposts, puts difficulties in

its path towards establishing ‘thought identity’. Accordingly, thinkingmust aim at freeing itself more and more from exclusive regulation by

the unpleasure principle and at restricting the development of affect in

thought-activity to the minimum required for acting as a signal. The

achievement  of  this  greater  delicacy  in  functioning  is  aimed  at  by

means of a further hypercathexis, brought about by consciousness. As

we well know, however, that aim is seldom attained completely, even

in  normal  mental  life,  and  our  thinking  always  remains  exposed  to

falsification by interference from the unpleasure principle.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1030

 

 

      This,  however,  is  not  the  gap  in  the  functional  efficiency  of  our

mental  apparatus  which  makes  it  possible  for  thoughts,  which

represent themselves as products of the secondary thought activity, to

become  subject  to  the  primary  psychical  process  -  for  such  is  the

formula  in  which  we  can  now  describe  the  activity  which  leads  to

dreams  and  to  hysterical  symptoms.  Inefficiency  arises  from  the

convergence of two factors derived from our developmental history.

One of these factors devolves entirely upon the mental apparatus and

has had a decisive influence on the relation between the two systems,

while the other makes itself felt to a variable degree and introduces

instinctual  forces  of  organic  origin  into  mental  life.  Both  of  them

originate  in  childhood  and  are  a  precipitate  of  the  modifications

undergone by our mental and somatic organism since our infancy.

   When I described one of the psychical processes occurring in the

mental apparatus as the ‘primary’ one, what I had in mind was not

merely considerations of relative importance and efficiency; I intended

also  to  choose  a  name  which  would  give  an  indication  of  its

chronological priority. It is true that, so far as we know, no psychical

apparatus  exists  which  possesses  a  primary  process  only  and  that

such an apparatus is to that extent a theoretical fiction. But this much

is a fact: the primary processes are present in the mental apparatus

from  the  first,  while  it  is  only  during  the  course  of  life  that  the

secondary  processes  unfold,  and  come  to  inhibit  and  overlay  theprimary ones; it may even be that their complete domination is not

attained  until  the  prime  of  life.  In  consequence  of  the  belated

appearance  of  the  secondary  processes,  the  core  of  our  being,

consisting of unconscious wishful impulses, remains inaccessible to

the understanding and inhibition of the preconscious; the part played

by the latter is restricted once and for all to directing along the most

expedient paths the wishful impulses that arise from the unconscious.

These unconscious wishes exercise a compelling force upon all later

mental trends, a force which those trends are obliged to fall in with or

which they may perhaps endeavour to divert and direct to higher aims.

A further result of the belated appearance of the secondary process is

that a wide sphere of mnemic material is inaccessible to preconscious

cathexis.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1031

 

      Among  these  wishful  impulses  derived  from  infancy,  which  can

neither be destroyed nor inhibited, there are some whose fulfilment

would be a contradiction of the purposive ideas of secondary thinking.

The fulfilment of these wishes would no longer generate an affect of

pleasure but of unpleasure; and it is precisely this transformation of

affect which constitutes the essence of what we term ‘repression’. The

problem of repression lies in the question of how it is and owing to

what motive forces that this transformation occurs; but it is a problem

that we need only touch upon here. It is enough for us to be clear that

a transformation of this kind does occur in the course of development -

we have only to recall the way in which disgust emerges in childhood

after having been absent to begin with - and that it is related to the

activity of the secondary system. The memories on the basis of which

the unconscious wish brings about the release of affect were never

accessible  to  the Pcs.,  and  consequently  the  release  of  the  affect

attaching to those memories cannot be inhibited either. It is for the

very  reason  of  this  generation  of  affect  that  these  ideas  are  now

inaccessible even by way of the preconscious thoughts on to which

they  have  transferred  their  wishful  force.  On  the  contrary,  theunpleasure principle takes control and causes the Pcs. to turn away

from  the  transference  thoughts.  They  are  left  to  themselves  -

‘repressed’ - and thus it is that the presence of a store of infantile

memories,  which  has  from  the  first  been  held  back  from  the Pcs.,

becomes a sine qua non for repression.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1032

 

   In the most favourable cases the generation of unpleasure ceases

along with the withdrawal of cathexis from the transference thoughts in

the Pcs.;  and  this  outcome  signifies  that  the  intervention  of  the

unpleasure principle has served a useful purpose. But it is another

matter  when  the  repressed  unconscious  wish  receives  an  organic

reinforcement, which it passes on to its transference thoughts; in that

way it may place them in a position to make an attempt at forcing their

way through with their excitation, even if they have lost their cathexis

from the Pcs. There then follows a defensive struggle - for the Pcs. in

turn reinforces its opposition to the repressed thoughts (i.e. produces

an ‘anticathexis’) - and thereafter the transference thoughts, which are

the vehicles of the unconscious wish, force their way through in some

form of compromise which is reached by the production of a symptom.

But from the moment at which the repressed thoughts are strongly

cathected by the unconscious wishful impulse and, on the other hand,

abandoned by the preconscious cathexis, they become subject to the

primary psychical process and their one aim is motor discharge or, if

the  path  is  open,  hallucinatory  revival  of  the  desired  perceptual

identity.  We  have  already  found  empirically  that  the  irrational

processes we have described are only carried out with thoughts that

are under repression. We can now see our way a little further into the

whole position. The irrational processes which occur in the psychical

apparatus  are  the primary  ones.  They  appear  wherever  ideas  are

abandoned by the preconscious cathexis, are left to themselves and

can  become  charged  with  the  uninhibited  energy  from  the

unconscious  which  is  striving  to  find  an  outlet.  Some  other

observations lend support to the view that these processes which aredescribed as irrational are not in fact falsifications of normal processes

-  intellectual  errors  -  but  are  modes  of  activity  of  the  psychical

apparatus that have been freed from an inhibition. Thus we find that

the transition from preconscious excitation to movement is governed

by the same processes, and that the linking of preconscious ideas to

words  may  easily  exhibit  the  same  displacements  and  confusions,

which  are  then  attributed  to  inattention.  Evidence,  finally,  of  the

increase  in  activity  which  becomes  necessary  when  these  primary

modes of functioning are inhibited is to be found in the fact that we

produce a comic effect, that is, a surplus of energy which has to be

discharged in laughter, if we allow these modes of thinking to force

their way through into consciousness.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1033

 

 

   The theory of the psychoneuroses asserts as an indisputable and

invariable fact that only sexual wishful impulses from infancy, which

have undergone repression (i.e. a transformation of their affect) during

the developmental period of childhood, are capable of being revived

during later  developmental  periods  (whether  as  a  result  of  the

subject’s  sexual  constitution,  which  is  derived  from  an  initial

bisexuality, or as a result of unfavourable influences acting upon the

course of his sexual life) and are thus able to furnish the motive force

for the formation of psychoneurotic symptoms of every kind. It is only

by reference to these sexual forces that we can close the gaps that

are  still  patent  in  the  theory  of  repression.  I  will  leave  it  an  open

question  whether  these  sexual  and  infantile  factors  are  equally

required in the theory of dreams: I will leave that theory incomplete at

this  point,  since  I  have  already  gone  a  step  beyond  what  can  be

demonstrated in assuming that dream-wishes are invariably derived

from the unconscious.¹ Nor do I propose to enquire further into the

nature of the distinction between the play of psychical forces in the

formation of dreams and in that of hysterical symptoms: we are still

without a sufficiently accurate knowledge of one of the two objects ofthe comparison.

 

   ¹ Here and elsewhere I have intentionally left gaps in the treatment of my theme because to

fill them would on the one hand require too great an effort and on the other would involve my
basing myself on material that is alien to the subject of dreams. For instance, I have omitted to
state  whether  I  attribute  different  meanings  to  the  words  ‘suppressed’  and  ‘repressed.’  It
should have been clear, however, that the latter lays more stress than the former upon the
fact of attachment to the unconscious. Nor have I entered into the obvious problem of why the
dream-thoughts are subjected to distortion by the censorship even in cases where they have
abandoned the progressive path towards consciousness and have chosen the regressive one.
And there are many similar omissions. What I was above all anxious to do was to create an
impression of the problems to which a further analysis of the dream-work must lead and to
give a hint of the other topics with which that further analysis would come into contact. It has
not always been easy for me to decide the point at which to break off my pursuit of this line of
exposition. There are special reasons, which may not be what my readers expect, why I have
not given any exhaustive treatment to the part played in dreams by the world of sexual ideas
and  why  I  have  avoided  analysing  dreams  of  obviously  sexual  content.  Nothing  could  be
further from my own views or from the theoretical opinions which I hold in neuropathology
than  to  regard  sexual  life  as  something  shameful,  with  which  neither  a  physician  nor  a
scientific research worker has any concern. Moreover, the moral indignation by which the
translator  of  the Oneirocritica  of  Artemidorus  of  Daldis  allowed  himself  to  be  led  into
withholding the chapter on sexual dreams from the knowledge a his readers strikes me as
laughable. What governed my decision was simply my seeing that an explanation of sexual
dreams would involve me deeply in the still unsolved problems of perversion and bisexuality;
and I accordingly reserved this material for another occasion.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1034

 

   There is, however, another point to which I attach importance; and I

must confess that it is solely on its account that I have embarked here

upon  all  these  discussions  of  the  two  psychical  systems  and  their

modes of activity and of repression. It is not now a question of whether

I have formed an approximately correct opinion of the psychological

factors  with  which  we  are  concerned,  or  whether,  which  is  quite

possible in such difficult matters, my picture of them is distorted and

incomplete. However many changes may be made in our reading of

the psychical censorship and of the rational and abnormal revisions

made of the dream-content, it remains true that processes of this sort

are at work in the formation of dreams and that they show the closest

analogy  in  their  essentials  to  the  processes  observable  in  the

formation  of  hysterical  symptoms.  A  dream,  however,  is  nopathological phenomenon; it presupposes no disturbance of psychical

equilibrium; it leaves behind it no loss of efficiency. The suggestion

may be made that no conclusions as to the dreams of normal people

can be drawn from my dreams or those of my patients; but this, I think,

is  an  objection  which  can  be  safely  disregarded.  If,  then,  we  may

argue  back  from  the  phenomena  to  their  motive  forces,  we  must

recognize that the psychical mechanism employed by neuroses is not

created by the impact of a pathological disturbance upon the mind but

is present already in the normal structure of the mental apparatus. The

two psychical systems, the censorship upon the passage from one of

them to the other, the inhibition and overlaying of one activity by the

other, the relations of both of them to consciousness - or whatever

more correct interpretations of the observed facts may take their place

-  all  of  these  form  part  of  the  normal  structure  of  our  mental

instrument,  and  dreams  show  us  one  of  the  paths  leading  to  an

understanding of its structure. If we restrict ourselves to the minimum

of new knowledge which has been established with certainty, we can

still  say  this  of  dreams:  they  have  proved  that what  is  suppressed

continues to exist in normal people as well as abnormal, and remains

capable of psychical functioning. Dreams themselves are among the

manifestations of this suppressed material; this is so theoretically in

every case, and it can be observed empirically in a great number of

cases at least, and precisely in cases which exhibit most clearly the

striking  peculiarities  of  dream-life.  In  waking  life  the  suppressed

material in the mind is prevented from finding expression and is cut off

from  internal  perception  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  contradictions

present in it are eliminated - one side being disposed of in favour of

the other; but during the night, under the sway of an impetus towards

the  construction  of  compromises,  this  suppressed  material  finds

methods and means of forcing its way into consciousness.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1035

 

                    Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo.¹

    The interpretation of dreams is the royal road to a knowledge of the

unconscious activities of the mind.

      By  analysing  dreams  we  can  take  a  step  forward  in  our

understanding of the composition of that most marvellous and most

mysterious  of  all  instruments.  Only  a  small  step,  no  doubt;  but  a

beginning. And this beginning will enable us to proceed further with its

analysis,  on  the  basis  of  other  structures  which  must  be  termed

pathological. For illnesses - those, at least, which are rightly named

‘functional’ - do not presuppose the disintegration of the apparatus or

the production of fresh splits in its interior. They are to be explained on

a dynamic basis - by the strengthening and weakening of the various

components in the interplay of forces, so many of whose effects are

hidden from view while functions are normal. I hope to be able to show

elsewhere how the compounding of the apparatus out of two agencies

makes  it  possible  for  the  normal  mind  too  to  function  with  greater

delicacy than would be possible with only one of them.²

 

   ¹ [‘If I cannot bend the Higher Powers, I will move the Infernal Regions.’]

   ² Dreams are not the only phenomena which allow us to find a basis for psychopathology in

psychology. In a short series of papers (1898b and 1899a) which is not yet completed, I have
attempted to interpret number of phenomena of daily life as evidence in favour of the same
conclusions. [Added 1909:] These, together with some further papers on forgetting, slips of
the  tongue,  bungled  actions,  etc.,  have  since  been  collected  under  the  title  of The
Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901b).
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1036

 

                                          (F)

 

                THE UNCONSCIOUS AND CONSCIOUSNESS - REALITY

 

   It will be seen on closer consideration that what the psychological

discussion in the preceding sections invites us to assume is not the

existence of two systems near the motor end of the apparatus but the

existence  of  two  kinds  of processes  of  excitation  or modes  of  its

discharge. It is all one to us, for we must always be prepared to drop

our  conceptual  scaffolding  if  we  feel  that  we  are  in  a  position  toreplace  it  by  something  that  approximates  more  closely  to  the

unknown reality. So let us try to correct some conceptions which might

be misleading so long as we looked upon the two systems in the most

literal and crudest sense as two localities in the mental apparatus -

conceptions which have left their traces in the expressions ‘to repress’

and ‘to force a way through.’ Thus, we may speak of an unconscious

thought seeking to convey itself into the preconscious so as to be able

then to force its way through into consciousness. What we have in

mind here is not the forming of a second thought situated in a new

place,  like  a  transcription  which  continues  to  exist  alongside  the

original; and the notion of forcing a way through into consciousness

must  be  kept  carefully  free  from  any  idea  of  a  change  of  locality.

Again, we may speak of a preconscious thought being repressed or

driven out and then taken over by the unconscious. These images,

derived from a set of ideas relating to a struggle for a piece of ground,

may tempt us to suppose that it is literally true that a mental grouping

in one locality has been brought to an end and replaced by a fresh

one in another locality. Let us replace these metaphors by something

that seems to correspond better to the real state of affairs, and let us

say instead that some particular mental grouping has had a cathexis

of energy attached to it or withdrawn from it, so that the structure in

question  has  come  under  the  sway  of  a  particular  agency  or  been

withdrawn from it. What we are doing here is once again to replace a

topographical way of representing things by a dynamic one. What we

regard  as  mobile  is  not  the  psychical  structure  itself  but  its

innervation.¹

   Nevertheless, I consider it expedient and justifiable to continue to

make use of the figurative image of the two systems. We can avoid

any possible abuse of this method of representation by recollecting

that ideas, thoughts and psychical structures in general must never be

regarded as localized in organic elements of the nervous system but

rather,  as  one  might  say, between  them,  where  resistances  and

facilitations  [Bahnungen]  provide  the  corresponding  correlates.

Everything that can be an object of our internal perception is virtual,

like the image produced in a telescope by the passage of light-rays.

But we are justified in assuming the existence of the systems (which

are not in any way psychical entities themselves and can never beaccessible  to  our  psychical  perception)  like  the  lenses  of  the

telescope, which cast the image. And, if we pursue this analogy, we

may compare the censorship between two systems to the refraction

which takes place when a ray of light passes into a new medium.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1925:] It became necessary to elaborate and modify thus view after it

was recognized that the essential feature of a preconscious idea was the fact of its being
connected with the residues of verbal presentations. Cf. ‘The Unconscious’ (1915e).
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1037

 

 

   So far we have been psychologizing on our own account. It is time

now  to  consider  the  theoretical  views  which  govern  present-day

psychology  and  to  examine  their  relation  to  our  hypotheses.  The

problem of the unconscious in psychology is, in the forcible words of

Lipps  (1897),  less a  psychological  problem  than the  problem  of

psychology. So long as psychology dealt with this problem by a verbal

explanation to the effect that ‘psychical’ meant ‘conscious’ and that to

speak of ‘unconscious psychical processes’ was palpable nonsense,

any psychological evaluation of the observations made by physicians

upon abnormal mental states was out of the question. The physician

and the philosopher can only come together if they both recognize that

the  term  ‘unconscious  psychical  processes’  is  ‘the  appropriate  and

justified expression of a solidly established fact’. The physician can

only shrug his shoulders when he is assured that ‘consciousness is an

indispensable characteristic of what is psychical’, and perhaps, if he

still feels enough respect for the utterances of philosophers, he may

presume  that  they  have  not  been  dealing  with  the  same  thing  or

working  at  the  same  science.  For  even  a  single  understanding

observation of a neurotic’s mental life or a single analysis of a dream

must  leave  him  with  an  unshakeable  conviction  that  the  most

complicated  and  most  rational  thought-processes,  which  can  surely

not be denied the name of psychical processes, can occur without

exciting  the  subject’s  consciousness.¹  It  is  true  that  the  physical

cannot learn of these unconscious processes until they have producedsome  effect  upon  consciousness  which  can  be  communicated  or

observed. But this conscious effect may exhibit a psychical character

quite different from that of the unconscious process, so that internal

perception  cannot  possibly  regard  the  one  as  a  substitute  for  the

other. The physician must feel at liberty to proceed by inference from

the conscious effect to the unconscious psychical process. He thus

learns that the conscious effect is only a remote psychical result of the

unconscious process and that the latter has not become conscious as

such; and moreover that the latter was present and operative even

without betraying its existence in any way to consciousness.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914:] I am happy to be able to point to an author who has drawn from

the study of dreams the same conclusions as I have on the relation between conscious and
unconscious  activity.  Du  Prel  (1885,  47)  writes:  ‘The  problem  of  the  nature  of  the  mind
evidently  calls  for  a  preliminary  investigation  as  to  whether  consciousness  and  mind  are
identical. This preliminary question is answered in the negative by dreams, which show that
the concept of the mind is a wider one than that of consciousness, in the same kind of way in
which the gravitational force of a heavenly body extends beyond its range of luminosity.’ And
again (ibid., 306): ‘It is a truth which cannot be too distinctly borne in mind that consciousness
is not co-extensive with mind.’
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1038

 

   It is essential to abandon the overvaluation of the property of being

conscious before it becomes possible to form any correct view of the

origin of what is mental. In Lipps’s words, the unconscious must be

assumed to be the general basis of psychical life. The unconscious is

the larger sphere, which includes within it the smaller sphere of the

conscious.  Everything  conscious  has  an  unconscious  preliminary

stage; whereas what is unconscious may remain at that stage and

nevertheless  claim  to  be  regarded  as  having  the  full  value  of  a

psychical process. The unconscious is the true psychical reality; in its

innermost nature it is as much unknown to us as the reality of the

external  world,  and  it  is  as  incompletely  presented  by  the  data  of

consciousness as is the external world by the communications of our

sense organs.

   Now that the old antithesis between conscious life and dream life

has been reduced to its proper proportions by the establishment ofunconscious  psychical  reality,  a  number  of  dream-problems  with

which  earlier  writers  were  deeply  concerned  have  lost  their

significance.  Thus  some  of  the  activities  whose  successful

performance in dreams excited astonishment are now no longer to be

attributed  to  dreams  but  to  unconscious  thinking,  which  is  active

during the day no less than at night. If, as Scherner has said, dreams

appear to engage in making symbolic representations of the body, we

now  know  that  those  representations  are  the  product  of  certain

unconscious  phantasies  (deriving,  probably,  from  sexual  impulses)

which find expression not only in dreams but also in hysterical phobias

and other symptoms. If a dream carries on the activities of the day and

completes them and even brings valuable fresh ideas to light, all we

need do is to strip it of the dream disguise, which is the product of

dream-work and the mark of assistance rendered by obscure forces

from the depths of the mind (cf. the Devil in Tartini’s sonata dream);

the intellectual achievement is due to the same mental forces which

produce  every  similar  result  during  the  daytime.  We  are  probably

inclined greatly to over-estimate the conscious character of intellectual

and artistic production as well. Accounts given us by some of the most

highly productive men, such as Goethe and Helmholtz, show rather

that what is essential and new in their creations came to them without

premeditation and as an almost ready-made whole. There is nothing

strange if in other cases, where a concentration of every intellectual

faculty was needed, conscious activity also contributed its share. But it

is the much-abused privilege of conscious activity, wherever it plays a

part, to conceal every other activity from our eyes.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1039

 

 

   It would scarcely repay the trouble if we were to treat the historical

significance  of  dreams  as  a  separate  topic.  A  dream  may  have

impelled some chieftain to embark upon a bold enterprise the success

of which has changed history. But this only raises a fresh problem so

long as a dream is regarded as an alien power in contrast to the othermore familiar forces of the mind; no such problem remains if a dream

is recognized as a form of expression of impulses which are under the

pressure of resistance during the day but which have been able to find

reinforcement during the night from deep-lying sources of excitation.¹

The  respect  paid  to  dreams  in  antiquity  is,  however,  based  upon

correct  psychological  insight  and  is  the  homage  paid  to  the

uncontrolled  and  indestructible  forces  in  the  human  mind,  to  the

‘daemonic’ power which produces the dream-wish and which we find

at work in our unconscious.

   It is not without intention that I speak of ‘our’ unconscious. For what I

thus describe is not the same as the unconscious of the philosophers

or even the unconscious of Lipps. By them the term is used merely to

indicate a contrast with the conscious: the thesis which they dispute

with so much heat and defend with so much energy is the thesis that

apart from conscious there are also unconscious psychical processes.

Lipps carries things further with his assertion that the whole of what is

psychical  exists  unconsciously  and  that  a  part  of  it  also  exists

consciously. But it is not in order to establish this thesis that we have

summoned  up  the  phenomena  of  dreams  and  of  the  formation  of

hysterical symptoms; the observation of normal waking life would by

itself suffice to prove it beyond any doubt. The new discovery that we

have been taught by the analysis of psychopathological structures and

of the first member of that class - the dream - lies in the fact that the

unconscious  (that  is,  the  psychical)  is  found  as  a  function  of  two

separate systems and that this is the case in normal as well as in

pathological life. Thus there are two kinds of unconscious, which have

not  yet  been  distinguished  by  psychologists.  Both  of  them  are

unconscious in the sense used by psychology; but in our sense one of

them, which we term the Ucs., is also inadmissible to consciousness,

while  we  term  the  other  the Pcs.  because  its  excitations  -  after

observing certain rules, it is true, and perhaps only after passing a

fresh censorship, though nonetheless without regard to the Ucs. - are

able  to  reach  consciousness.  The  fact  that  excitations  in  order  to

reach consciousness must pass through a fixed series or hierarchy of

agencies (which is revealed to us by the modifications made in them

by  censorship)  has  enabled  us  to  construct  a  spatial  analogy.  We

have described the relations of the two systems to each other and toconsciousness by saying that the system Pcs. stands like a screen

between the system Ucs. and consciousness. The system Pcs. not

merely bars access to consciousness, it also controls access to the

power of voluntary movement and has at its disposal for distribution a

mobile cathectic energy, a part of which is familiar to us in the form of

attention.²

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1911:] Cf. in this connection AIexander the Great’s dream during his

siege of Tyre ( ).

   ² [Footnote added 1914:] Cf. my remarks on the concept of the unconscious in psycho-

analysis  (Freud,  1912g),  first  published  in  English  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research,  26,  in  which  I  have  distinguished  the  descriptive,  dynamic  and
systematic meanings of the highly ambiguous word ‘unconscious’.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1040

 

   We must avoid, too, the distinction between ‘supraconscious’ and

‘subconscious’,  which  has  become  so  popular  in  the  more  recent

literature  of  the  psychoneuroses,  for  such  a  distinction  seems

precisely calculated to stress the equivalence of what is psychical to

what is conscious.

 

      But  what  part  is  there  left  to  be  played  in  our  scheme  by

consciousness, which was once so omnipotent and hid all else from

view? Only  that  of  a  sense-organ  for  the  perception  of  psychical

qualities.  In  accordance  with  the  ideas  underlying  our  attempt  at  a

schematic picture, we can only regard conscious perception as the

function proper to a particular system; and for this the abbreviation Cs.

seems appropriate. In its mechanical properties we regard this system

as resembling the perceptual systems Pcpt.: as being susceptible to

excitation by qualities but incapable of retaining traces of alterations -

that is to say, as having no memory. The psychical apparatus, which

is turned towards the external world with its sense-organ of the Pcpt.

systems, is itself the external world in relation to the sense-organ of

the Cs., whose teleological justification resides in this circumstance.

Here we once more meet the principle of the hierarchy of agencies,

which  seems  to  govern  the  structure  of  the  apparatus.  Excitatorymaterial flows in to the Cs. sense-organ from two directions: from the

Pcpt. system, whose excitation, determined by qualities, is probably

submitted to a fresh revision before it becomes a conscious sensation,

and  from  the  interior  of  the  apparatus  itself,  whose  quantitative

processes  are  felt  qualitatively  in  the  pleasure-unpleasure  series

when,  subject  to  certain  modifications,  they  make  their  way  to

consciousness.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1041

 

      Those  philosophers  who  have  become  aware  that  rational  and

highly complex thought-structures are possible without consciousness

playing any part in them have found difficulty in assigning any function

to consciousness; it has seemed to them that it can be no more than a

superfluous reflected picture of the completed psychical process. We,

on  the  other  hand,  are  rescued  from  this  embarrassment  by  the

analogy  between  our Cs.  system  and  the  perceptual  systems.  We

know that perception by our sense-organs has the result of directing a

cathexis of attention to the paths along which the in-coming sensory

excitation is spreading: the qualitative excitation of the Pcpt. system

acts  as  a  regulator  of  the  discharge  of  the  mobile  quantity  in  the

psychical  apparatus.  We  can  attribute  the  same  function  to  the

overlying sense-organ of the Cs. system. By perceiving new qualities,

it  makes  a  new  contribution  to  directing  the  mobile  quantities  of

cathexis and distributing them in an expedient fashion. By the help of

its perception of pleasure and unpleasure it influences the discharge

of the cathexes within what is otherwise an unconscious apparatus

operating  by  means  of  the  displacement  of  quantities.  It  seems

probable that in the first instance the unpleasure principle regulates

the  displacement  of  cathexes  automatically.  But  it  is  quite  possible

that  consciousness  of  these  qualities  may  introduce  in  addition  a

second  and  more  discriminating  regulation,  which  is  even  able  to

oppose  the  former  one,  and  which  perfects  the  efficiency  of  the

apparatus by enabling it, in contradiction to its original plan, to cathect

and work over even what is associated with the release of unpleasure.We learn from the psychology of the neuroses that these processes of

regulation carried out by the qualitative excitation of the sense organs

play  a  great  part  in  the  functional  activity  of  the  apparatus.  The

automatic  domination  of  the  primary  unpleasure  principle  and  the

consequent restriction imposed upon efficiency are interrupted by the

processes  of  sensory  regulation,  which  are  themselves  in  turn

automatic in action. We find that repression (which, though it served a

useful purpose to begin with, leads ultimately to a damaging loss of

inhibition and mental control) affects memories so much more easily

than perceptions because the former can receive no extra cathexis

from the excitation of the psychical sense-organs. It is true on the one

hand  that  a  thought  which  has  to  be  warded  off  cannot  become

conscious,  because  it  has  undergone  repression;  but  on  the  other

hand  it  sometimes  happens  that  a  thought  of  this  kind  is  only

repressed  because  for  other  reasons  it  has  been  withdrawn  from

conscious  perception.  Here  are  some  hints  of  which  we  take

advantage in our therapeutic procedure in order to undo repressions

which have already been effected.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1042

 

      The  value  of  the  hypercathexis  which  is  set  up  in  the  mobile

quantities by the regulating influence of the sense organ of the Cs.

cannot be better illustrated in its teleological aspect than by the fact of

its creation of a new series of qualities and consequently of a new

process  of  regulation  which  constitutes  the  superiority  of  men  over

animals. Thought-processes are in themselves without quality, except

for the pleasurable and unpleasurable excitations which accompany

them,  and  which,  in  view  of  their  possible  disturbing  effect  upon

thinking, must be kept within bounds. In order that thought-processes

may acquire quality, they are associated in human beings with verbal

memories,  whose  residues  of  quality  are  sufficient  to  draw  the

attention  of  consciousness  to  them  and  to  endow  the  process  of

thinking with a new mobile cathexis from consciousness.

   The whole multiplicity of the problems of consciousness can only begrasped by an analysis of the thought-processes in hysteria. These

give one the impression that the transition from a preconscious to a

conscious cathexis is marked by a censorship similar to that between

the Ucs.  and  the Pcs.  This  censorship,  too,  only  comes  into  force

above  a  certain  quantitative  limit,  so  that  thought-structures  of  low

intensity  escape  it.  Examples  of  every  possible  variety  of  how  a

thought can be withheld from consciousness or can force its way into

consciousness  under  certain  limitations  are  to  be  found  included

within the framework of psychoneurotic phenomena; and they all point

to  the  intimate  and  reciprocal  relations  between  censorship  and

consciousness. I will bring these psychological reflections to an end

with a report of two such examples.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1043

 

   I was called in to a consultation last year to examine an intelligent

and unembarrassed-looking girl. She was most surprisingly dressed.

For though as a rule a woman’s clothes are carefully considered down

to the last detail, she was wearing one of her stockings hanging down

and two of the buttons on her blouse were undone. She complained of

having pains in her leg and, without being asked, exposed her calf.

But what she principally complained of was, to use her own words,

that she had a feeling in her body as though there was something

‘stuck into it’ which was ‘moving backwards and forwards’ and was

‘shaking’ her through and through: sometimes it made her whole body

feel ‘stiff.’ My medical colleague, who was present at the examination,

looked at me; he found no difficulty in understanding the meaning of

her complaint. But what struck both of us as extraordinary was the fact

that it meant nothing to the patient’s mother - though she must often

have found herself in the situation which her child was describing. The

girl herself had no notion of the bearing of her remarks; for if she had,

she would never have given voice to them. In this case it had been

possible to hoodwink the censorship into allowing a phantasy which

would normally have been kept in the preconscious to emerge into

consciousness under the innocent disguise of making a complaint.   Here is another example. A fourteen-year-old boy came to me for

psycho-analytic  treatment  suffering  from tic  convulsif,  hysterical

vomiting, headaches, etc. I began the treatment by assuring him that if

he shut his eyes he would see pictures or have ideas, which he was

then to communicate to me. He replied in pictures. His last impression

before coming to me was revived visually in his memory. He had been

playing at draughts with his uncle and saw the board in front of him.

He thought of various positions, favourable or unfavourable, and of

moves that one must not make. He then saw a dagger lying on the

board - an object that belonged to his father but which his imagination

placed on the board. Then there was a sickle lying on the board and

next a scythe. And there now appeared a picture of an old peasant

mowing the grass in front of the patient’s distant home with a scythe.

After a few days I discovered the meaning of this series of pictures.

The boy had been upset by an unhappy family situation. He had a

father  who  was  a  hard  man,  liable  to  fits  of  rage,  who  had  been

unhappily  married  to  the  patient’s  mother,  and  whose  educational

methods had consisted of threats. His father had been divorced from

his mother, a tender and affectionate woman, had married again and

had one day brought a young woman home with him who was to be

the boy’s new mother. It was during the first few days after this that

the fourteen-year-old boy’s illness had come on. His suppressed rage

against his father was what had constructed this series of pictures with

their understandable allusions. The material for them was provided by

a recollection from mythology. The sickle was the one with which Zeus

castrated  his  father;  the  scythe  and  the  picture  of  the  old  peasant

represented Kronos, the violent old man who devoured his children

and on whom Zeus took such unfilial vengeance. His father’s marriage

gave the boy an opportunity of repaying the reproaches and threats

which  he  had  heard  from  his  father  long  before  because  he  had

played with his genitals. (Cf. the playing at draughts; the forbidden

moves;  the  dagger  which  could  be  used  to  kill.)  In  this  case  long-

repressed memories and derivatives from them which had remained

unconscious slipped into consciousness by a roundabout path in the

form of apparently meaningless pictures.

                             The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1044

 

 

   Thus I would look for the theoretical value of the study of dreams in

the  contributions  it  makes  to  psychological  knowledge  and  in  the

preliminary  light  it  throws  on  the  problems  of  the  psychoneuroses.

Who can guess the importance of the results which might be obtained

from a thorough understanding of the structure and functions of the

mental  apparatus,  since  even  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge

allows us to exert a favourable therapeutic influence on the curable

forms of psychoneurosis? But what of the practical value of this study

- I hear the question raised - as a means towards an understanding of

the  mind,  towards  a  revelation  of  the  hidden  characteristics  of

individual men? Have not the unconscious impulses brought out by

dreams  the  importance  of  real  forces  in  mental  life?  Is  the  ethical

significance of suppressed wishes to be made light of - wishes which,

just as they lead to dreams, may some day lead to other things?

      I  do  not  feel  justified  in  answering  these  questions.  I  have  not

considered this side of the problem of dreams further. I think however,

that the Roman emperor was in the wrong when he had one of his

subjects executed because he had dreamt of murdering the emperor.

He should have begun by trying to find out what the dream meant;

most probably its meaning was not what it appeared to be. And even if

a dream with another content had had this act of lèse majesté as its

meaning, would it not be right to bear in mind Plato’s dictum that the

virtuous man is content to dream what a wicked man really does? I

think it is best, therefore, to acquit dreams. Whether we are to attribute

reality  to  unconscious  wishes,  I  cannot  say.  It  must  be  denied,  of

course,  to  any  transitional  or  intermediate  thoughts.  If  we  look  at

unconscious  wishes  reduced  to  their  most  fundamental  and  truest

shape, we shall have to conclude, no doubt, that psychical reality is a

particular form of existence not to be confused with material reality.

Thus  there  seems  to  be  no  justification  for  people’s  reluctance  in

accepting responsibility for the immorality of their dreams. When the

mode of functioning of the mental apparatus is rightly appreciated and

the relation between the conscious and the unconscious understood,the greater part of what is ethically objectionable in our dream and

phantasy  lives  will  be  found  to  disappear.  In  the  words  of  Hanns

Sachs: ‘If we look in our consciousness at something that has been

told up by a dream about a contemporary (real) situation, we ought not

to  be  surprised  to  find  that  the  monster  which  we  saw  under  the

magnifying glass of analysis turns out to be a tiny infusorian.’

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1045

 

   Actions and consciously expressed opinions are as a rule enough

for practical purposes in judging men’s characters. Actions deserve to

be considered first and foremost; for many impulses which force their

way through to consciousness are then brought to nothing by the real

forces of mental life before they can mature into deeds. In fact, such

impulses often meet with no psychical obstacles to their progress, for

the  very  reason  that  the  unconscious  is  certain  that  they  will  be

stopped at some other stage. It is in any case instructive to get to

know the much trampled soil from which our virtues proudly spring.

Very rarely does the complexity of a human character, driven hither

and  thither  by  dynamic  forces,  submit  to  a  choice  between  simple

alternatives, as our antiquated morality would have us believe.

   And the value of dreams for giving us knowledge of the future?

There is of course no question of that. It would be truer to say instead

that they give us knowledge of the past. For dreams are derived from

the past in every sense. Nevertheless the ancient belief that dreams

foretell the future is not wholly devoid of truth. By picturing our wishes

as  fulfilled,  dreams  are  after  all  leading  us  into  the  future.  But  this

future, which the dreamer pictures as the present, has been moulded

by his indestructible wish into a perfect likeness of the past.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1046

 

                                    APPENDIX A

                         A PREMONITORY DREAM FULFILLED

 

Frau  B.,  an  estimable  woman  who  moreover  possesses  a  critical

sense, told me in another connection and without the slightest arrière

pensée that once some years ago she dreamt she had met Dr. K., a

friend and former family doctor of hers, in the Kärntnerstrasse in front

of Hiess’s shop. The next morning, while she was walking along the

same street, she in fact met the person in question at the very spot

she had dreamt of. So much for my theme. I will only add that no

subsequent  event  proved  the  importance  of  this  miraculous

coincidence, which cannot therefore be accounted for by what lay in

the future.

   Analysis of the dream was helped by questioning, which established

the fact that there was no evidence of her having had any recollection

at all of the dream on the morning after she dreamt it, until after her

walk - evidence such as her having written the dream down or told it to

someone before it was fulfilled. On the contrary, she was obliged to

accept the following account of what happened, which seems to me

more plausible, without raising any objection to it. She was walking

along the Kärntnerstrasse one morning and met her old family doctor

in front of Hiess’s shop. On seeing him she felt convinced that she had

dreamt the night before of having this very meeting at that precise

spot. According to the rules that apply to the interpretation of neurotic

symptoms, her conviction must have been justified; its content may,

however, require to be re-interpreted.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1047

 

   The following is an episode with which Dr. K. is connected from Frau

B.’s earlier life. When she was young she was married, without her

wholehearted  consent,  to  an  elderly  but  wealthy  man.  A  few  years

later he lost his money, fell ill of tuberculosis and died. For many years

the young woman supported herself and her sick husband by giving

music lessons. Among her friends in misfortune was her family doctor,

Dr. K., who devoted himself to looking after her husband and helped

her in finding her first pupils. Another friend was a barrister, also a Dr.K., who put the chaotic affairs of the ruined merchant in order, while at

the same time he made love to the young woman and - for the first

and last time - set her passion aflame. This love affair brought her no

real happiness, for the scruples created by her upbringing and her

cast  of  mind  interfered  with  her  complete  surrender  while  she  was

married and later when she was a widow. In the same connection in

which she told me the dream, she also told me of a real occurrence

dating from this unhappy period of her life, an occurrence which in her

opinion was a remarkable coincidence. She was in her room, kneeling

on the floor with her head buried in a chair and sobbing in passionate

longing  for  her  friend  and  helper  the  barrister,  when  at  that  very

moment the door opened and in he came to visit her. We shall find

nothing at all remarkable in this coincidence when we consider how

often  she  thought  of  him  and  how  often  he  probably  visited  her.

Moreover,  accidents  which  seem  preconcerted  like  this  are  to  be

found in every love story. Nevertheless this coincidence was probably

the true content of her dream and the sole basis of her conviction that

it had come true.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                      1048

 

   Between the scene in which her wish had been fulfilled and the time

of the dream more than twenty-five years elapsed. In the meantime

Frau B. had become the widow of a second husband who left her with

a child and a fortune. The old lady’s affection was still centred on Dr.

K., who was now her adviser and the administrator of her estate and

whom she saw frequently. Let us suppose that during the few days

before the dream she had been expecting a visit from him, but that

this had not taken place - he was no longer so pressing as he used to

be. She may then have quite well had a nostalgic dream one night

which took her back to the old days. Her dream was probably of a

rendez-vous at the time of her love affair, and the chain of her dream-

thoughts  carried  her  back  to  the  occasion  when,  without  any  pre-

arrangement, he had come in at the very moment at which she had

been longing for him. She probably had dreams of this kind quite oftennow; they were a part of the belated punishment with which a woman

pays  for  her  youthful  cruelty.  But  such  dreams  -  derivatives  of  a

suppressed current of thought, filled with memories of rendez-vous of

which, since her second marriage, she no longer liked to think - such

dreams were put aside on waking. And that was what happened to our

ostensibly  prophetic  dream.  She  then  went  out,  and  in  the

Kärntnerstrasse, at a spot which was in itself indifferent, she met her

old family doctor, Dr. K. It was a very long time since she had seen

him. He was intimately associated with the excitements of that happy-

unhappy time. He too had been a helper, and we may suppose that he

had been used in her thoughts, and perhaps in her dreams as well, as

a screen figure behind which she concealed the better-loved figure of

the  other  Dr.  K.  This  meeting  now  revived  her  recollection  of  the

dream. She must have thought: ‘Yes, I had a dream last night of my

rendez-vous  with  Dr.  K.’  But  this  recollection  had  to  undergo  the

distortion  which  the  dream  escaped  only  because  it  had  been

completely  forgotten.  She  inserted  the  indifferent  K.  (who  had

reminded her of the dream) in place of the beloved K. The content of

the dream - the rendez-vous - was transferred to a belief that she had

dreamt of that particular spot, for a rendez-vous consists in two people

coming to the same spot at the same time. And if she then had an

impression that a dream had been fulfilled, she was only giving effect

in that way to her memory of the scene in which she had longed in her

misery for him to come and her longing had at once been fulfilled.

   Thus the creation of a dream after the event, which alone makes

prophetic dreams possible, is nothing other than a form of censoring,

thanks  to  which  the  dream  is  able  to  make  its  way  through  into

consciousness.

 

10 Nov. 99

                                                                                       1049

 

                                      ON DREAMS

                                        (1901)

 


                                                                                      1050

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1051

 

                                      ON DREAMS

 

                                            I

 

   During the epoch which may be described as pre-scientific, men had

no  difficulty  in  finding  an  explanation  of  dreams.  When  they

remembered a dream after waking up, they regarded it as either a

favourable or a hostile manifestation by higher powers, daemonic and

divine. When modes of thought belonging to natural science began to

flourish, all this ingenious mythology was transformed into psychology,

and to-day only a small minority of educated people doubt that dreams

are a product of the dreamer’s own mind.

   Since the rejection of the mythological hypothesis, however, dreams

have stood in need of explanation. The conditions of their origin, their

relation  to  waking  mental  life,  their  dependence  upon  stimuli  which

force their way upon perception during the state of sleep, the many

peculiarities of their content which are repugnant to waking thought,

the  inconsistency  between  their  ideational  images  and  the  affects

attaching to them, and lastly their transitory character, the manner in

which waking thought pushes them on one side as something alien to

it, and mutilates or extinguishes them in memory - all of these and

other  problems  besides  have  been  awaiting  clarification  for  many

hundreds of years, and till now no satisfactory solution of them has

been advanced. But what stands in the foreground of our interest isthe question of the significance of dreams, a question which bears a

double  sense.  It  enquires  in  the  first  place  as  to  the  psychical

significance of dreaming, as to the relation of dreams to other mental

processes, and as to any biological function that they may have; in the

second place it seeks to discover whether dreams can be interpreted,

whether the content of individual dreams has a ‘meaning’, such as we

are accustomed to find in other psychical structures.

      In  the  assessment  of  the  significance  of  dreams  three  lines  of

thought can be distinguished. One of these, which echoes, as it were,

the ancient overvaluation of dreams, is expressed in the writings of

certain philosophers. They consider that the basis of dream-life is a

peculiar state of mental activity, and even go so far as to acclaim that

state as an elevation to a higher level. For instance, Schubert declares

that dreams are a liberation of the spirit from the power of external

nature, and a freeing of the soul from the bonds of the senses. Other

thinkers, without going so far as this, insist nevertheless that dreams

arise essentially from mental impulses and represent manifestations of

mental  forces  which  have  been  prevented  from  expanding  freely

during  the  daytime.  (Cf.  the  ‘dream  imagination’  of  Scherner  and

Volkelt.) A large number of observers agree in attributing to dream-life

a capacity for superior functioning in certain departments at least (e.g.

in memory).

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1052

 

   In sharp contrast to this, the majority of medical writers adopt a view

according to which dreams scarcely reach the level of being psychical

phenomena at all. On their theory, the sole instigators of dreams are

the sensory and somatic stimuli which either impinge upon the sleeper

from  outside  or  become  active  accidentally  in  his  internal  organs.

What  is  dreamt,  they  contend,  has  no  more  claim  to  sense  and

meaning than, for instance, the sounds which would be produced if

‘the ten fingers of a man who knows nothing of music were wandering

over the keys of a piano.’ Dreams are described by Binz as being no

more than ‘somatic processes which are in every case useless and inmany cases positively pathological.’ All the characteristics of dream-

life would thus be explained as being due to the disconnected activity

of separate organs or groups of cells in an otherwise sleeping brain,

an activity forced upon them by physiological stimuli.

   Popular opinion is but little affected by this scientific judgement, and

is not concerned as to the sources of dreams; it seems to persist in

the belief that nevertheless dreams have a meaning, which relates to

the  prediction  of  the  future  and  which  can  be  discovered  by  some

process  of  interpretation  of  a  content  which  is  often  confused  and

puzzling.  The  methods  of  interpretation  employed  consist  in

transforming the content of the dream as it is remembered, either by

replacing it piecemeal in accordance with a fixed key, or by replacing

the  dream  as  a  whole  by  another  whole  to  which  it  stands  in  a

symbolic  relation.  Serious-minded  people  smile  at  these  efforts:

‘Träume sind Schäume’ - ‘dreams are froth’.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1053

 

                                            II

 

   One day I discovered to my great astonishment that the view of

dreams which came nearest to the truth was not the medical but the

popular one, half-involved though it still was in superstition. For I had

been led to fresh conclusions on the subject of dreams by applying to

them  a  new  method  of  psychological  investigation  which  had  done

excellent service in the solution of phobias, obsessions and delusions,

etc.  Since  then,  under  the  name  of  ‘psycho-analysis’,  it  has  found

acceptance by a whole school of research workers. The numerous

analogies  that  exist  between  dream-life  and  a  great  variety  of

conditions  of  psychical  illness  in  waking  life  have  indeed  been

correctly  observed  by  many  medical  investigators.  There  seemed,

therefore, good ground for hoping that a method of investigation which

had given satisfactory results in the case of psychopathic structures

would  also  be  of  use  in  throwing  light  upon  dreams.  Phobias  and

obsessions are as alien to normal consciousness as dreams are towaking consciousness; their origin is as unknown to consciousness as

that of dreams. In the case of these psychopathic structures practical

considerations  led  to  an  investigation  of  their  origin  and  mode  of

development;  for  experience  had  shown  that  the  discovery  of  the

trains of thought which, concealed from consciousness, connect the

pathological  ideas  with  the  remaining  contents  of  the  mind  is

equivalent  to  a  resolution  of  the  symptoms  and  has  as  its

consequence  the  mastering  of  ideas  which  till  then  could  not  be

inhibited. Thus psychotherapy was the starting-point of the procedure

of which I made use for the explanation of dreams.

   This procedure is easily described, although instruction and practice

would be necessary before it could be put into effect.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1054

 

   If we make use of it on someone else, let us say on a patient with a

phobia,  we  require  him  to  direct  his  attention  on  to  the  idea  in

question,  not,  however,  to  reflect  upon  it  as  he  has  done  so  often

already, but to take notice of whatever occurs to his mind without any

exception and report it to the physician. If he should then assert that

his attention is unable to grasp anything at all, we dismiss this with an

energetic  assurance  that  a  complete  absence  of  any  ideational

subject-matter is quite impossible. And in fact very soon numerous

ideas  will  occur  to  him  and  will  lead  on  to  others;  but  they  will

invariably be prefaced by a judgement on the part of the self-observer

to  the  effect  that  they  are  senseless  or  unimportant,  that  they  are

irrelevant, and that they occurred to him by chance and without any

connection with the topic under consideration. We perceive at once

that  it  was  this  critical  attitude  which  prevented  the  subject  from

reporting  any  of  these  ideas,  and  which  indeed  had  previously

prevented them from becoming conscious. If we can induce him to

abandon his criticism of the ideas that occur to him, and to continue

pursuing the trains of thought which will emerge so long as he keeps

his attention turned upon them, we find ourselves in possession of a

quantity of psychical material, which we soon find is clearly connectedwith the pathological idea which was our starting-point; this material

will soon reveal connections between the pathological idea and other

ideas, and will eventually enable us to replace the pathological idea by

a new one which fits into the nexus of thought in an intelligible fashion.

   This is not the place in which to give a detailed account of the

premises  upon  which  this  experiment  was  based,  or  the

consequences which follow from its invariable success. It will therefore

be enough to say that we obtain material that enables us to resolve

any  pathological  idea  if  we  turn  our  attention  precisely  to  those

associations  which  are  ‘involuntary’,  which  ‘interfere  with  our

reflection’, and which are normally dismissed by our critical faculty as

worthless rubbish.

   If we make use of this procedure upon ourselves, we can best assist

the investigation by at once writing down what are at first unintelligible

associations.

      I  will  now  show  what  results  follow  if  I  apply  this  method  of

investigation to dreams. Any example of a dream should in fact be

equally appropriate for the purpose; but for particular reasons I will

choose  some  dream  of  my  own,  one  which  seems  obscure  and

meaningless as I remember it, and one which has the advantage of

brevity.  A  dream  which  I  actually  had  last  night  will  perhaps  meet

these requirements. Its content, as I noted it down immediately after

waking up, was as follows:

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1055

 

   Company at table or table d’hôte . . . spinach was being eaten . . .

Frau E. L. was sitting beside me; she was turning her whole attention

to me and laid her hand on my knee in an intimate manner. I removed

her hand unresponsively. She then said: "But you’ve always had such

beautiful eyes." . . . I then had an indistinct picture of two eyes, as

though it were a drawing or like the outline of a pair of spectacles . . . .’

      This  was  the  whole  of  the  dream,  or  at  least  all  that  I  could

remember of it. It seemed to me obscure and meaningless, but above

all surprising. Frau E. L. is a person with whom I have hardly at anytime been on friendly terms, nor, so far as I know, have I ever wished

to have any closer relations with her. I have not seen her for a long

time, and her name has not, I believe, been mentioned during the last

few days. The dream-process was not accompanied by affects of any

kind.

   Reflecting over this dream brought me no nearer to understanding it.

I  determined,  however,  to  set  down  without  any  premeditation  or

criticism  the  associations  which  presented  themselves  to  my  self-

observation. As I have found, it is advisable for this purpose to divide

a  dream-into  its  elements  and  to  find  the  associations  attaching  to

each of these fragments separately.

   Company at table or table d’hôte. This at once reminded me of an

episode which occurred late yesterday evening. I came away from a

small party in the company of a friend who offered to take a cab and

drive me home in it. ‘I prefer taking a cab with a taximeter’, he said, ‘it

occupies one’s mind so agreeably; one always has something to look

at.’ When we had taken our places in the cab and the driver had set

the  dial,  so  that  the  first  charge  of  sixty  hellers  became  visible,  I

carried the joke further. ‘We’ve only just got in’, I said, ‘and already we

owe him sixty hellers. A cab with a taximeter always reminds me of a

table d’hôte. It makes me avaricious and selfish, because it keeps on

reminding me of what I owe. My debt seems to be growing too fast,

and I’m afraid of getting the worst of the bargain; and in just the same

way at a table d’hôte I can’t avoid feeling in a comic way that I’m

getting too little, and must keep an eye on my own interests.’ I went on

to quote, somewhat discursively:

 

                                                                ‘Ihr führt ins Leben uns hinein,

                                                                Ihr lasst den Armen schuldig werden.’¹

 

   ¹ [These lines are from one of the Harp-player’s songs in Goethe’s Wilhelm Meister. In the

original the words are addressed to the Heavenly Powers and may be translated literally: ‘You
lead us into life, you make the poor creature guilty.’ But the words ‘Armen’ and ‘schuldig’ are
both capable of bearing another meaning. ‘Armen’ might mean ‘poor’ in the financial sense
and ‘schulding’ might mean ‘in debt.’ So in the present context the last line could be rendered:
‘You make the poor man fall into debt.’]
 


                                        On Dreams                                                                                      1056

 

   And now a second association to ‘table d’hôte.’ A few weeks ago,

while we were at table in a hotel at a mountain resort in the Tyrol, I

was very much annoyed because I thought my wife was not being

sufficiently  reserved  towards  some  people  sitting  near  us  whose

acquaintance I had no desire at all to make. I asked her to concern

herself more with me than with these strangers. This was again as

though I were getting the worst of the bargain at the table. I was struck

too by the contrast between my wife’s behaviour at table and that of

Frau E. L. in the dream, who ‘turned her whole attention to me.’

      To  proceed.  I  now  saw  that  the  events  in  the  dream  were  a

reproduction  of  a  small  episode  of  a  precisely  similar  kind  which

occurred between my wife and me at the time at which I was secretly

courting her. The caress which she gave me under the table-cloth was

her reply to a pressing love letter. In the dream, however, my wife was

replaced by a comparative stranger - E. L.

   Frau E. L. is the daughter of a man to whom I was once in debt. I

could not help noticing that this revealed an unsuspected connection

between parts of the content of the dream and my associations. If one

follows  the  train  of  association  starting  out  from  one  element  of  a

dream’s content, one is soon brought back to another of its elements.

My associations to the dream were bringing to light connections which

were not visible in the dream itself.

   If a person expects one to keep an eye on his interests without any

advantage to oneself, his artlessness is apt to provoke the scornful

question: ‘Do you suppose I’m going to do this or that for the sake of

your beaux yeux [beautiful eyes]?’ That being so, Frau E. L.’s speech

in the dream, ‘You’ve always had such beautiful eyes’, can only have

meant:  ‘People  have  always  done  everything  for  you  for  love;  you

have  always  had  everything without  paying  for  it.’  The  truth  is,  of

course,  just  the  contrary:  I  have  always  paid  dearly  for  whatever

advantage I have had from other people. The fact that my friend took

me home yesterday in a cab without my paying for it must, after all,

have made an impression on me.

                                         On Dreams

                                                                                      1057

 

   Incidentally, the friend whose guests we were yesterday has often

put me in his debt. Only recently I allowed an opportunity of repaying

him to slip by. He has had only one present from me - an antique

bowl,  round  which  there  are eyes  painted:  what  is  known  as  an

‘occhiale’, to avert the evil eye. Moreover he is an eye surgeon. The

same evening I asked him after a woman patient, whom I had sent on

to him for a consultation to fit her with spectacles.

   As I now perceived, almost all the elements of the dream’s content

had been brought into the new context. For the sake of consistency,

however, the further question might be asked of why spinach, of all

things, was being served in the dream. The answer was that spinach

reminded me of an episode which occurred not long ago at our family

table, when one of the children - and precisely the one who really

deserves to be admired for his beautiful eyes - refused to eat any

spinach. I myself behaved in just the same way when I was a child; for

a long time I detested spinach, till eventually my taste changed and

promoted that vegetable into one of my favourite foods. My own early

life and my child’s were thus brought together by the mention of this

dish.  ‘You  ought  to  be  glad  to  have  spinach’,  the  little gourmet’s

mother exclaimed; ‘there are children who would be only too pleased

to have spinach.’ Thus I was reminded of the duties of parents to their

children. Goethe’s words

 

                                                                ‘Ihr führt ins Leben uns hinein,
                                                                Ihr lasst den Armen schuldig werden.’

 

gained a fresh meaning in this connection.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1058

 

   I will pause here to survey the results I had so far reached in my

dream-analysis. By following the associations which arose from the

separate elements of the dream divorced from their context, I arrivedat a number of thoughts and recollections, which I could not fail to

recognize  as  important  products  of  my  mental  life.  This  material

revealed by the analysis of the dream was intimately connected with

the dream’s content, yet the connection was of such a kind that I could

never have inferred the fresh material from that content. The dream

was  unemotional,  disconnected  and  unintelligible;  but  while  I  was

producing the thoughts behind the dream, I was aware of intense and

well-founded affective impulses; the thoughts themselves fell at once

into  logical  chains,  in  which  certain  central  ideas  made  their

appearance more than once. Thus, the contrast between ‘selfish’ and

‘unselfish’, and the elements ‘being in debt’ and ‘without paying for it’

were central ideas of this kind, not represented in the dream itself. I

might draw closer together the threads in the material revealed by the

analysis,  and  I  might  then  show  that  they  converge  upon  a  single

nodal point, but considerations of a personal and not of a scientific

nature prevent my doing so in public. I should be obliged to betray

many things which had better remain my secret, for on my way to

discovering the solution of the dream all kinds of things were revealed

which I was unwilling to admit even to myself. Why then, it will be

asked, have I not chosen some other dream, whose analysis is better

suited for reporting, so that I could produce more convincing evidence

of  the  meaning  and  connectedness  of  the  material  uncovered  by

analysis? The answer is that every dream with which I might try to

deal would lead to things equally hard to report and would impose an

equal discretion upon me. Nor should I avoid this difficulty by bringing

up someone else’s dream for analysis, unless circumstances enabled

me  to  drop  all  disguise  without  damage  to  the  person  who  had

confided in me.

   At the point which I have now reached, I am led to regard the dream

as a sort of substitute for the thought-processes, full of meaning and

emotion, at which I arrived after the completion of the analysis. We do

not yet know the nature of the process which has caused the dream to

be generated from these thoughts, but we can see that it is wrong to

regard  it  as  purely  physical  and  without  psychical  meaning,  as  a

process which has arisen from the isolated activity of separate groups

of brain cells aroused from sleep.

   Two other things are already clear. The content of the dream is verymuch shorter than the thoughts for which I regard it as a substitute;

and  analysis  has  revealed  that  the  instigator  of  the  dream  was  an

unimportant event of the evening before I dreamt it.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1059

 

   I should, of course, not draw such far-reaching conclusions if only a

single dream-analysis was at my disposal. If experience shows me,

however,  that  by  uncritically  pursuing  the  associations  arising  from

any  dream  I  can  arrive  at  a  similar  train  of  thoughts,  among  the

elements of which the constituents of the dream re-appear and which

are interconnected in a rational and intelligible manner, then it will be

safe to disregard the slight possibility that the connections observed in

a  first  experiment  might  be  due  to  chance.  I  think  I  am  justified,

therefore,  in  adopting  a  terminology  which  will  crystallize  our  new

discovery.  In  order  to  contrast  the  dream  as  it  is  retained  in  my

memory with the relevant material discovered by analysing it, I shall

speak of the former as the ‘manifest content of the dream’ and the

latter - without, in the first instance, making any further distinction - as

the ‘latent content of the dream.’ I am now faced by two new problems

which have not hitherto been formulated. (1) What is the psychical

process which has transformed the latent content of the dream into

the manifest one which is known to me from my memory? (2) What

are  the  motive  or  motives  which  have  necessitated  this

transformation?  I  shall  describe  the  process  which  transforms  the

latent into the manifest content of dreams as the ‘dream-work.’ The

counterpart to this activity - one which brings about a transformation in

the opposite direction - is already known to us as the work of analysis.

The remaining problems arising out of dreams - questions as to the

instigators  of  dreams,  as  to  the  origin  of  their  material,  as  to  their

possible meaning, as to the possible function of dreaming, and as to

the reasons for dreams being forgotten - all these problems will be

discussed by me on the basis, not of the manifest, but of the newly

discovered latent dream-content. Since I attribute all the contradictory

and incorrect views upon dream-life which appear in the literature ofthe subject to ignorance of the latent content of dreams as revealed by

analysis,  I  shall  be  at  the  greatest  pains  henceforward  to  avoid

confusing the manifest dream with the latent dream-thoughts.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1060

 

                                            III

 

   The transformation of the latent dream-thoughts into the manifest

dream-content deserves all our attention, since it is the first instance

known to us of psychical material being changed over from one mode

of  expression  to  another,  from  a  mode  of  expression  which  is

immediately intelligible to us to another which we can only come to

understand with the help of guidance and effort, though it too must be

recognized as a function of our mental activity.

      Dreams  can  be  divided  into  three  categories  in  respect  of  the

relation between their latent and manifest content. In the first place,

we may distinguish those dreams which make sense and are at the

same time intelligible, which, that is to say, can be inserted without

further difficulty into the context of our mental life. We have numbers

of such dreams. They are for the most part short and appear to us in

general to deserve little attention, since there is nothing astonishing or

strange  about  them.  Incidentally,  their  occurrence  constitutes  a

powerful  argument  against  the  theory  according  to  which  dreams

originate from the isolated activity of separate groups of brain cells.

They give no indication of reduced or fragmentary psychical activity,

but nevertheless we never question the fact of their being dreams, and

do not confuse them with the products of waking life. A second group

is  formed  by  those  dreams  which,  though  they  are  connected  in

themselves and have a clear sense, nevertheless have a bewildering

effect, because we cannot see how to fit that sense into our mental

life. Such would be the case if we were to dream, for instance, that a

relative of whom we were fond had died of the plague, when we had

no  reason  for  expecting,  fearing  or  assuming  any  such  thing;  we

should ask in astonishment: ‘How did I get hold of such an idea?’ Thethird  group,  finally,  contains  those  dreams  which  are  without  either

sense  or  intelligibility,  which  seem disconnected,  confused,  and

meaningless.  The  preponderant  majority  of  the  products  of  our

dreaming exhibit these characteristics, which are the basis of the low

opinion in which dreams are held and of the medical theory that they

are the outcome of a restricted mental activity. The most evident signs

of incoherence are seldom absent, especially in dream-compositions

of any considerable length and complexity.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1061

 

   The contrast between the manifest and latent content of dreams is

clearly  of  significance  only  for  dreams  of  the  second  and  more

particularly of the third category. It is there that we are faced by riddles

which only disappear after we have replaced the manifest dream by

the latent thoughts behind it; and it was on a specimen of the last

category  -  a  confused  and  unintelligible  dream  -  that  the  analysis

which  I  have  just  recorded  was  carried  out.  Contrary  to  our

expectation, however, we came up against motives which prevented

us from becoming fully acquainted with the latent dream-thoughts. A

repetition of similar experiences may lead us to suspect that there is

an  intimate  and  regular  relation  between  the  unintelligible  and

confused nature of dreams and the difficulty of reporting the thoughts

behind them. Before enquiring into the nature of this relation, we may

with advantage turn our attention to the more easily intelligible dreams

of the first category, in which the manifest and latent content coincide,

and there appears to be a consequent saving in dream-work.

   Moreover, an examination of these dreams offers advantages from

another standpoint. For children’s dreams are of that kind - significant

and  not  puzzling.  Here,  incidentally,  we  have  a  further  argument

against  tracing  the  origin  of  dreams  to  dissociated  cerebral  activity

during sleep. For why should a reduction in psychical functioning of

this kind be a characteristic of the state of sleep in the case of adults

but not in that of children? On the other hand, we shall be fully justified

in expecting that an explanation of psychical processes in children, inwhom  they  may  well  be  greatly  simplified,  may  turn  out  to  be  an

indispensable prelude to the investigation of the psychology of adults.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1062

 

      I  will  therefore  record  a  few  instances  of  dreams  which  I  have

collected from children. A little girl nineteen months old had been kept

without food all day because she had had an attack of vomiting in the

morning;  her  nurse  declared  that  she  had  been  upset  by  eating

strawberries.  During  the  night  after  this  day  of  starvation  she  was

heard saying her own name in her sleep and adding: ‘Stwawbewwies,

wild  stwawbewwies,  omblet,  pudden!’  She  was  thus  dreaming  of

eating  a  meal,  and  she  laid  special  stress  in  her  menu  on  the

particular delicacy of which, as she had reason to expect, she would

only be allowed scanty quantities in the near future. - A little boy of

twenty-two months had a similar dream of a feast which he had been

denied. The day before, he had been obliged to present his uncle with

a gift of a basket of fresh cherries, of which he himself, of course, had

only  been  allowed  to  taste  a  single  sample.  He  awoke  with  this

cheerful news: ‘Hermann eaten all the chewwies!’ - One day a girl of

three  and  a  quarter  made  a  trip  across  a  lake.  The  voyage  was

evidently not long enough for her, for she cried when she had to get

off the boat. Next morning she reported that during the night she had

been for a trip on the lake: she had been continuing her interrupted

voyage. - A boy of five and a quarter showed signs of dissatisfaction in

the course of a walk in the neighbourhood of the Dachstein. Each time

a new mountain came into view he asked if it was the Dachstein and

finally refused to visit a waterfall with the rest of the company. His

behaviour was attributed to fatigue; but it found a better explanation

when next morning he reported that he had dreamt that he climbed up

the  Dachstein.  He  had  evidently  had  the  idea  that  the  expedition

would end in a climb up the Dachstein, and had become depressed

when the promised mountain never came in view. He made up in his

dream for what the previous day had failed to give him. - A six-year-

old girl had an exactly similar dream. In the course of a walk her fatherhad stopped short of their intended goal as the hour was getting late.

On their way back she had noticed a signpost bearing the name of

another landmark; and her father had promised to take her there as

well another time. Next morning she met her father with the news that

she had dreamt that he had been with her to both places.

   The common element in all these children’s dreams is obvious. All of

them  fulfilled  wishes  which  were  active  during  the  day  but  had

remained unfulfilled. The dreams were simple and undisguised wish-

fulfilments.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1063

 

   Here is another child’s dream, which, though at first sight it is not

quite easy to understand, is also nothing more than a wish-fulfilment.

A little girl not quite four years old had been brought to town from the

country because she was suffering from an attack of poliomyelitis. She

spent the night with an aunt who had no children, and was put to sleep

in a large bed - much too large for her, of course. Next morning she

said she had had a dream that the bed had been far too small for her,

and that there has been no room for her in it. It is easy to recognize

this dream as a wishful dream if we remember that children very often

express a wish ‘to be big.’ The size of the bed was a disagreeable

reminder  of  her  smallness  to  the  would-be  big  child;  she  therefore

corrected the unwelcome relation in her dream, and grew so big that

even the large bed was too small for her.

   Even when the content of children’s dreams becomes complicated

and subtle, there is never any difficulty in recognizing them as wish-

fulfilments. An eight-year-old boy had a dream that he was driving in a

chariot  with  Achilles  and  that  Diomede  was  the  charioteer.  It  was

shown that the day before he had been deep in a book of legends

about the Greek heroes; and it was easy to see that he had taken the

heroes as his models and was sorry not to be living in their days.

   This small collection throws a direct light on a further characteristic

of children’s dreams: their connection with daytime life. The wishes

which are fulfilled in them are carried over from daytime and as a rulefrom the day before, and in waking life they have been accompanied

by  intense  emotion.  Nothing  unimportant  or  indifferent,  or  nothing

which would strike a child as such, finds its way into the content of

their dreams.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1064

 

   Numerous examples of dreams of this infantile type can be found

occurring in adults as well, though, as I have said, they are usually

brief  in  content.  Thus  a  number  of  people  regularly  respond  to  a

stimulus of thirst during the night with dreams of drinking, which thus

endeavour to get rid of the stimulus and enable sleep to continue. In

some people ‘dreams of convenience’ of this kind often occur before

waking, when the necessity for getting up presents itself. They dream

that they are already up and at the washing-stand, or that they are

already at the school or office where they are due at some particular

time. During the night before a journey we not infrequently dream of

having arrived at our destination; so too, before a visit to the theatre or

a party, a dream will often anticipate the pleasure that lies ahead - out

of  impatience,  as  it  were.  In  other  dreams  the  wish-fulfilment  is

expressed  a  stage  more  indirectly:  some  connection  or  implication

must be established - that is, the work of interpretation must be begun

-  before  the  wish-fulfilment  can  be  recognized.  A  man  told  me,  for

instance, that his young wife had had a dream that her period had

started. I reflected that if this young woman had missed her period she

must have known that she was faced with a pregnancy. Thus when

she reported her dream she was announcing her pregnancy, and the

meaning of the dream was to represent as fulfilled her wish that the

pregnancy might be postponed for a while. Under unusual or extreme

conditions dreams of this infantile character are particularly common.

Thus the leader of a polar expedition has recorded that the members

of his expedition, while they were wintering in the ice-field and living

on a monotonous diet and short rations, regularly dreamt like children

of large meals, of mountains of tobacco, and of being back at home.

   It by no means rarely happens that in the course of a comparativelylong, complicated and on the whole confused dream one particularly

clear  portion  stands  out,  which  contains  an  unmistakable  wish-

fulfilment,  but  which  is  bound  up  with  some  other,  unintelligible

material. But in the case of adults, anyone with some experience in

analysing their dreams will find to his surprise that even those dreams

which have an appearance of being transparently clear are seldom as

simple  as  those  of  children,  and  that  behind  the  obvious  wish-

fulfilment some other meaning may lie concealed.

   It would indeed be a simple and satisfactory solution of the riddle of

dreams if the work of analysis were to enable us to trace even the

meaningless and confused dreams of adults back to the infantile type

of fulfilment of an intensely felt wish of the previous day. There can be

no doubt, however, that appearances do not speak in favour of such

an  expectation.  Dreams  are  usually  full  of  the  most  indifferent  and

strangest material, and there is no sign in their content of the fulfilment

of any wish.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1065

 

   But before taking leave of infantile dreams with their undisguised

wish-fulfilments, I must not omit to mention one principal feature of

dreams, which has long been evident and which emerges particularly

clearly  precisely  in  this  group.  Every  one  of  these  dreams  can  be

replaced by an optative clause: ‘Oh, if only the trip on the lake had

lasted longer!’ - ‘If only I were already washed and dressed!’ - ‘If only I

could  have  kept  the  cherries  instead  of  giving  them  to  Uncle!’  But

dreams give us more than such optative clauses. They show us the

wish  as  already  fulfilled;  they  represent  its  fulfilment  as  real  and

present; and the material employed in dream-representation consists

principally,  though  not  exclusively,  of  situations  and  of  sensory

images, mostly of a visual character. Thus, even in this infantile group,

a  species  of  transformation,  which  deserves  to  be  described  as

dream-work,  is  not  completely  absent: a  thought  expressed  in  the

optative has been replaced by a representation in the present tense.

                                         On Dreams

                                                                                      1066

 

                                            IV

 

   We shall be inclined to suppose that a transformation of some such

kind has occurred even in confused dreams, though we cannot tell

whether what has been transformed was an optative in their case too.

There  are,  however,  two  passages  in  the  specimen  dream  which  I

have  reported,  and  with  whose  analysis  we  have  made  some

headway, that give us reason to suspect something of the kind. The

analysis showed that my wife had concerned herself with some other

people  at  table,  and  that  I  had  found  this  disagreeable;  the  dream

contained  precisely  the  opposite  of  this  -  the  person  who  took  the

place  of  my  wife  was  turning  her  whole  attention  to  me.  But  a

disagreeable experience can give rise to no more suitable wish than

that its opposite might have occurred - which was what the dream

represented as fulfilled. There was an exactly similar relation between

the  bitter  thought  revealed  in  the  analysis  that  I  had  never  had

anything free of cost and the remark made by the woman in the dream

- ‘You’ve always had such beautiful eyes.’ Some part of the opposition

between the manifest and latent content of dreams is thus attributable

to wish-fulfilment.

   But another achievement of the dream-work, tending as it does to

produce incoherent dreams, is even more striking. If in any particular

instance we compare the number of ideational elements or the space

taken up in writing them down in the case of the dream and of the

dream-thoughts to which the analysis leads us and of which traces are

to be found in the dream itself, we shall be left in no doubt that the

dream-work has carried out a work of compression or condensation

on a large scale. It is impossible at first to form any judgement of the

degree of this condensation; but the deeper we plunge into a dream-

analysis  the  more  impressive  it  seems.  From  every  element  in  a

dream’s  content  associative  threads  branch  out  in  two  or  more

directions; every situation in a dream seems to be put together out of

two or more impressions or experiences. For instance, I once had a

dream  of  a  sort  of  swimming-pool,  in  which  the  bathers  werescattering  in  all  directions;  at  one  point  on  the  edge  of  the  pool

someone  was  standing  and  bending  towards  one  of  the  people

bathing, as though to help her out of the water. The situation was put

together from a memory of an experience I had had at puberty and

from two paintings, one of which I had seen shortly before the dream.

One  was  a  picture  from  Schwind’s  series  illustrating  the  legend  of

Mélusine, which showed the water-nymphs surprised in their pool (cf.

the scattering bathers in the dream); the other was a picture of the

Deluge by an Italian Master; while the little experience remembered

from my puberty was of having seen the instructor at a swimming-

school helping a lady out of the water who had stopped in until after

the time set aside for men bathers. -In the case of the example which I

chose for interpretation, an analysis of the situation led me to a small

series  of  recollections  each  of  which  contributed  something  to  the

content of the dream. In the first place, there was the episode from the

time of my engagement of which I have already spoken. The pressure

upon  my  hand  under  the  table,  which  was  a  part  of  that  episode,

provided the dream with the detail ‘under the table’ - a detail which I

had to add as an afterthought to my memory of the dream. In the

episode itself there was of course no question of ‘turning to me’; the

analysis  showed  that  this  element  was  the  fulfilment  of  a  wish  by

presenting the opposite of an actual event, and that it related to my

wife’s behaviour at the table d’hôte. But behind this recent recollection

there lay concealed an exactly similar and far more important scene

from the time of our engagement, which estranged us for a whole day.

The intimate laying of a hand on my knee belonged to a quite different

context and was concerned with quite other people. This element in

the  dream  was  in  turn  the  starting-point  of  two  separate  sets  of

memories - and so on.

   The material in the dream-thoughts which is packed together for the

purpose of constructing a dream-situation must of course in itself be

adaptable  for  that  purpose.  There  must  be  one  or  more common

elements in all the components. The dream-work then proceeds just

as  Francis  Galton  did  in  constructing  his  family  photographs.  It

superimposes, as it were, the different components upon one another.

The common element in them then stands out clearly in the composite

picture, while contradictory details more or less wipe one another out.This method of production also explains to some extent the varying

degrees of characteristic vagueness shown by so many elements in

the  content  of  dreams.  Basing  itself  on  this  discovery,  dream-

interpretation has laid down the following rule: In analysing a dream, if

an uncertainty can be resolved into an ‘either-or’, we must replace it

for  purposes  of  interpretation  by  an  ‘and’,  and  take  each  of  the

apparent alternatives as an independent starting-point for a series of

associations.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1067

 

   If a common element of this kind between the dream-thoughts is not

present, the dream-work sets about creating one, so that it may be

possible for the thoughts to be given a common representation in the

dream.  The  most  convenient  way  of  bringing  together  two  dream-

thoughts which, to start with, have nothing in common, is to alter the

verbal form of one of them, and thus bring it half-way to meet the

other,  which  may  be  similarly  clothed  in  a  new  form  of  words.  A

parallel process is involved in hammering out a rhyme, where a similar

sound has to be sought for in the same way as a common element is

in our present case. A large part of the dream-work consists in the

creation of intermediate thoughts of this kind which are often highly

ingenious, though they frequently appear far-fetched; these then form

a link between the composite picture in the manifest content of the

dream and the dream-thoughts, which are themselves diverse both in

form and essence and have been determined by the exciting factors of

the dream. The analysis of our sample dream affords us an instance

of this kind in which a thought has been given a new form in order to

bring it into contact with another which is essentially foreign to it. In

carrying out the analysis I came upon the following thought: ‘I should

like to get something sometimes without paying for it’. But in that form

the  thought  could  not  be  employed  in  the  dream-content.  It  was

therefore  given  a  fresh  form:  ‘I  should  like  to  get  some  enjoyment

without cost ["Kosten"].’¹ Now the word ‘Kosten’ in its second sense

fits into the ‘table d’hôte’ circle of ideas, and could thus be representedin the ‘spinach’ which was served in the dream. When a dish appears

at our table and the children refuse it, their mother begins by trying

persuasion, and urges them ‘just to taste [‘kosten’] a bit of it’. It may

seem  strange  that  the  dream-work  should  make  such  free  use  of

verbal  ambiguity,  but  further  experience  will  teach  us  that  the

occurrence is quite a common one.

 

   ¹ [The German word ‘Kosten’ means both ‘cost’ and ‘to taste.’]

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1068

 

   The process of condensation further explains certain constituents of

the content of dreams which are peculiar to them and are not found in

waking ideation. What I have in mind are ‘collective’ and ‘composite

figures’  and  the  strange  ‘composite  structures’,  which  are  creations

not unlike the composite animals invented by the folk-imagination of

the Orient. The latter, however, have already assumed stereotyped

shapes in our thought, whereas in dreams fresh composite forms are

being perpetually constructed in an inexhaustible variety. We are all of

us familiar with such structures from our own dreams.

   There are many sorts of ways in which figures of this kind can be put

together. I may build up a figure by giving it the features of two people;

or I may give it the form of one person but think of it in the dream as

having the name of another person; or I may have a visual picture of

one person, but put it in a situation which is appropriate to another. In

all  these  cases  the  combination  of  different  persons  into  a  single

representative  in  the  content  of  the  dream  has  a  meaning;  it  is

intended to indicate an ‘and’ or ‘just as’, or to compare the original

persons with each other in some particular respect, which may even

be  specified  in  the  dream  itself.  As  a  rule,  however,  this  common

element between the combined persons can only be discovered by

analysis, and is only indicated in the contents of the dream by the

formation of the collective figure.

   The composite structures which occur in dreams in such immense

numbers are put together in an equal variety of ways, and the same

rules apply to their resolution. There is no need for me to quote anyinstances.  Their  strangeness  disappears  completely  when  once  we

have made up our minds not to class them with the objects of our

waking perception, but to remember that they are products of dream-

condensation and are emphasizing in an effectively abbreviated form

some  common  characteristic  of  the  objects  which  they  are  thus

combining.  Here  again  the  common  element  has  as  a  rule  to  be

discovered by analysis. The content of the dream merely says as it

were: ‘All these things have an element x in common.’ The dissection

of  these  composite  structures  by  means  of  analysis  is  often  the

shortest way to finding the meaning of a dream. - Thus, I dreamt on

one  occasion  that  I  was  sitting  on  a  bench  with  one  of  my  former

University  teachers,  and  that  the  bench,  which  was  surrounded  by

other  benches,  was  moving  forward  at  a  rapid  pace.  This  was  a

combination of a lecture theatre and a trottoir roulant.¹ I will not pursue

this  train  of  ideas  further.  -  Another  time  I  was  sitting  in  a  railway

carriage and holding on my lap an object in the shape of a top-hat

[‘Zylinderhut’,  literally  ‘cylinder-hat’],  which  however  was  made  of

transparent glass. The situation made me think at once of the proverb:

‘Mit dem Hute in der Hand kommt man duchs ganze land.’² The glass

cylinder led me by a short détour to think of an incandescent gas-

mantle; and I soon saw that I should like to make a discovery which

would make me as rich and independent as my fellow-countryman Dr.

Auer von Welsbach was made by his, and that I should like to travel

instead of stopping in Vienna. In the dream I was travelling with my

discovery, the hat in the shape of a glass cylinder - a discovery which,

it is true, was not as yet of any great practical use. - The dream-work

is  particularly  fond  of  representing  two contrary  ideas  by  the  same

composite  structure.  Thus,  for  instance,  a  woman  had  a  dream  in

which she saw herself carrying a tall spray of flowers, such as the

angel is represented as holding in pictures of the Annunciation. (This

stood for innocence; incidentally, her own name was Maria.) On the

other  hand,  the  spray  was  covered  with  large  white  flowers  like

camellias. (This stood for the opposite of innocence; it was associated

with La dame aux camélias.)

 

   ¹ [The ‘trottoir roulant’ was a moving roadway installed at the Paris Exhibition of 1900.]

   ² [‘If you go hat in hand, you can cross the whole land.’] 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1069

 

   A good proportion of what we have learnt about condensation in

dreams  may  be  summarized  in  this  formula:  each  element  in  the

content  of  a  dream  is  ‘overdetermined’  by  material  in  the  dream-

thoughts;  it  is  not  derived  from  a single  element  in  the  dream-

thoughts, but may be traced back to a whole number. These elements

need not necessarily be closely related to each other in the dream-

thoughts themselves; they may belong to the most widely separated

regions  of  the  fabric  of  those  thoughts.  A  dream-element  is,  in  the

strictest sense of the word, the ‘representative’ of all this disparate

material in the content of the dream. But analysis reveals yet another

side of the complicated relation between the content of the dream and

the dream-thoughts. Just as connections lead from each element of

the dream to several dream-thoughts, so as a rule a single dream-

thought is represented by more than one dream-element; the threads

of association do not simply converge from the dream-thoughts to the

dream-content, they cross and interweave with each other many times

over in the course of their journey.

      Condensation,  together  with  the  transformation  of  thoughts  into

situations  (‘dramatization’),  is  the  most  important  and  peculiar

characteristic  of  the  dream-work.  So  far,  however,  nothing  has

transpired  as  to  any motive  necessitating  this  compression  of  the

material.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1070

 

                                            V

 

   In the case of the complicated and confused dreams with which we

are  now  concerned,  condensation  and  dramatization  alone  are  not

enough to account for the whole of the impression that we gain of the

dissimilarity  between  the  content  of  the  dream  and  the  dream-thoughts. We have evidence of the operation of a third factor, and this

evidence deserves careful sifting.

   First and foremost, when by means of analysis we have arrived at a

knowledge  of  the  dream-thoughts,  we  observe  that  the  manifest

dream-content  deals  with  quite  different  material  from  the  latent

thoughts.  This,  to  be  sure,  is  no  more  than  an  appearance,  which

evaporates under closer examination, for we find ultimately that the

whole of the dream-content is derived from the dream-thoughts, and

that  almost  all  the  dream-thoughts  are  represented  in  the  dream-

content. Nevertheless, something of the distinction still remains. What

stands  out  boldly  and  clearly  in  the  dream  as  its  essential  content

must,  after  analysis,  be  satisfied  with  playing  an  extremely

subordinate  role  among  the  dream-thoughts;  and  what,  on  the

evidence of our feelings, can claim to be the most prominent among

the dream-thoughts is either not present at all as ideational material in

the  content  of  the  dream  or  is  only  remotely  alluded  to  in  some

obscure region of it. We may put it in this way: in the course of the

dream-work the psychical intensity passes over from the thoughts and

ideas to which it properly belongs on to others which in our judgement

have no claim to any such emphasis. No other process contributes so

much  to  concealing  the  meaning  of  a  dream  and  to  making  the

connection  between  the  dream-content  and  the  dream-thoughts

unrecognizable. In the course of this process, which I shall describe

as  ‘dream-displacement’,  the  psychical  intensity,  significance  or

affective potentiality of the thoughts is, as we further find, transformed

into  sensory  vividness.  We  assume  as  a  matter  of  course  that  the

most distinct element in the manifest content of a dream is the most

important one; but in fact it is often an indistinct element which turns

out to be the most direct derivative of the essential dream-thought.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1071

 

   What I have called dream-displacement might equally be described

as  ‘a  transvaluation  of  psychical  values.’  I  shall  not  have  given  an

exhaustive estimate of this phenomenon, however, unless I add thatthis  work  of  displacement  or  transvaluation  is  performed  to  a  very

varying  degree  in  different  dreams.  There  are  dreams  which  come

about  almost  without  any  displacement.  These  are  the  ones  which

make sense and are intelligible, such, for instance, as those which we

have recognized as undisguised wishful dreams. On the other hand,

there are dreams in which not a single piece of the dream-thoughts

has retained its own psychical value, or in which everything that is

essential  in  the  dream-thoughts  has  been  replaced  by  something

trivial.  And  we  can  find  a  complete  series  of  transitional  cases

between  these  two  extremes.  The  more  obscure  and  confused  a

dream appears to be, the greater the share in its construction which

may be attributed to the factor of displacement.

   Our specimen dream exhibits displacement to this extent at least,

that  its  content  seems  to  have  a  different centre  from  its  dream-

thoughts. In the foreground of the dream-content a prominent place is

taken by a situation in which a woman seems to be making advances

to me; while in the dream-thoughts the chief emphasis is laid on a

wish for once to enjoy unselfish love, love which ‘costs nothing’ - an

idea concealed behind the phrase about ‘beautiful eyes’ and the far-

fetched allusion to ‘spinach.’

   If we undo dream-displacement by means of analysis, we obtain

what seems to be completely trustworthy information on two much-

disputed problems concerning dreams: as to their instigators and as to

their connection with waking life. There are dreams which immediately

reveal  their  derivation  from  events  of  the  day;  there  are  others  in

which no trace of any such derivation is to be discovered. If we seek

the help of analysis, we find that every dream without any possible

exception goes back to an impression of the past few days, or, it is

probably more correct to say, of the day immediately preceding the

dream,  of  the  ‘dream-day.’  The  impression  which  plays  the  part  of

dream-instigator  may  be  such  an  important  one  that  we  feel  no

surprise at being concerned with it in the daytime, and in that case we

rightly speak of the dream as carrying on with the significant interests

of our waking life. As a rule, however, if a connection is to be found in

the content of the dream with any impression of the previous day, that

impression is so trivial, insignificant and unmemorable, that it is only

with difficulty that we ourselves can recall it. And in such cases thecontent  of  the  dream  itself,  even  if  it  is  connected  and  intelligible,

seems  to  be  concerned  with  the  most  indifferent  trivialities,  which

would be unworthy of our interest if we were awake. A good deal of

the contempt in which dreams are held is due to the preference thus

shown in their content for what is indifferent and trivial.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1072

 

   Analysis does away with the misleading appearance upon which this

derogatory  judgement  is  founded.  If  the  content  of  a  dream  puts

forward some indifferent impression as being its instigator, analysis

invariably brings to light a significant experience, and one by which the

dreamer  has  good  reason  to  be  stirred.  This  experience  has  been

replaced by the indifferent one, with which it is connected by copious

associative  links.  Where  the  content  of  the  dream  treats  of

insignificant and uninteresting ideational material, analysis uncovers

the  numerous  associative  paths  connecting  these  trivialities  with

things that are of the highest psychical importance in the dreamer’s

estimation. If what makes their way into the content of dreams are

impressions and material which are indifferent and trivial rather than

justifiably stirring and interesting, that is only the effect of the process

of displacement. If we answer our questions about dream-instigators

and the connection between dreaming and daily affairs on the basis of

the new insight we have gained from replacing the manifest by the

latent content of dreams, we arrive at these conclusions: dreams are

never concerned with things with which we should not think it worth

while  to  be  concerned  during  the  day,  and  trivialities  which  do  no

affect us during the day are unable to pursue us in our sleep.

   What was the dream-instigator in the specimen that we have chosen

for analysis? It was the definitely insignificant event of my friend giving

me a drive in a cab free of cost. The situation in the dream at the table

d’hôte contained an allusion to this insignificant precipitating cause, for

in  my  conversation  I  had  compared  the  taximeter  cab  with  a  table

d’hôte. But I can also point to the important experience which was

represented by this trivial one. A few days earlier I had paid out aconsiderable sum of money on behalf of a member of my family of

whom I am fond. No wonder, said the dream-thoughts, if this person

were to feel grateful to me: love of that sort would not be ‘free of cost.’

Love that is free of cost, however, stood in the forefront of the dream-

thoughts. The fact that not long before I had had several cab-drives

with the relative in question, made it possible for the cab-drive with my

friend to remind me of my connections with this other person.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1073

 

   The indifferent impression which becomes a dream-instigator owing

to associations of this kind is subject to a further condition which does

not apply to the true source of the dream: it must always be a recent

impression, derived from the dream-day.

   I cannot leave the subject of dream-displacement without drawing

attention to a remarkable process which occurs in the formation of

dreams  and  in  which  condensation  and  displacement combine  to

produce the result. In considering condensation we have already seen

the  way  in  which  two  ideas  in  the  dream-thoughts  which  have

something  in  common,  some  point  of  contact,  are  replaced  in  the

dream-content  by  a  composite  idea,  in  which  a  relatively  distinct

nucleus  represents  what  they  have  in  common,  while  indistinct

subordinate  details  correspond  to  the  respects  in  which  they  differ

from  each  other.  If  displacement  takes  place  in  addition  to

condensation,  what  is  constructed  is  not  a  composite  idea  but  an

‘intermediate  common  entity’,  which  stands  in  a  relation  to  the  two

different  elements  similar  to  that  in  which  the  resultant  in  a

parallelogram of forces stands to its components. For instance, in the

content of one of my dreams there was a question of an injection with

propyl.  To  begin  with,  the  analysis  only  led  me  to  an  indifferent

experience which had acted as dream-instigator, and in which a part

was  played  by amyl.  I  was  not  yet  able  to  justify  the  confusion

between amyl and propyl . In the group of ideas behind this same

dream,  however,  there  was  also  a  recollection  of  my  first  visit  to

Munich, where I had been struck by the Propylaea. The details of theanalysis made it plausible to suppose that it was the influence of this

second group of ideas upon the first one that was responsible for the

displacement from amyl to propyl. Propyl is as it were an intermediate

idea between amyl and Propylaea, and found its way into the content

of  the  dream  as  a  kind  of compromise,  by  means  of  simultaneous

condensation and displacement.

   There is a still more urgent necessity in the case of the process of

displacement than in that of condensation to discover the motive for

these puzzling efforts on the part of the dream-work.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1074

 

                                            VI

 

   It is the process of displacement which is chiefly responsible for our

being  unable  to  discover  or  recognize  the  dream-thoughts  in  the

dream-content, unless we understand the reason for their distortion.

Nevertheless, the dream-thoughts are also submitted to another and

milder sort of transformation, which leads to our discovering a new

achievement on the part of the dream-work - one, however, which is

easily intelligible. The dream-thoughts which we first come across as

we proceed with our analysis often strike us by the unusual form in

which  they  are  expressed;  they  are  not  clothed  in  the  prosaic

language usually employed by our thoughts, but are on the contrary

represented  symbolically  by  means  of  similes  and  metaphors,  in

images resembling those of poetic speech. There is no difficulty in

accounting  for  the  constraint  imposed  upon  the  form  in  which  the

dream-thoughts  are  expressed.  The  manifest  content  of  dreams

consists  for  the  most  part  in  pictorial  situations;  and  the  dream-

thoughts  must  accordingly  be  submitted  in  the  first  place  to  a

treatment which will make them suitable for a representation of this

kind. If we imagine ourselves faced by the problem of representing the

arguments  in  a  political  leading  article  or  the  speeches  of  counsel

before a court of law in a series of pictures, we shall easily understand

the modifications which must necessarily be carried out by the dream-work owing to considerations of representability in the content of the

dream.

   The psychical material of the dream-thoughts habitually includes

recollections of impressive experiences - not infrequently dating back

to early childhood - which are thus themselves perceived as a rule as

situations  having  a  visual  subject  matter.  Wherever  the  possibility

arises,  this  portion  of  the  dream-thoughts  exercises  a  determining

influence  upon  the  form  taken  by  the  content  of  the  dream;  it

constitutes,  as  it  were,  a  nucleus  of  crystallization,  attracting  the

material  of  the  dream-thoughts  to  itself  and  thus  affecting  their

distribution.  The  situation  in  a  dream  is  often  nothing  other  than  a

modified  repetition,  complicated  by  interpolations,  of  an  impressive

experience of this kind; on the other hand, faithful and straightforward

reproductions of real scenes only rarely appear in dreams.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1075

 

      The  content  of  dreams,  however,  does  not  consist  entirely  of

situations, but also includes disconnected fragments of visual images,

speeches  and  even  bits  of  unmodified  thoughts.  It  may  therefore

perhaps  be  of  interest  to  enumerate  very  briefly  the  modes  of

representation available to the dream-work for reproducing the dream-

thoughts in the peculiar form of expression necessary in dreams.

   The dream-thoughts which we arrive at by means of analysis reveal

themselves  as  a  psychical  complex  of  the  most  intricate  possible

structure. Its portions stand in the most manifold logical relations to

one another: they represent foreground and background, conditions,

digressions  and  illustrations,  chains  of  evidence  and  counter-

arguments. Each train of thought is almost invariably accompanied by

its  contradictory  counterpart.  This  material  lacks  none  of  the

characteristics that are familiar to us from our waking thinking. If now

all of this is to be turned into a dream, the psychical material will be

submitted to a pressure which will condense it greatly, to an internal

fragmentation  and  displacement  which  will,  as  it  were,  create  new

surfaces, and to a selective operation in favour of those portions of itwhich are the most appropriate for the construction of situations. If we

take into account the genesis of the material, a process of this sort

deserves  to  be  described  as  a  ‘regression.’  In  the  course  of  this

transformation, however, the logical links which have hitherto held the

psychical  material  together  are  lost.  It  is  only,  as  it  were,  the

substantive content of the dream-thoughts that the dream-work takes

over and manipulates. The restoration of the connections which the

dream-work has destroyed is a task which has to be performed by the

work of analysis.

      The  modes  of  expression  open  to  a  dream  may  therefore  be

qualified  as  meagre  by  comparison  with  those  of  our  intellectual

speech; nevertheless a dream need not wholly abandon the possibility

of reproducing the logical relations present in the dream-thoughts. On

the contrary, it succeeds often enough in replacing them by formal

characteristics in its own texture.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1076

 

   In the first place, dreams take into account the connection which

undeniably exists between all the portions of the dream-thoughts by

combining the whole material into a single situation. They reproduce

logical  connection  by approximation  in  space  and  time,  just  as  a

painter will represent all the poets in a single group in a picture of

Parnassus.  It  is  true  that  they  were  never  in  fact  assembled  on  a

single  mountain-top;  but  they  certainly  form  a  conceptual  group.

Dreams carry this method of reproduction down to details; and often

when they show us two elements in the dream-content close together,

this indicates that there is some specially intimate connection between

what correspond to them among the dream-thoughts. Incidentally, it is

to be observed that all dreams produced during a single night will be

found on analysis to be derived from the same circle of thoughts.

   A causal relation between two thoughts is either left unrepresented

or  is  replaced  by  a sequence  of  two  pieces  of  dream  of  different

lengths. Here the representation is often reversed, the beginning of

the dream standing for the consequence and its conclusion for thepremise. An immediate transformation of one thing into another in a

dream seems to represent the relation of cause and effect.

   The alternative ‘either-or’ is never expressed in dreams, both of the

alternatives being inserted in the text of the dream as though they

were equally valid. I have already mentioned that an ‘either-or’ used in

recording a dream is to be translated by ‘and’.

   Ideas which are contraries are by preference expressed in dreams

by  one  and  the  same  element.¹  ‘No’  seems  not  to  exist  so  far  as

dreams are concerned. Opposition between two thoughts, the relation

of reversal, may be represented in dreams in a most remarkable way.

It  may  be  represented  by  some other  piece  of  the  dream-content

being turned into its opposite - as it were by an afterthought. We shall

hear presently of a further method of expressing contradiction. The

sensation of inhibition of movement which is so common in dreams

also  serves  to  express  a  contradiction  between  two  impulses,  a

conflict of will.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1911:] It deserves to be remarked that well-known philologists have

asserted that the most ancient human languages tended in general to express contradictory
opposites by the same word. (E.g. ‘strong-weak’, ‘inside-outside.’ This has been described as
‘the antithetical meaning of primal words’.)
 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1077

 

      One  and  one  only  of  these  logical  relations  -  that  of similarity,

consonance,  the  possession  of  common  attributes  -  is  very  highly

favoured  by  the  mechanism  of  dream-formation.  The  dream-work

makes use of such cases as a foundation for dream-condensation, by

bringing together everything that shows an agreement of this kind into

a new unity.

   This short series of rough comments is of course inadequate to deal

with the full extent of the formal means employed by dreams for the

expression of logical relations in the dream-thoughts. Different dreams

are more or less carefully constructed in this respect; they keep more

or less closely to the text presented to them; they make more or less

use of the expedients that are open to the dream-work. In the secondcase they appear obscure, confused and disconnected. If, however, a

dream strikes one as obviously absurd, if its content includes a piece

of palpable nonsense, this is intentionally so; its apparent disregard of

all the requirements of logic is expressing a piece of the intellectual

content  of  the  dream-thoughts.  Absurdity  in  a  dream  signifies  the

presence in the dream-thoughts of contradiction, ridicule and derision.

Since this statement is in the most marked opposition to the view that

dreams are the product of a dissociated and uncritical mental activity, I

will emphasize it by means of an example.

   One of my acquaintances, Herr M., had been attacked in an essay

with an unjustifiable degree of violence, as we all thought - by no less

a person than Goethe. Herr M. was naturally crushed by the attack.

He complained of it bitterly to some company at table; his veneration

for  Goethe  had  not  been  affected,  however,  by  this  personal

experience. I now tried to throw a little light on the chronological data,

which  seemed  to  me  improbable.  Goethe  died  in  1832.  Since  his

attack on Herr M. must have been made earlier than that, Herr M.

must have been quite a young man at the time. It seemed to be a

plausible notion that he was eighteen. I was not quite sure, however,

what year we were actually in, so that my whole calculation melted

into obscurity. Incidentally, the attack was contained in Goethe’s well-

known essay on ‘Nature’.

   The nonsensical character of this dream will be even more glaringly

obvious, if I explain that Herr M. is a youngish business man, who is

far removed from any poetical and literary interests. I have no doubt,

however, that when I have entered into the analysis of the dream I

shall succeed in showing how much ‘method’ there is in its nonsense.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1078

 

   The material of the dream was derived from three sources:

   (1) Herr M., whom I had got to know among some company at table,

asked me one day to examine his elder brother, who was showing

signs of general paralysis. In the course of my conversation with the

patient an awkward episode occurred for he gave his brother away forno accountable reason by talking of his youthful follies. I had asked

the patient the year of his birth (cf. the year of Goethe’s death in the

dream) and had made him carry out a number of calculations in order

to test the weakness of his memory.

   (2) A medical journal, which bore my name among others on its title-

page,  had  published  a  positively  ‘crushing’  criticism  by  a  youthful

reviewer of a book by my friend F. in Berlin. I took the editor to task

over this; but, though he expressed his regret, he would not undertake

to  offer  any  redress.  I  therefore  severed  my  connection  with  the

journal,  but  in  my  letter  of  resignation  expressed  a  hope  that our

personal relations would not be affected by the event. This was the

true source of the dream. The unfavourable reception of my friend’s

work  had  made  a  profound  impression  on  me.  It  contained,  in  my

opinion, a fundamental biological discovery, which is only now - many

years later beginning to find favour with the experts.

   (3) A woman patient of mine had given me an account a short time

before of her brother’s illness, and how he had broken out in a frenzy

with  cries  of  ‘Nature!  Nature!’  The  doctors  believed  that  his

exclamation came from his having read Goethe’s striking essay on

that  subject  and  that  it  showed  he  had  been  overworking  at  his

studies. I had remarked that it seemed to me more plausible that his

exclamation of the word ‘Nature’ should be taken in the sexual sense

in which it is used by the less educated people here. This idea of mine

was at least not disproved by the fact that the unfortunate young man

subsequently mutilated his own genitals. He was eighteen at the time

of his outbreak.

   Behind my own ego in the dream-content there lay concealed, in the

first instance, my friend who had been so badly treated by the critic. ‘I

tried to throw a little light on the chronological data.’ My friend’s book

dealt  with  the chronological  data  of  life  and  among  other  things

showed that the length of Goethe’s life was a multiple of a number of

days that has a significance in biology. But this ego was compared

with a paralytic: ‘I was not quite sure what year we were in.’ Thus the

dream made out that my friend was behaving like a paralytic, and in

this  respect  it  was  a  mass  of  absurdities.  The  dream-thoughts,

however, were saying ironically: ‘Naturally, it’s he who is the crazy fool

and it’s you who are the men of genius and know better. Surely itcouldn’t  be  the reverse?’  There  were  plenty  of  examples  of  this

reversal in the dream. For instance, Goethe attacked the young man,

which is absurd, whereas it is still easy for quite a young man to attack

the great Goethe.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1079

 

   I should like to lay it down that no dream is prompted by motives

other than egoistic ones. In fact, the ego in the present dream does

not stand only for my friend but for myself as well. I was identifying

myself  with  him,  because  the  fate  of  his  discovery  seemed  to

foreshadow the reception of my own findings. If I were to bring forward

my theory emphasizing the part played by sexuality in the aetiology of

psychoneurotic  disorders  (cf.  the  allusion  to  the  eighteen-year-old

patient’s  cry  of  ‘Nature!  Nature!’),  I  should  come  across  the  same

criticisms; and I was already preparing to meet them with the same

derision.

   If we pursue the dream-thoughts further, we shall keep on finding

ridicule and derision as correlates of the absurdities of the manifest

dream. It is well known that it was the discovery of the split skull of a

sheep on the Lido of Venice that gave Goethe the idea of the so-

called ‘vertebral’ theory of the skull. My friend boasts that, when he

was a student, he released a storm which led to the resignation of an

old Professor who, though he had once been distinguished (among

other  things  in  connection  precisely  with  the  same  branch  of

comparative anatomy), had become incapable of teaching owing to

senile dementia. Thus the agitation which my friend promoted served

to combat the mischievous system according to which there is no age

limit  for  academic  workers  in  German  universities  -  for age  is

proverbially no defence against folly. - In the hospital here I had the

honour of serving for years under a chief who had long been a fossil

and had for decades been notoriously feeble minded, but who was

allowed to continue carrying on his responsible duties. At this point I

thought  of  a  descriptive  term  based  upon  the  discovery  on  the

Lido.¹Some of my young contemporaries at the hospital concocted, inconnection with this man, a version of what was then a popular song:

‘Das hat kein Goethe g’schrieben, das hat kein Schiller g’dicht . . .’ ²

 

   ¹ [‘Schafkopf’, literally ‘sheep’s head’, = ‘silly ass.’]

   ² [‘This was written by no Goethe, this was composed by no Schiller.’]

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1080

 

                                          VII

 

   We have not yet come to the end of our consideration of the dream-

work.  In  addition  to  condensation,  displacement  and  pictorial

arrangement of the psychical material, we are obliged to assign it yet

another activity, though this is not to be found in operation in every

dream. I shall not deal exhaustively with this part of the dream-work,

and will therefore merely remark that the easiest way of forming an

idea of its nature is to suppose - though the supposition probably does

not meet the facts - that it only comes into operation after the dream-

content has already been constructed. Its function would then consist

in arranging the constituents of the dream in such a way that they form

an approximately connected whole, a dream-composition. In this way

the dream is given a kind of façade (though this does not, it is true,

hide its content at every point), and thus receives a first, preliminary

interpretation,  which  is  supported  by  interpolations  and  slight

modifications. Incidentally, this revision of the dream-content is only

possible if it is not too punctiliously carried out; nor does it present us

with  anything  more  than  a  glaring  misunderstanding  of  the  dream-

thoughts. Before we start upon the analysis of a dream we have to

clear the ground of this attempt at an interpretation.

   The motive for this part of the dream-work is particularly obvious.

Considerations of intelligibility are what lead to this final revision of a

dream; and this reveals the origin of the activity. It behaves towards

the dream-content lying before it just as our normal psychical activity

behaves  in  general  towards  any  perceptual  content  that  may  be

presented  to  it.  It  understands  that  content  on  the  basis  of  certain

anticipatory ideas, and arranges it, even at the moment of perceivingit, on the presupposition of its being intelligible; in so doing it runs a

risk of falsifying it, and in fact, if it cannot bring it into line with anything

familiar,  is  a  prey  to  the  strangest  misunderstandings.  As  is  well

known, we are incapable of seeing a series of unfamiliar signs or of

hearing a succession of unknown words, without at once falsifying the

perception  from  considerations  of  intelligibility,  on  the  basis  of

something already known to us.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1081

 

   Dreams which have undergone a revision of this kind at the hands of

a psychical activity completely analogous to waking thought may be

described  as  ‘well-constructed.’  In  the  case  of  other  dreams  this

activity has completely broken down; no attempt even has been made

to arrange or interpret the material, and, since after we have woken up

we feel ourselves identical with this last part of the dream-work, we

make a judgement that the dream was ‘hopelessly confused.’ From

the  point  of  view  of  analysis,  however,  a  dream  that  resembles  a

disordered heap of disconnected fragments is just as valuable as one

that has been beautifully polished and provided with a surface. In the

former case, indeed, we are saved the trouble of demolishing what

has been superimposed upon the dream-content.

      It  would  be  a  mistake,  however,  to  suppose  that  these  dream-

façades  are  nothing  other  than  mistaken  and  somewhat  arbitrary

revisions of the dream-content by the conscious agency of our mental

life. In the erection of a dream-façade use is not infrequently made of

wishful phantasies which are present in the dream-thoughts in a pre-

constructed form, and are of the same character as the appropriately

named  ‘day-dreams’  familiar  to  us  in  waking  life.  The  wishful

phantasies revealed by analysis in night-dreams often turn out to be

repetitions or modified versions of scenes from infancy; thus in some

cases  the  façade  of  the  dream  directly  reveals  the  dream’s  actual

nucleus, distorted by an admixture of other material.

                                         On Dreams

                                                                                      1082

 

   The dream-work exhibits no activities other than the four that have

already been mentioned. If we keep to the definition of ‘dream-work’

as the process of transforming the dream-thoughts into the dream-

content, it follows that the dream-work is not creative, that it develops

no phantasies of its own, that it makes no judgements and draws no

conclusions; it has no functions whatever other than condensation and

displacement of the material and its modification into pictorial form, to

which must be added as a variable factor the final bit of interpretative

revision.  It  is  true  that  we  find  various  things  in  the  dream-content

which we should be inclined to regard as a product of some other and

higher  intellectual  function;  but  in  every  case  analysis  shows

convincingly  that these  intellectual  operations  have  already  been

performed in the dream-thoughts and have only been TAKEN OVER by

the dream-content. A conclusion drawn in a dream is nothing other

than  the  repetition  of  a  conclusion  in  the  dream-thoughts;  if  the

conclusion  is  taken  over  into  the  dream  unmodified,  it  will  appear

impeccable;  if  the  dream-work  has  displaced  it  on  to  some  other

material, it will appear nonsensical. A calculation in the dream-content

signifies nothing more than that there is a calculation in the dream-

thoughts; but while the latter is always rational, a dream-calculation

may produce the wildest results if its factors are condensed or if its

mathematical operations are displaced on to other material. Not even

the  speeches  that  occur  in  the  dream-content  are  original

compositions; they turn out to be a hotchpotch of speeches made,

heard or read, which have been revived in the dream-thoughts and

whose  wording  is  exactly  reproduced,  while  their  origin  is  entirely

disregarded and their meaning is violently changed.

   It will perhaps be as well to support these last assertions by a few

examples.

   (I) Here is an innocent-sounding, well-constructed dream dreamt by

a woman patient:

   She dreamt she was going to the market with her cook, who was

carrying the basket. After she had asked for something, the butcher

said  to  her:  ‘That’s  not  obtainable  any  longer’,  and  offered  hersomething else, adding ‘This is good too.’ She rejected it and went on

to  the  woman  who  sells  vegetables,  who  tried  to  get  her  to  buy  a

peculiar  vegetable  that  was  tied  up  in  bundles  but  was  of  a  black

colour. She said: ‘I don’t recognize that; I won’t take it.’

   The remark ‘That’s not obtainable any longer’ originated from the

treatment itself . A few days earlier I had explained to the patient in

those very words that the earliest memories of childhood were ‘not

obtainable  any  longer  as  such’,  but  were  replaced  in  analysis  by

‘transferences’ and dreams. So I was the butcher.

   The second speech - ‘I don’t recognize that’ - occurred in an entirely

different connection. On the previous day she had reproved her cook,

who incidentally also appeared in the dream, with the words: ‘Behave

yourself properly! I don’t recognize that!’ meaning, no doubt, that she

did not understand such behaviour and would not put up with it. As the

result of a displacement, it was the more innocent part of this speech

which made its way into the content of the dream; but in the dream-

thoughts it was only the other part of the speech that played a part.

For  the  dream-work  had  reduced  to  complete  unintelligibility  and

extreme  innocence  an  imaginary  situation  in  which I was behaving

improperly to the lady in a particular way. But this situation which the

patient was expecting in her imagination was itself only a new edition

of something she had once actually experienced.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1083

 

      (II)  Here  is  an  apparently  quite  meaningless  dream-containing

figures. She  was  going  to  pay  for  something.  Her  daughter  took  3

florins and 65 kreuzers from her (the mother’s) purse. The dreamer

said to her: ‘What are you about? It only costs 21 kreuzers.’

   The dreamer came from abroad and her daughter was at school

here. She was in a position to carry on her treatment with me as long

as her daughter remained in Vienna. The day before the dream the

head-mistress  had  suggested  to  her  that  she  should  leave  her

daughter at school for another year. In that case she could also have

continued her treatment for a year. The figures in the dream becomesignificant if we remember that ‘time is money.’ One year is equal to

365  days,  or,  expressed  in  money,  365  kreuzers  or  3  florins  65

kreuzers. The 21 kreuzers corresponded to the 3 weeks which had

still to run between the dream-day and the end of the school term and

also  to  the  end  of  the  patient’s  treatment.  It  was  clearly  financial

considerations  which  had  induced  the  lady  to  refuse  the  head

mistress’s proposal, and which were responsible for the smallness of

the sums mentioned in the dream.

   (III) A lady who, though she was still young, had been married for a

number  of  years,  received  news  that  an  acquaintance  of  hers,

Fräulein  Elise  L.,  who  was  almost  exactly  her  contemporary,  had

become engaged. This was the precipitating cause of the following

dream:

   She was at the theatre with her husband. One side of the stalls was

completely empty. Her husband told her that Elise L. and her fiancé

had wanted to go too; but had only been able to get bad seats - three

for 1 florin 50 kreuzers - and of course they could not take those. She

thought it would not really have done any harm if they had.

   What interests us here is the source of the figures in the material of

the  dream-thoughts  and  the  transformations  which  they  underwent.

What was the origin of the 1 florin 50 kreuzers? It came from what was

in fact an indifferent event of the previous day. Her sister-in-law had

been given a present of 150 florins by her husband and had been in a

hurry  to  get  rid  of  them  by  buying  a  piece  of  jewellery.  It  is  to  be

noticed that 150 florins is a hundred  times  as  much  as  1  florin  50

kreuzers. The only connection with the ‘three’, which was the number

of  the  theatre  tickets,  was  that  her  newly  engaged  friend  was  that

number of months - three - her junior. The situation in the dream was

a repetition of a small incident which her husband often teased her

about. On one occasion she had been in a great hurry to buy tickets

for a play in advance, and when she got to the theatre she had found

that one side of the stalls was almost completely empty. There had

been no  need  for  her  to  be  in  such  a  hurry.  Finally,  we  must  not

overlook the absurdity in the dream of two people taking three tickets

for a play.

   Now for the dream-thoughts: ‘It was absurd to marry so early. There

was no  need  for  me  to  be  in  such  a  hurry.  I  see  from  Elise  L.’sexample that I should have got a husband in the end. Indeed, I should

have got one a hundred times better’ (a treasure) ‘if I had only waited.

My money’ (or dowry) ‘could have bought three men just as good.’

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1084

 

                                          VIII

 

   Having been made acquainted with the dream-work by the foregoing

discussion,  we  shall  no  doubt  be  inclined  to  pronounce  it  a  quite

peculiar psychical process, the like of which, so far as we are aware,

does not exist elsewhere. It is as though we were carrying over on to

the  dream-work  all  the  astonishment  which  used  formerly  to  be

aroused in us by its product, the dream. In fact, however, the dream-

work is only the first to be discovered of a whole series of psychical

processes,  responsible  for  of  hysterical  symptoms,  of  phobias,

obsessions and delusions. Condensation and, above all, displacement

are  invariable  characteristics  of  these  other  processes  as  well.

Modification  into  a  pictorial  form,  on  the  other  hand,  remains  a

peculiarity of the dream-work. If this explanation places dreams in a

single series alongside the structures produced by psychical illness,

this makes it all the more important for us to discover the essential

determining  conditions  of  such  processes  as  those  of  dream-

formation.  We  shall  probably  be  surprised  to  hear  that  neither  the

state of sleep nor illness is among these indispensable conditions. A

whole number of the phenomena of the everyday life of healthy people

-  such  as  forgetting,  slips  of  the  tongue,  bungled  actions  and  a

particular class of errors - owe their origin to a psychical mechanism

analogous to that of dreams and of the other members of the series.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1085

 

   The heart of the problem lies in displacement, which is by far the

most striking of the special achievements of the dream-work. If weenter deeply into the subject, we come to realize that the essential

determining condition of displacement is a purely psychological one:

something in the nature of a motive. One comes upon its track if one

takes into consideration certain experiences which one cannot escape

in analysing dreams. In analysing my specimen dream I was obliged

to break off my report of the dream-thoughts on p. 1059, because, as I

confessed,  there  were  some  among  them  which  I  should  prefer  to

conceal from strangers and which I could not communicate to other

people without doing serious mischief in important directions. I added

that  nothing  would  be  gained  if  I  were  to  choose  another  dream

instead of that particular one with a view to reporting its analysis: I

should come upon dream-thoughts which required to be kept secret in

the  case  of every  dream  with  an  obscure  or  confused  content.  If,

however, I were to continue the analysis on my own account, without

any  reference  to  other  people  (whom,  indeed,  an  experience  so

personal as my dream cannot possibly have been intended to reach), I

should eventually arrive at thoughts which would surprise me, whose

presence in me I was unaware of, which were not only alien but also

disagreeable  to  me,  and  which  I  should  therefore  feel  inclined  to

dispute energetically, although the chain of thoughts running through

the analysis insisted upon them remorselessly. There is only one way

of  accounting  for  this  state  of  affairs,  which  is  of  quite  universal

occurrence; and that is to suppose that these thoughts really were

present  in  my  mind,  and  in  possession  of  a  certain  amount  of

psychical  intensity  or  energy,  but  that  they  were  in  a  peculiar

psychological  situation,  as  a  consequence  of  which  they could  not

become conscious to me. (I describe this particular condition as one of

‘repression.’) We cannot help concluding, then, that there is a causal

connection between the obscurity of the dream-content and the state

of  repression  (in  admissibility  to  consciousness)  of  certain  of  the

dream-thoughts, and that the dream had to be obscure so as not to

betray the proscribed dream-thoughts. Thus we are led to the concept

of a ‘dream-distortion’, which is the product of the dream-work and

serves the purpose of dissimulation, that is, of disguise.

 


                                        On Dreams                                                                                      1086

 

   I will test this on the specimen dream which I chose for analysis, and

enquire what the thought was which made its way into that dream in a

distorted form, and which I should be inclined to repudiate if it were

undistorted. I recall that my free cab-drive reminded me of my recent

expensive drive with a member of my family, that the interpretation of

the dream was ‘I wish I might for once experience love that cost me

nothing’, and that a short time before the dream I had been obliged to

spend a considerable sum of money on this same person’s account.

Bearing this context in mind, I cannot escape the conclusion that I

regret having made that expenditure. Not until I have recognized this

impulse does my wish in the dream for the love which would call for no

expenditure acquire a meaning. Yet I can honestly say that when I

decided to spend this sum of money I did not hesitate for a moment.

My regret at having to do so - the contrary current of feeling - did not

become conscious to me. Why it did not, is another and a far-reaching

question, the answer to which is known to me but belongs in another

connection.

   If the dream that I analyse is not my own, but someone else’s, the

conclusion will be the same, though the grounds for believing it will be

different. If the dreamer is a healthy person, there is no other means

open to me of obliging him to recognize the repressed ideas that have

been  discovered  than  by  pointing  out  the  context  of  the  dream-

thoughts;  and  I  cannot  help  it  if  he  refuses  to  recognize  them.  If,

however,  I  am  dealing  with  a  neurotic  patient,  with  a  hysteric  for

instance, he will find the acceptance of the repressed thought forced

upon him, owing to its connection with the symptoms of his illness,

and owing to the improvement he experiences when he exchanges

those symptoms for the repressed ideas. In the case, for instance, of

the woman patient who had the dream I have just quoted about the

three theatre tickets which cost 1 florin 50 kreuzers, the analysis led to

the inevitable conclusion that she had a low estimate of her husband

(cf. her idea that she could have got one ‘a hundred times better’), that

she regretted having married him, and that she would have liked to

exchange him for another one. It is true that she asserted that she

loved her husband, and that her emotional life knew nothing of anysuch  low  estimate  of  him,  but  all  her  symptoms  led  to  the  same

conclusion as the dream. And after her repressed memories had been

revived of a particular period during which she had consciously not

loved  her  husband,  her  symptoms  cleared  up  and  her  resistance

against the interpretation of the dream disappeared.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1087

 

                                            IX

 

   Now that we have established the concept of repression and have

brought  dream-distortion  into  relation  with  repressed  psychical

material,  we  can  express  in  general  terms  the  principal  finding  to

which we have been led by the analysis of dreams. In the case of

dreams which are intelligible and have a meaning, we have found that

they  are  undisguised  wish-fulfilments;  that  is,  that  in  their  case  the

dream-situation  represents  as  fulfilled  a  wish  which  is  known  to

consciousness,  which  is  left  over  from  daytime  life,  and  which  is

deservedly  of  interest.  Analysis  has  taught  us  something  entirely

analogous in the case of obscure and confused dreams: once again

the  dream-situation  represents  a  wish  as  fulfilled  -  a  wish  which

invariably  arises  from  the  dream-thoughts,  but  one  which  is

represented  in  an  unrecognizable  form  and  can  only  be  explained

when it has been traced back in analysis. The wish in such cases is

either  itself  a  repressed  one  and  alien  to  consciousness,  or  it  is

intimately  connected  with  repressed  thoughts  and  is  based  upon

them.  Thus  the  formula  for  such  dreams  is  as  follows: they  are

disguised  fulfilments  of  repressed  wishes.  It  is  interesting  in  this

connection  to  observe  that  the  popular  belief  that  dreams  always

foretell the future is confirmed. Actually the future which the dream

shows us is not the one which will occur but the one which we should

like to occur. The popular mind is behaving here as it usually does:

what it wishes, it believes.

   Dreams fall into three classes according to their attitude to wish-

fulfilment.  The  first  class  consists  of  those  which  represent  anunrepressed wish undisguisedly; these are the dreams of an infantile

type  which  become  ever  rarer  in  adults.  Secondly  there  are  the

dreams which express a repressed wish disguisedly; these no doubt

form the overwhelming majority of all our dreams, and require analysis

before they can be understood. In the third place there are the dreams

which represent a repressed wish, but do so with insufficient or no

disguise. These last dreams are invariably accompanied by anxiety,

which interrupts them. In their case anxiety takes the place of dream

distortion; and in dreams of the second class anxiety is only avoided

owing to the dream-work. There is no great difficulty in proving that the

ideational content which produces anxiety in us in dreams was once a

wish but has since undergone repression.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1088

 

      There  are  also  clear  dreams  with  a  distressing  content,  which,

however, is not felt[/experienced] as distressing in the dream itself.

For this reason they cannot be counted as anxiety-dreams; but they

have  always  been  taken  as  evidence  of  the  fact  that  dreams  are

without meaning and have no psychical value. An analysis of a dream

of this kind will show that we are dealing with well-disguised fulfilments

of repressed wishes, that is to say with a dream of the second class; it

will also show how admirably the process of displacement is adapted

for disguising wishes.

   A girl had a dream of seeing her sister’s only surviving child lying

dead in the same surroundings in which a few years earlier she had in

fact seen the dead body of her sister’s first child. She felt no pain over

this; but she naturally rejected the idea that this situation represented

any wish of hers. Nor was there any need to suppose this. It had been

beside  the  first  child’s  coffin,  however,  that,  years  before,  she  had

seen and spoken to the man she was in love with; if the second child

died, she would no doubt meet the man again in her sister’s house.

She longed for such a meeting, but fought against the feeling. On the

dream-day she had bought a ticket for a lecture which was to be given

by this same man, to whom she was still devoted. Her dream was asimple  dream  of  impatience  of  the  kind  that  often  occurs  before

journeys, visits to the theatre, and similar enjoyments that lie ahead.

But  in  order  to  disguise  this  longing  from  her,  the  situation  was

displaced on to an event of a kind most unsuitable for producing a

feeling of enjoyment, though it had in fact done so in the past. It is to

be  observed  that  the  emotional  behaviour  in  the  dream  was

appropriate to the real content which lay in the background and not to

what was pushed into the foreground. The dream-situation anticipated

the meeting she had so long desired; it offered no basis for any painful

feelings.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1089

 

                                            X

 

   Hitherto philosophers have had no occasion to concern themselves

with a psychology of repression. We may therefore be permitted to

make a first approach to this hitherto unknown topic by constructing a

pictorial image of the course of events in dream-formation. It is true

that the schematic picture we have arrived at - not only from the study

of dreams - is a fairly complicated one; but we cannot manage with

anything simpler. Our hypothesis is that in our mental apparatus there

are two thought-constructing agencies, of which the second enjoys the

privilege  of  having  free  access  to  consciousness  for  its  products

whereas the activity of the first is in itself unconscious and can only

reach consciousness by way of the second. On the frontier between

the two agencies, where the first passes over to the second, there is a

censorship, which only allows what is agreeable to it to pass through

and holds back everything else. According to our definition, then, what

is rejected by the censorship is in a state of repression. Under certain

conditions, of which the state of sleep is one, the relation between the

strength of the two agencies is modified in such a way that what is

repressed  can  no  longer  be  held  back.  In  the  state  of  sleep  this

probably occurs owing to a relaxation of the censorship; when this

happens it becomes possible for what has hitherto been repressed tomake  a  path  for  itself  to  consciousness.  Since,  however,  the

censorship  is  never  completely  eliminated  but  merely  reduced,  the

repressed material must submit to certain alterations which mitigate its

offensive  features.  What  becomes  conscious  in  such  cases  is  a

compromise between the intentions of one agency and the demands

of the other. Repression - relaxation of the censorship - the formation

of a compromise, this is the fundamental pattern for the generation not

only of dreams but of many other psychopathological structures; and

in  the  latter  cases  too  we  may  observe  that  the  formation  of

compromises  is  accompanied  by  processes  of  condensation  and

displacement  and  by  the  employment  of  superficial  associations,

which we have become familiar with in the dream-work.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1090

 

   We have no reason to disguise the fact that in the hypothesis which

we have set up in order to explain the dream-work a part is played by

what might be described as a ‘ daemonic’ element. We have gathered

an impression that the formation of obscure dreams occurs as though

one person who was dependent upon a second person had to make a

remark which was bound to be disagreeable in the ears of this second

one; and it is on the basis of this simile that we have arrived at the

concepts of dream-distortion and censorship, and have endeavoured

to  translate  our  impression  into  a  psychological  theory  which  is  no

doubt crude but is at least lucid. Whatever it may be with which a

further investigation of the subject may enable us to identify our first

and second agencies, we may safely expect to find a confirmation of

some  correlate  of  our  hypothesis  that  the  second  agency  controls

access  to  consciousness  and  can  bar  the  first  agency  from  such

access.

   When the state of sleep is over, the censorship quickly recovers its

full strength; and it can now wipe out all that was won from it during

the  period  of  its  weakness.  This  must  be  one  part  at  least  of  the

explanation of the forgetting of dreams, as is shown by an observation

which has been confirmed on countless occasions. It not infrequentlyhappens that during the narration of a dream or during its analysis a

fragment of the dream-content which had seemed to be forgotten re-

emerges.  This  fragment  which  has  been  rescued  from  oblivion

invariably affords us the best and most direct access to the meaning

of the dream. And that, in all probability, must have been the only

reason for its having been forgotten, that is, for its having been once

more suppressed.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1091

 

                                            XI

 

   When once we have recognized that the content of a dream is the

representation  of  a  fulfilled  wish  and  that  its  obscurity  is  due  to

alterations in repressed material made by the censorship, we shall no

longer have any difficulty in discovering the function of dreams. It is

commonly said that sleep is disturbed by dreams; strangely enough,

we  are  led  to  a  contrary  view  and  must  regard  dreams  as the

guardians of sleep.

   In the case of children’s dreams there should be no difficulty in

accepting  this  statement.  The  state  of  sleep  or  the  psychical

modification involved in sleep, whatever that may be, is brought about

by  a  resolve  to  sleep  which  is  either  imposed  upon  the  child  or  is

reached  on  the  basis  of  sensations  of  fatigue;  and  it  is  only  made

possible  by  the  withholding  of  stimuli  which  might  suggest  to  the

psychical apparatus aims other than that of sleeping. The means by

which external stimuli can be kept off are familiar to us; but what are

the means available for controlling internal mental stimuli which set

themselves against falling asleep? Let us observe a mother putting

her  child  to  sleep.  The  child  gives  vent  to  an  unceasing  stream  of

desires:  he  wants  one  more  kiss,  he  wants  to  go  on  playing.  His

mother  satisfies  some  of  these  desires,  but  uses  her  authority  to

postpone others of them to the next day. It is clear that any wishes or

needs that may arise have an inhibiting effect upon falling asleep. We

all know the amusing story told by Balduin Groller of the bad little boywho woke up in the middle of the night and shouted across the night

nursery: ‘I want the rhino!’ A better behaved child, instead of shouting,

would have dreamt that he was playing with the rhino. Since a dream

that shows a wish as fulfilled is believed during sleep, it does away

with the wish and makes sleep possible. It cannot be disputed that

dream-images  are  believed  in  this  way,  for  they  are  clothed  in  the

psychical  appearance  of  perceptions,  and  children  have  not  yet

acquired the later faculty of distinguishing hallucinations or phantasies

from reality.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1092

 

   Adults have learnt to make this distinction; they have also grasped

the uselessness of wishing, and after lengthy practice know how to

postpone their desires until they can find satisfaction by the long and

roundabout  path  of  altering  the  external  world.  In  their  case,

accordingly, wish-fulfilments along the short psychical path are rare in

sleep too; it is even possible, indeed, that they never occur at all, and

that anything that may seem to us to be constructed on the pattern of

a child’s dream in fact requires a far more complicated solution. On

the  other  hand,  in  the  case  of  adults  -  and  this  no  doubt  applies

without  exception  to  everyone  in  full  possession  of  his  senses  -  a

differentiation has occurred in the psychical material, which was not

present in children. A psychical agency has come into being, which,

taught  by  experience  of  life,  exercises  a  dominating  and  inhibiting

influence  upon  mental  impulses  and  maintains  that  influence  with

jealous severity, and which, owing to its relation to consciousness and

to  voluntary  movement,  is  armed  with  the  strongest  instruments  of

psychical  power.  A  portion  of  the  impulses  of  childhood  has  been

suppressed by this agency as being useless to life, and any thought-

material derived from those impulses is in a state of repression.

   Now while this agency, in which we recognize our normal ego, is

concentrated on the wish to sleep, it appears to be compelled by the

psycho-physiological  conditions  of  sleep  to  relax  the  energy  with

which it is accustomed to hold down the repressed material during theday. In itself, no doubt, this relaxation does no harm; however much

the  suppressed  impulses  of  the  childish  mind  may  prance  around,

their  access  to  consciousness  is  still  difficult  and  their  access  to

movement  is  barred  as  the  result  of  this  same  state  of  sleep.  The

danger of sleep being disturbed by them must, however, be guarded

against. We must in any case suppose that even during deep sleep a

certain amount of free attention is on duty as a guard against sensory

stimuli,  and  that  this  guard  may  sometimes  consider  waking  more

advisable than a continuation of sleep. Otherwise there would be no

explanation of how it is that we can be woken up at any moment by

sensory stimuli of some particular quality. As the physiologist Burdach

insisted  long  ago,  a  mother,  for  instance,  will  be  roused  by  the

whimpering of her baby, or a miller if his mill comes to a stop, or most

people if they are called softly by their own name. Now the attention

which is thus on guard is also directed towards internal wishful stimuli

arising from the repressed material, and combines with them to form

the dream which, as a compromise, simultaneously satisfies both of

the  two  agencies.  The  dream  provides  a  kind  of  psychical

consummation for the wish that has been suppressed (or formed with

the help of repressed material) by representing it as fulfilled; but it also

satisfies the other agency by allowing sleep to continue. In this respect

our ego is ready to behave like a child; it gives credence to the dream

images, as though what it wanted to say was: ‘Yes, yes! you’re quite

right, but let me go on sleeping!’ The low estimate which we form of

dreams when we are awake, and which we relate to their confused

and apparently illogical character, is probably nothing other than the

judgement passed by our sleeping ego upon the repressed impulses,

a  judgement  based,  with  better  right,  upon  the  motor  impotence  of

these disturbers of sleep. We are sometimes aware in our sleep of this

contemptuous judgement. If the content of a dream goes too far in

overstepping the censorship, we think: ‘After all, it’s only a dream!’ -

and go on sleeping.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1093

    This view is not traversed by the fact that there are marginal cases

in which the dream - as happens with anxiety-dreams - can no longer

perform  its  function  of  preventing  an  interruption  of  sleep,  but

assumes instead the other function of promptly bringing sleep to an

end.  In  doing  so  it  is  merely  behaving  like  a  conscientious  night-

watchman, who first carries out his duty by suppressing disturbances

so that the townsmen may not be woken up, but afterwards continues

to do his duty by himself waking the townsmen up, if the causes of the

disturbance seem to him serious and of a kind that he cannot cope

with alone.

      The  function  of  the  dream  as  a  guardian  of  sleep  becomes

particularly  evident  when  an  external  stimulus  impinges  upon  the

senses  of  a  sleeper.  It  is  generally  recognized  that  sensory  stimuli

arising  during  sleep  influence  the  content  of  dreams;  this  can  be

proved experimentally and is among the few certain (but, incidentally,

greatly overvalued) findings of medical investigation into dreams. But

this finding involves a puzzle which has hitherto proved insoluble. For

the sensory stimulus which the experimenter causes to impinge upon

the sleeper is not correctly recognized in the dream; it is subjected to

one  of  an  indefinite  number  of  possible  interpretations,  the  choice

being apparently left to an arbitrary psychical determination. But there

is,  of  course,  no  such  thing  as  arbitrary  determination  in  the  mind.

There are several ways in which a sleeper may react to an external

sensory stimulus. He may wake up or he may succeed in continuing

his sleep in spite of it. In the latter case he may make use of a dream

in order to get rid of the external stimulus, and here again there is

more than one method open to him. For instance, he may get rid of

the stimulus by dreaming that he is in a situation which is absolutely

incompatible with the stimulus. Such was the line taken by a sleeper

who was subject to disturbance by a painful abscess on the perineum.

He dreamt that he was riding on a horse, making use of the poultice

that was intended to mitigate his pain as a saddle, and in this way he

avoided being disturbed. Or, as happens more frequently, the external

stimulus is given an interpretation which brings it into the context of a

repressed wish which is at the moment awaiting fulfilment; in this way

the external stimulus is robbed of its reality and is treated as though it

were a portion of the psychical material. Thus someone dreamt thathe had written a comedy with a particular plot; it was produced in a

theatre, the first act was over, and there were thunders of applause;

the clapping was terrific. . . . The dreamer must have succeeded in

prolonging his sleep till after the interference had ceased; for when he

woke  up  he  no  longer  heard  the  noise,  but  rightly  concluded  that

someone must have been beating a carpet or mattress. Every dream

which occurs immediately before the sleeper is woken by a loud noise

has  made  an  attempt  at  explaining  away  the  arousing  stimulus  by

providing  another  explanation  of  it  and  has  thus  sought  to  prolong

sleep, even if only for a moment.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1094

 

                                          XII

 

   No one who accepts the view that the censorship is the chief reason

for  dream-distortion  will  be  surprised  to  learn  from  the  results  of

dream-interpretation that most of the dreams of adults are traced back

by analysis to erotic wishes. This assertion is not aimed at dreams

with an undisguised sexual content, which are no doubt familiar to all

dreamers from their own experience and are as a rule the only ones to

be described as ‘sexual dreams.’ Even dreams of this latter kind offer

enough surprises in their choice of the people whom they make into

sexual  objects,  in  their  disregard  of  all  the  limitations  which  the

dreamer imposes in his waking life upon his sexual desires, and by

their many strange details, hinting at what are commonly known as

‘perversions.’ A great many other dreams, however, which show no

sign of being erotic in their manifest content, are revealed by the work

of  interpretation  in  analysis  as  sexual  wish-fulfilments;  and,  on  the

other hand, analysis proves that a great many of the thoughts left over

from the activity of waking life as ‘residues of the previous day’ only

find their way to representation in dreams through the assistance of

repressed erotic wishes.

      There  is  no  theoretical  necessity  why  this  should  be  so;  but  to

explain the fact it may be pointed out that no other group of instinctshas been submitted to such far-reaching suppression by the demands

of cultural education, while at the same time the sexual instincts are

also the ones which, in most people, find it easiest to escape from the

control  of  the  highest  mental  agencies.  Since  we  have  become

acquainted with infantile sexuality: which is often so unobtrusive in its

manifestations and is always overlooked and misunderstood, we are

justified in saying that almost every civilized man retains the infantile

forms of sexual life in some respect or other. We can thus understand

how  it  is  that  repressed  infantile  sexual  wishes  provide  the  most

frequent and strongest motive-forces for the construction of dreams.¹

 

    ¹ See my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d).

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1095

 

   There is only one method by which a dream which expresses erotic

wishes can succeed in appearing innocently non-sexual in its manifest

content. The material of the sexual ideas must not be represented as

such,  but  must  be  replaced  in  the  content  of  the  dream  by  hints,

allusions and similar forms of indirect representation. But, unlike other

forms  of  indirect  representation,  that  which  is  employed  in  dreams

must  not  be  immediately  intelligible.  The  modes  of  representation

which fulfil these conditions are usually described as ‘symbols’ of the

things which they represent. Particular interest has been directed to

them  since  it  has  been  noticed  that  dreamers  speaking  the  same

language make use of the same symbols, and that in some cases,

indeed, the use of the same symbols extends beyond the use of the

same  language.  Since  dreamers  themselves  are  unaware  of  the

meaning of the symbols they use, it is difficult at first sight to discover

the  source  of  the  connection  between  the  symbols  and  what  they

replace and represent. The fact itself, however, is beyond doubt, and it

is  important  for  the  technique  of  dream-interpretation.  For,  with  the

help of a knowledge of dream-symbolism, it is possible to understand

the  meaning  of  separate  elements  of  the  content  of  a  dream  or

separate pieces of a dream or in some cases even whole dreams,

without having to ask the dreamer for his associations. Here we areapproaching the popular ideal of translating dreams and on the other

hand  are  returning  to  the  technique  of  interpretation  used  by  the

ancients,  to  whom  dream-interpretation  was  identical  with

interpretation by means of symbols.

   Although the study of dream-symbols is far from being complete, we

are  in  a  position  to  lay  down  with  certainty  a  number  of  general

statements and a quantity of special information on the subject. There

are some symbols which bear a single meaning almost universally:

thus the Emperor and Empress (or the King and Queen) stand for the

parents, rooms represent women¹ and their entrances and exits the

openings  of  the  body.  The  majority  of  dream-symbols  serve  to

represent persons, parts of the body and activities invested with erotic

interest;  in  particular,  the  genitals  are  represented  by  a  number  of

often very surprising symbols, and the greatest variety of objects are

employed to denote them symbolically. Sharp weapons, long and stiff

objects,  such  as  tree-trunks  and  sticks,  stand  for  the  male  genital;

while cupboards, boxes, carriages or ovens may represent the uterus.

In  such  cases  as  these  the tertium  comparationis,  the  common

element in these substitutions, is immediately intelligible; but there are

other  symbols  in  which  it  is  not  so  easy  to  grasp  the  connection.

Symbols  such  as  a  staircase  or  going  upstairs  to  represent  sexual

intercourse, a tie or cravat for the male organ, or wood for the female

one, provoke our unbelief until we can arrive at an understanding of

the symbolic relation underlying them by some other means. Moreover

a whole number of dream-symbols are bisexual and can relate to the

male or female genitals according to the context.

 

   ¹ Cf. ‘Frauenzimmer’[literally ‘women’s apartment’, commonly used in German as a slightly

derogatory word for ‘woman.’]
 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1096

 

   Some symbols are universally disseminated and can be met with in

all dreamers belonging to a single linguistic or cultural group; there are

others which occur only within the most restricted and individual limits,

symbols  constructed  by  an  individual  out  of  his  own  ideationalmaterial. Of the former class we can distinguish some whose claim to

represent  sexual  ideas  is  immediately  justified  by  linguistic  usage

(such, for instance, as those derived from agriculture, e.g. ‘fertilization’

or ‘seed’) and others whose relation to sexual ideas appears to reach

back into the very earliest ages and to the most obscure depths of our

conceptual  functioning.  The  power  of  constructing  symbols  has  not

been exhausted in our own days in the case of either of the two sorts

of  symbols  which  I  have  distinguished  at  the  beginning  of  this

paragraph. Newly discovered objects (such as airships) are, as we

may  observe,  at  once  adopted  as  universally  available  sexual

symbols.

   It would, incidentally, be a mistake to expect that if we had a still

profounder  knowledge  of  dream-symbolism  (of  the  ‘language  of

dreams’) we could do without asking the dreamer for his associations

to  the  dream  and  go  back  entirely  to  the  technique  of  dream-

interpretation  of  antiquity.  Quite  apart  from  individual  symbols  and

oscillations in the use of universal ones, one can never tell whether

any particular element in the content of a dream is to be interpreted

symbolically or in its proper sense, and one can be certain that the

whole  content  of  a  dream  is  not  to  be  interpreted  symbolically.  A

knowledge of dream-symbolism will never do more than enable us to

translate certain constituents of the dream-content, and will not relieve

us  of  the  necessity  for  applying  the  technical  rules  which  I  gave

earlier.  It  will,  however,  afford  the  most  valuable  assistance  to

interpretation precisely at points at which the dreamer’s associations

are insufficient or fail altogether.

 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1097

 

   Dream-symbolism is also indispensable to an understanding of what

are known as ‘typical’ dreams, which are common to everyone, and of

‘recurrent’ dreams in individuals.

   If the account I have given in this short discussion of the symbolic

mode of expression in dreams appears incomplete, I can justify my

neglect by drawing attention to one of the most important pieces ofknowledge  that  we  possess  on  this  subject.  Dream-symbolism

extends far beyond dreams: it is not peculiar to dreams, but exercises

a similar dominating influence on representation in fairy-tales, myths

and  legends,  in  jokes  and  in  folk-lore.  It  enables  us  to  trace  the

intimate  connections  between  dreams  and  these  latter  productions.

We  must  not  suppose  that  dream-symbolism  is  a  creation  of  the

dream-work; it is in all probability a characteristic of the unconscious

thinking  which  provides  the  dream-work  with  the  material  for

condensation, displacement and dramatization.¹

 

   ¹ Further information on dream-symbolism may be found in the works of early writers on

dream-interpretation, e.g. Artemidorus of Daldis and Scherner (1861), and also in my own
Interpretation of Dreams (1900a), in the mythological studies of the psycho-analytic school, as
well as in some of W. Stekel’s writings (e.g. 1911).
 


                                        On Dreams

                                                                                      1098

 

                                          XIII

 

   I lay no claim to having thrown light in these pages upon all the

problems  of  dreams,  nor  to  having  dealt  in  a  convincing  way  with

those that I have discussed. Anyone who is interested in the whole

extent of the literature of dreams may be referred to a work by Sante

de  Sanctis  (I  sogni,  1899);  and  anyone  who  wishes  to  hear  more

detailed  arguments  in  favour  of  the  view  of  dreams  which  I  myself

have  put  forward  should  turn  to  my  volume The  Interpretation  of

Dreams, 1900. It only remains for me now to indicate the direction in

which my exposition of the subject of the dream-work calls for pursuit.

   I have laid it down as the task of dream-interpretation to replace the

dream  by  the  latent  dream-thoughts,  that  is,  to  unravel  what  the

dream-work has woven. In so doing I have raised a number of new

psychological  problems  dealing  with  the  mechanism  of  this  dream-

work  itself,  as  well  as  with  the  nature  and  conditions  of  what  is

described  as  repression;  on  the  other  hand  I  have  asserted  the

existence  of  the  dream-thoughts  -  a  copious  store  of  psychical

structures of the highest order, which is characterized by all the signsof normal intellectual functioning, but is nevertheless withdrawn from

consciousness till it emerges in distorted form in the dream-content. I

cannot but assume that thoughts of this kind are present in everyone,

since almost everyone, including the most normal people, is capable

of dreaming. The unconscious material of the dream-thoughts and its

relation to consciousness and to repression raise further questions of

significance to psychology, the answers to which must no doubt be

postponed  until  analysis  has  clarified  the  origin  of  other

psychopathological  structures,  such  as  hysterical  symptoms  and

obsessional ideas.

                                                                                       1099

 

              THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYDAY LIFE

 

  Forgetting, Slips of the Tongue, Bungled Actions, Superstitions and

                                        Errors

 

                                        (1901)

 

 

 

                                    Nun ist die Luft von solchem Spuk so voll,

                                    Dass niemand weiss, wie er ihn meiden soll.

                                                Faust, Part II, Act V, Scene 5

 

                                    Now fills the air so many a haunting shape,

                                    That no one knows how best he may escape.

                                                (Bayard Taylor’s translation)

 


                                                                                      1100

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1101

 

                                      CHAPTER I

 

                THE FORGETTING OF PROPER NAMES

 

In the 1898 volume of the Monatschrift für Psychiatrie und Neurologie

I  published  under  the  title  of  ‘The  Psychical  Mechanism  of

Forgetfulness’  a  short  paper  the  substance  of  which  I  shall

recapitulate  here  and  take  as  the  starting-point  for  more  extensive

discussions.  In  it  I  applied  psychological  analysis  to  the  frequentcircumstance  of  proper  names  being  temporarily  forgotten,  by

exploring  a  highly  suggestive  example  drawn  from  my  self-

observation; and I reached the conclusion that this particular instance

(admittedly commonplace and without much practical significance), in

which a psychical function - the memory - refuses to operate, admits

of  an  explanation  much  more  far-reaching  than  that  which  the

phenomenon is ordinarily made to yield.

   If a psychologist were asked to explain why it is that on so many

occasions a proper name which we think we know perfectly well fails

to enter our heads, he would, unless I am much mistaken, be satisfied

with  answering  that  proper  names  succumb  more  easily  to  the

process of being forgotten than other kinds of memory-content. He

would bring forward the plausible reasons why proper names should

thus be singled out for special treatment, but would not suspect that

any other conditions played their part in such occurrences.

      My  close  preoccupation  with  the  phenomenon  of  names  being

temporarily  forgotten  arose  out  of  my  observation  of  certain

characteristics  which  could  be  recognized  sufficiently  clearly  in

individual cases, though not, it is true, in all of them. These are cases

in which a name is in fact not only forgotten, but wrongly remembered.

In the course of our efforts to recover the name that has dropped out,

other  ones  - substitute  names  -  enter  our  consciousness;  we

recognize  them  at  once,  indeed,  as  incorrect,  but  they  keep  on

returning  and  force  themselves  on  us  with  great  persistence.  The

process that should lead to the reproduction of the missing name has

been  so  to  speak displaced  and  has  therefore  led  to  an  incorrect

substitute.  My  hypothesis  is  that  this  displacement  is  not  left  to

arbitrary psychical choice but follows paths which can be predicted

and which conform to laws. In other words, I suspect that the name or

names which are substituted are connected in a discoverable way with

the missing name: and I hope, if I am successful in demonstrating this

connection, to proceed to throw light on the circumstances in which

names are forgotten.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1102 

   The name that I tried without success to recall in the example I

chose  for  analysis  in  1898  was  that  of  the  artist  who  painted  the

magnificent frescoes of the ‘Four Last Things’ in Orvieto cathedral.

Instead of the name I was looking for - Signorelli - the names of two

other  painters  - Botticelli  and Boltraffio  -  thrust  themselves  on  me,

though  they  were  immediately  and  decisively  rejected  by  my

judgement as incorrect. When I learnt the correct name from someone

else, I recognized it at once and without hesitation. The investigation

into the influences and the associative paths by which the reproducing

of the name had been displaced in this way from Signorelli to Botticelli

and Boltraffio led to the following results

   (a)  The reason why the name Signorelli was lost is not to be found

in  anything  special  about  the  name  itself  or  in  any  psychological

characteristic of the context into which it was introduced. The name I

had  forgotten  was  just  as  familiar  to  me  as  one  of  the  substitute

names - Botticelli - and much more familiar than the other substitute

name - Boltraffio - about whose owner I could scarcely produce any

information  other  than  that  he  belonged  to  the  Milanese  school.

Moreover the context in which the name was forgotten seemed to me

harmless  and  did  not  enlighten  me  further.  I  was  driving  in  the

company  of  a  stranger  from  Ragusa  in  Dalmatia  to  a  place  in

Herzegovina: our conversation turned to the subject of travel in Italy,

and I asked my companion whether he had ever been to Orvieto and

looked at the famous frescoes there, painted by . . .

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1103

 

   (b) Light was only thrown on the forgetting of the name when I

recalled the topic we had been discussing directly before, and it was

revealed  as  a  case  in  which a  topic  that  has  just  been  raised  is

disturbed by the preceding topic. Shortly before I put the question to

my travelling companion whether he had ever been to Orvieto, we had

been  talking  about  the  customs  of  the  Turks  living  in Bosnia  and

Herzegovina.  I  had  told  him  what  I  had  heard  from  a  colleaguepractising among those people - that they are accustomed to show

great confidence in their doctor and great resignation to fate. If one

has to inform them that nothing can be done for a sick person, their

reply is: ‘Herr: what is there to be said? If he could be saved, I know

you would have saved him.’ In these sentences we for the first time

meet with the words and names Bosnia, Herzegovina and Herr, which

can  be  inserted  into  an  associative  series  between Signorelli  and

Botticelli-Boltraffio.

   (c) I assume that the series of thoughts about the customs of the

Turks  in  Bosnia,  etc.,  acquired  the  capacity  to  disturb  the  next

succeeding thought from the fact that I had withdrawn my attention

from that series before it was brought to an end. I recall in fact wanting

to tell a second anecdote which lay close to the first in my memory.

These  Turks  place  a  higher  value  on  sexual  enjoyment  than  on

anything else, and in the event of sexual disorders they are plunged in

a despair which contrasts strangely with their resignation towards the

threat  of  death.  One  of  my  colleague’s  patients  once  said  to  him:

‘Herr, you must know that if that comes to an end then life is of no

value.’ I suppressed my account of this characteristic trait, since I did

not want to allude to the topic in a conversation with a stranger. But I

did more: I also diverted my attention from thoughts which might have

arisen  in  my  mind  from  the  topic  of  ‘death  and  sexuality.’  On  this

occasion I was still under the influence of a piece of news which had

reached me a few weeks before while making a brief stay at Trafoi. A

patient over whom I had taken a great deal of trouble had put an end

to his life on account of an incurable sexual disorder. I know for certain

that this melancholy event and everything related to it was not recalled

to my conscious memory during my journey to Herzegovina. But the

similarity between ‘Trafoi’ and ‘Boltraffio’ forces me to assume that this

reminiscence, in spite of my attention being deliberately diverted from

it, was brought into operation in me at the time.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1104

 

   (d) It is no longer possible for me to take the forgetting of the nameSignorelli as a chance event. I am forced to recognize the influence of

a motive in the process. It was a motive which caused me to interrupt

myself while recounting what was in my mind (concerning the customs

of the Turks, etc.), and it was a motive which further influenced me so

that I debarred the thoughts connected with them, the thoughts which

had led to the news at Trafoi, from becoming conscious in my mind. I

wanted,  therefore,  to  forget  something;  I  had repressed something.

What I wanted to forget was not, it is true, the name of the artist at

Orvieto but something else - something, however, which contrived to

place itself in an associative connection with his name, so that my act

of will missed its target and I forgot the one thing against my will, while

I wanted to forget the other thing intentionally. The disinclination to

remember was aimed against one content;  the inability to remember

emerged  in  another.  It  would  obviously  be  a  simpler  case  if

disinclination and inability to remember related to the same content .

Moreover  the  substitute  names  no  longer  strike  me  as  so  entirely

unjustified as they did before the matter was elucidated: by a sort of

compromise they remind me just as much of what I wanted to forget

as of what I wanted to remember; and they show me that my intention

to forget something was neither a complete success nor a complete

failure.

   (e) The way in which the missing name and the repressed topic (the

topic  of  death  and  sexuality,  etc.,  in  which  the  names  of  Bosnia,

Herzegovina and Trafoi appeared)  became linked is very striking. The

schematic diagram which I have inserted at this point, and which is

repeated from the 1898 paper, aims at giving a clear picture of this.

  

 

                                          Fig. 1.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1105

 

   The name Signorelli has undergone a division into two pieces. One

of the pairs of syllables (elli)  recurs without alteration in one of the

substitute  names:  while  the  other,  by  means  of  the  translation  of

Signor into Herr, has acquired a numerous and miscellaneous set of

relations to the names contained in the repressed topic, but for this

reason is not available for reproduction. The substitute for it has been

arrived  at  in  a  way  that  suggests  that  a  displacement  along  the

connected  names  of  ‘Herzegovina  and Bosnia’  had  taken  place,

without consideration for the sense or for the acoustic demarcation of

the syllables. Thus the names have been treated in this process like

the pictograms in a sentence which has had to be converted into a

picture-puzzle (or rebus). Of the whole course of events that have in

ways like these produced the substitute names instead of the name

Signorelli  no  information  has  been  given  to  consciousness.  At  first

sight it seems impossible to discover any relation between the topic in

which  the  name Signorelli  occurred  and  the  repressed  topic  which

preceded it in time, apart from this recurrence of the same syllables

(or rather sequence of letters).

   Perhaps it is not superfluous to remark that the conditions whichpsychologists  assume  to  be  necessary  for  reproducing  and  for

forgetting, and which they look for in certain relations and dispositions,

are not inconsistent with the above explanation. All we have done is,

in  certain  cases,  to  add  a motive  to  the  factors  that  have  been

recognized all along as being able to bring about the forgetting of a

name; and, in addition, we have elucidated the mechanism of false

recollection (paramnesia). These dispositions are indispensable to our

case as well, in order to make it possible for the repressed element to

get hold of the missing name by association and draw it with itself into

repression.  In  the  case  of  another  name  with  more  favourable

conditions  for  reproduction  this  perhaps  would  not  happen.  It  is

probable indeed that a suppressed element always strives to assert

itself elsewhere, but is successful in this only when suitable conditions

meet it half way. At other times the suppression succeeds without any

functional disturbance, or, as we can justly say, without any symptom.

   The conditions necessary for forgetting a name, when forgetting it is

accompanied by paramnesia, may then be summarized as follows: (1)

a  certain  disposition  for  forgetting  the  name,  (2)  a  process  of

suppression  carried  out  shortly  before,  (3)  the  possibility  of

establishing  an external  association  between  the  name  and  the

element  previously  suppressed.  The  difficulty  of  fulfilling  the  last

condition need probably not be rated very high, since, considering the

low standards expected of an association of this kind, one could be

established  in  the  great  majority  of  cases.  There  is,  however,  the

profounder  question  whether  an  external  association  like  this  can

really be a sufficient condition for the repressed element’s disturbing

the  reproduction  of  the  lost  name  -  whether  some  more  intimate

connection  between  the  two  topics  is  required.  On  a  superficial

consideration one would be inclined to reject the latter demand, and

accept as sufficient a temporal contiguity between the two, even if the

contents  are  completely  different.  On  close  enquiry,  however,  one

finds more and more frequently that the two elements which are joined

by an external association (the repressed element and the new one)

possess  in  addition  some  connection  of  content;  and  such  a

connection is in fact demonstrable in the Signorelli example.

                     The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1106

 

 

      The  value  of  the  insight  that  we  have  gained  in  analysing  the

Signorelli  example  naturally  depends  on  whether  we  want  to

pronounce  that  instance  as  typical  or  as  an  isolated  occurrence.  I

must  affirm,  that  the  forgetting  of  names,  accompanied  by

paramnesia,  takes  place  with  uncommon  frequency  in  the  way  in

which  we  have  explained  it  in  the Signorelli  case.  In  almost  every

instance in which I could observe this phenomenon in myself, I have

also  been  able  to  explain  it  in  the  way  described  above,  i.e.  as

motivated  by  repression.  I  must  also  draw  attention  to  another

consideration which supports the typical nature of our analysis. I think

there is no justification for making a theoretical separation between

those  cases  in  which  the  forgetting  of  names  is  accompanied  by

paramnesia and the sort where incorrect substitute names have not

presented themselves. These substitute names occur spontaneously

in  a  number  of  cases;  in  others,  where  they  have  not  emerged

spontaneously, it is possible to force them to emerge by an effort of

attention;  and  they  then  show  the  same  relation  to  the  repressed

element and the missing name as they would if they had appeared

spontaneously.  Two  factors  seem  to  be  decisive  in  bringing  the

substitute names to consciousness: first, the effort of attention, and

secondly, an inner condition that attaches to the psychical material.

We might look for the latter in the greater or lesser facility with which

the  necessary  external  association  between  the  two  elements

establishes  itself.  A  good  portion  of  the  cases  of  name-forgetting

without  paramnesia  can  thus  be  added  to  the  cases  in  which

substitute  names  are  formed  -  to  which  the  mechanism  of  the

Signorelli example applies. I shall certainly not venture to affirm that all

cases of name-forgetting are to be classed in the same group. There

is no question that instances of it exist which are much simpler. We

shall, I think, have stated the facts of the case with sufficient caution if

we  affirm: By  the  side  of  simple  cases  where  proper  names  are

forgotten there is a type which is motivated by repression.

                     The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1107

 

                                      CHAPTER II

 

                THE FORGETTING OF FOREIGN WORDS

 

The current vocabulary of our own language, when it is confined to the

range of normal usage, seems to be protected against being forgotten.

With the vocabulary of a foreign language it is notoriously otherwise.

The disposition to forget it extends to all parts of speech, and an early

stage in functional disturbance is revealed by the fluctuations in the

control we have over our stock of foreign words - according to the

general condition of our health and to the degree of our tiredness. In a

number of cases this kind of forgetting exhibits the same mechanism

disclosed to us by the Signorelli example. In proof of this I shall give

only a single analysis, one which is distinguished, however, by some

useful characteristics: it concerns the forgetting of a non-substantival

word in a Latin quotation. Perhaps I may be allowed to present a full

and clear account of this small incident.

   Last summer - it was once again on a holiday trip - I renewed my

acquaintance  with  a  certain  young  man  of  academic  background.  I

soon  found  that  he  was  familiar  with  some  of  my  psychological

publications.  We  had  fallen  into  conversation  -  how  I  have  now

forgotten  -  about  the  social  status  of  the  race  to  which  we  both

belonged;  and  ambitious  feelings  prompted  him  to  give  vent  to  a

regret that his generation was doomed (as he expressed it) to atrophy,

and  could  not  develop  its  talents  or  satisfy  its  needs.  He  ended  a

speech of impassioned fervour with the well-known line of Virgil’s in

which  the  unhappy  Dido  commits  to  posterity  her  vengeance  on

Aeneas: ‘Exoriare . . .’ Or rather, he wanted to end it in this way, for he

could not get hold of the quotation and tried to conceal an obvious gap

in  what  he  remembered  by  changing  the  order  of  the  words:

‘Exoriar(e) ex nostris ossibus ultor.’ At last he said irritably: ‘Please

don’t  look  so  scornful:  you  seem  as  if  you  were  gloating  over  my

embarrassment. Why not help me? There’s something missing in the

line; how does the whole thing really go?’   ‘I’II help you with pleasure,’ I replied, and gave the quotation in its

correct form: ‘Exoriar(e) ALIQUIS nostris ex ossibus ultor.’

   ‘How stupid to forget a word like that! By the way, you claim that one

never forgets a thing without some reason. I should be very curious to

learn how I came to forget the indefinite pronoun "aliquis" in this case.’

      I  took  up  this  challenge  most  readily,  for  I  was  hoping  for  a

contribution to my collection. So I said: ‘That should not take us long. I

must  only  ask  you  to  tell  me, candidly  and uncritically,  whatever

comes into your mind if you direct your attention to the forgotten word

without any definite aim.’¹

   ‘Good. There springs to mind, then, the ridiculous notion of dividing

up the word like this: a and liquis.’

   ‘What does that mean?’ ‘I don’t know.’ ‘And what occurs to you

next?’ ‘What comes next is Reliquien [relics], liquefying, fluidity, fluid.

Have you discovered anything so far?’

   ‘No. Not by any means yet. But go on.’

   ‘I am thinking,’ he went on with a scornful laugh, ‘of Simon of Trent,

whose relics I saw two years ago in a church at Trent. I am thinking of

the accusation of ritual blood-sacrifice which is being brought against

the Jews again just now, and of Kleinpaul’s book in which he regards

all  these  supposed  victims  as  incarnations,  one  might  say  new

editions, of the Saviour.’

 

     ¹ This  is  the  general  method  of  introducing  concealed  ideational  elements  to

consciousness. Cf. my Interpretation of Dreams, p. 604.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1108

 

      ‘The  notion  is  not  entirely  unrelated  to  the  subject  we  were

discussing before the Latin word slipped your memory.’

   ‘True. My next thoughts are about an article that I read lately in an

Italian newspaper. Its title, I think, was "What St. Augustine says about

Women." What do you make of that?’

   ‘I am waiting.’

   ‘And now comes something that is quite clearly unconnected with

our subject.’   ‘Please refrain from any criticism and---'

   ‘Yes, I understand. I am thinking of a fine old gentleman I met on my

travels last week. He was a real original, with all the appearance of a

huge bird of prey. His name was Benedict, if it’s of interest to you.’

    ‘Anyhow, here are a row of saints and Fathers of the Church: St.

Simon,  St. Augustine,  St. Benedict.  There  was,  I  think,  a  Church

Father called Origen. Moreover, three of these names are also first

names, like Paul in Kleinpaul.’

   ‘Now it’s St. Januarius and the miracle of his blood that comes into

mind - my thoughts seem to me to be running on mechanically.’

   ‘Just a moment: St. Januarius and St. Augustine both have to do

with the calendar. But won’t you remind me about the miracle of his

blood?’

   ‘Surely you must have heard of that? They keep the blood of St.

Januarius in a phial inside a church at Naples, and on a particular holy

day it miraculously liquefies. The people attach great importance to

this miracle and get very excited if it’s delayed, as happened once at a

time when the French were occupying the town. So the general in

command  -  or  have  I  got  it  wrong?  was  it  Garibaldi?  -  took  the

reverend  gentleman  aside  and  gave  him  to  understand,  with  an

unmistakable  gesture  towards  the  soldiers  posted  outside,  that  he

hoped the miracle would take place very soon. And in fact it did take

place . . .

   ‘Well, go on. Why do you pause?’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1109

 

   ‘Well, something has come into my mind . . . but it’s too intimate to

pass on. . . . Besides, I don’t see any connection, or any necessity for

saying it.’

   ‘You can leave the connection to me. Of course I can’t force you to

talk about something that you find distasteful; but then you mustn’t

insist on learning from me how you came to forget your aliquis.’

   ‘Really? Is that what you think? Well then, I’ve suddenly, thought of

a lady from whom I might easily hear a piece of news that would bevery awkward for both of us.’

   ‘That her periods have stopped?’

   ‘How could you guess that?’

   ‘That’s not difficult any longer; you’ve prepared the way sufficiently.

Think  of the  calendar  saints,  the  blood  that  starts  to  flow  on  a

particular day, the disturbance when the event fails to take place, the

open threats that the miracle must be vouchsafed, or else . . . In fact

you’ve  made  use  of  the  miracle  of  St.  Januarius  to  manufacture  a

brilliant allusion to women’s periods.’

   ‘Without being aware of it. And you really mean to say that it was

this  anxious  expectation  that  made  me  unable  to  produce  an

unimportant word like aliquis?’

   ‘It seems to me undeniable. You need only recall the division you

made into a-liquis, and your associations: relics, liquefying, fluid. St.

Simon was sacrificed as a child  -  shall  I  go  on  and  show  how  he

comes in? You were led on to him by the subject of relics.

   ‘No, I’d much rather you didn’t. I hope you don’t take these thoughts

of  mine  too  seriously,  if  indeed  I  really  had  them.  In  return  I  will

confess to you that the lady is Italian and that I went to Naples with

her. But mayn’t all this just be a matter of chance?’

   ‘I must leave it to your own judgement to decide whether you can

explain all these connections by the assumption that they are matters

of chance. I can however tell you that every case like this that you

care to analyse will lead you to "matters of chance" that are just as

striking.’¹

 

   ¹ This short analysis has received much attention in the literature of the subject and has

provoked  lively  discussion.  Basing  himself  directly  on  it,  Bleuler  (1919)  has  attempted  to
determine mathematically the credibility of psycho-analytic interpretations, and has come to
the conclusion that it has a higher probability value than thousands of medical ‘truths’ which
have gone unchallenged, and that it owes its exceptional position only to the fact that we are
not yet accustomed to take psychological probabilities into consideration in science.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1110

 

 

   I have several reasons for valuing this brief analysis; and my thanksare due to my former travelling-companion who presented me with it.

In the first place, this is because I was in this instance allowed to draw

on a source that is ordinarily denied to me. For the examples collected

here of disturbances of a psychical function in daily life I have to fall

back mainly on self-observation. I am anxious to steer clear of the

much richer material provided by my neurotic patients, since it might

otherwise  be  objected  that  the  phenomena  in  question  are  merely

consequences  and  manifestations  of  neurosis.  My  purpose  is

therefore particularly well served when a person other than myself, not

suffering from nervous illness, offers himself as the object of such an

investigation. This analysis is significant in a further respect: it throws

light on the case of a word being forgotten without a substitute for it

appearing in the memory. It thus confirms my earlier assertion that the

appearance or non-appearance in the memory of incorrect substitutes

cannot be made the basis for any radical distinction.¹

 

   ¹ Closer scrutiny somewhat diminishes the contrast between the analyses of Signorelli and

of aliquis in regard to substitutive memories. In the latter example too it appears that the
forgetting  was  accompanied  by  a  substitutive  formation.  When  subsequently  I  asked  my
companion  whether  in  the  course  of  his  efforts  to  recall  the  missing  word  no  substitute
whatever came into his mind, he reported that at first he had felt a temptation to introduce an
ab into the line (perhaps the detached portion of a-liquis) - nostris ab ossibus; and he went on
to say that the exoriare had thrust itself on him with peculiar clarity and obstinacy, ‘evidently,’
he added with his characteristic scepticism, ‘because it was the first word in the line.’ When I
asked him to attend all the same to the associations starting from exoriare, he produced
exorcism. I can therefore very well believe that the intensification of exoriare when it was
reproduced actually had the value of a substitutive formation of this sort. This substitute would
have  been  arrived  at  from  the  names  of  the  saints viâ  the  association  ‘exorcism.’  These
however are refinements to which one need attach no importance. (On the other hand Wilson,
1922,  stresses  the  fact  that  the  intensification  of exoriare  is  of  great  significance  to  the
understanding  of  the  case,  since  exorcism  would  be  the  best  symbolic  substitute  for
repressed thoughts about getting rid of the unwanted child by abortion. I gratefully accept this
correction, which does not weaken the validity, of the analysis.) It seems possible, however,
that  the  appearance  of  any  kind  of  substitute  memory  is  a  constant  sign  -  even  though
perhaps  only  a  characteristic  and  revealing  sign  -  of  tendentious  forgetfulness  which  is
motivated by repression. It would seem that substitutive formation occurs even in cases not
marked by the appearance of incorrect names as substitutes, and that in these it lies in the
intensification of an element that is closely related to the forgotten name. For example, in the
Signorelli case, so long as the painter’s name remained inaccessible, the visual memory that I
had of the series of frescoes and of the self-portrait which is introduced into the corner of one
of the pictures was ultra-clear - at any rate much more intense than visual memory-traces
normally appear to me. In another case, also described in my 1898 paper, which concerned a
visit which I was very reluctant to pay to an address in a strange town, I had forgotten the
name of the street beyond all hope of recovery, but my memory of the house number, as if inderision,  was  ultra-clear,  whereas  normally  I  have  the  greatest  difficulty  in  remembering
numbers.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1111

 

   The chief importance however of the aliquis example lies in another

of  the  ways  in  which  it  differs  from  the Signorelli  specimen.  In  the

latter, the reproducing of a name was disturbed by the after-effect of a

train of thought begun just before and then broken off, whose content,

however, had no clear connection with the new topic containing the

name  of  Signorelli.  Contiguity  in  time  furnished  the  only  relation

between the repressed topic and the topic of the forgotten name; but

this was enough to enable the two topics to find a connection in an

external association.¹ Nothing on the other hand can be seen in the

aliquis example of an independent repressed topic of this sort, which

had  engaged  conscious  thinking  directly  before  and  then  left  its

echoes in a disturbance. The disturbance in reproduction occurred in

this instance from the very nature of the topic hit upon in the quotation,

since opposition unconsciously arose to the wishful idea expressed in

it. The circumstances must be construed as follows. The speaker had

been deploring the fact that the present generation of his people was

deprived of its full rights; a new generation, he prophesied like Dido,

would  inflict  vengeance  on  the  oppressors.  He  had  in  this  way

expressed  his  wish  for  descendants.  At  this  moment  a  contrary

thought intruded. ‘Have you really so keen a wish for descendants?

That is not so. How embarrassed you would be if you were to get

news just now that you were to expect descendants from the quarter

you know of. No: no descendants - however much we need them for

vengeance.’  This contradiction then asserts itself by exactly the same

means  as  in  the Signorelli  example  -  by  setting  up  an  external

association between one of its ideational elements and an element in

the wish that has been repudiated; this time, indeed, it does so in a

most arbitrary fashion by making use of a roundabout associative path

which  has  every  appearance  of  artificiality.  A  second  essential  in

which the present case agrees with the Signorelli instance is that the

contradiction  has  its  roots  in  repressed  sources  and  derives  fromthoughts that would lead to a diversion of attention.

   So much for the dissimilarity and the inner affinity between these

two typical specimens of the forgetting of words. We have got to know

a second mechanism of forgetting - the disturbance of a thought by an

internal  contradiction  which  arises  from  the  repressed.  Of  the  two

processes  this  is,  I  think,  the  easier  to  understand;  and  we  shall

repeatedly come across it again in the course of this discussion.

 

   ¹ I am not entirely convinced of the absence of any internal connection between the two

groups of thoughts in the Signorelli case. After all, if the repressed thoughts on the topic of
death and sexual life are carefully followed up, one will be brought face to face with an idea
that is by no means remote from the topic of the frescoes at Orvieto.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1112

 

                                    CHAPTER III

 

      THE FORGETTING OF NAMES AND SETS OF WORDS

 

Observations such as those mentioned above, of what happens when

a portion of a set of words in a foreign tongue is forgotten, may make

us curious to know whether the forgetting of sets of words in our own

language  demands  an  essentially  different  explanation.  We  are  not

usually surprised, it is true, if a formula learnt by heart, or a poem, can

be reproduced only inaccurately some time later, with alterations and

omissions. Since, however, this forgetting does not have a uniform

effect on what has been learnt as a whole but seems on the contrary

to break off isolated portions of it, it may be worth the trouble to submit

to analytic investigation a few instances of such faulty reproduction.

   A younger colleague of mine told me in conversation that he thought

it likely that the forgetting of poetry in one’s own language could very

well have motives similar to the forgetting of single elements from a

set of words in a foreign tongue. At the same time he offered to be the

subject of an experiment. I asked him on what poem he would like to

make the test, and he chose ‘Die Braut von Korinth,’ a poem of which

he was very fond and of which he thought he knew at least somestanzas  by  heart.  At  the  beginning  of  his  reproduction  he  was

overcome by a rather remarkable uncertainty. ‘Does it run "Travelling

from  Corinth  to  Athens",’  he  asked,  ‘or  "Travelling  to  Corinth  from

Athens"?’ I also had a moment’s hesitation, until I laughingly observed

that the title of the poem ‘The Bride of Corinth’ left no doubt which way

the young man was travelling. The reproduction of the first stanza then

proceeded smoothly or at any rate without any striking falsifications.

My  colleague  seemed  to  search  for  a  while  for  the  first  line  of  the

second stanza; he soon continued, and recited as follows:

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1113

 

                                                Aber wird er auch willkommen scheinen,
                                                Jetzt jeder Tag was Neues bringt?
                                                Denn er ist noch Heide mit den Seinen

                                                Und sie sind Christen und - getauft.¹

 

   Before he reached this point I had already pricked up my ears in

surprise; and after the end of the last line we were both in agreement

that some distortion had occurred here. But as we did not succeed in

correcting  it,  we  hurried  to  the  bookcase  to  get  hold  of  Goethe’s

poems, and found to our surprise that the second line of the stanza

had  a  completely  different  wording,  which  had,  as  it  were,  been

expelled from my colleague’s memory and replaced by something that

did not seem to belong. The correct version runs:

 

                                                Aber wird er auch willkommen scheinen,

                                                Wenn er teuer nicht die Gunst erkauft?²

 

   ‘Getauft’ [‘baptized,’ two lines below] rhymes with ‘erkauft’, and it

struck me as singular that the connected group of ‘heathen’, ‘Christian’

and ‘baptized’ should have given him so little help in restoring the text.

      ‘Can  you  explain,’  I  asked  my  colleague,  ‘how  you  have  so

completely expunged a line in a poem that you claim you know so

well, and have you any notion from what context you can have taken

the substitute?’ 

   ¹ [Literally: ‘But will he in fact seem welcome,

                     Now, when every day brings something new?
                     For he is still a heathen with his kindred
                     And they are Christians and baptized.’]

   ² [‘But will he in fact seem welcome if he does not buy the favour dearly?’]

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1114

 

   He was in a position to provide an explanation, though obviously

with some reluctance. ‘The line "Jetzt, wo jeder Tag was Neues bringt"

seems familiar to me; I must have used the words a short time ago in

referring to my practice - as you know, I am highly satisfied with its

progress at the present time. But how does the sentence fit in here? I

could think of a connection. The line "Wenn er teuer nicht die Gunst

erkauft’ was obviously one which I found disagreeable. It is connected

with  a  proposal  of  marriage  which  was  turned  down  on  the  first

occasion, and which, in view of the great improvement in my material

position, I am now thinking of repeating. I cannot tell you any more,

but if I am accepted now, it certainly cannot be enjoyable for me to

reflect that some sort of calculation tipped the scale both then and

now.’

   This struck me as intelligible, even without my needing to know

further  particulars.  But  I  continued  with  my  questions:  ‘How  in  any

case have you and your private affairs become involved in the text of

the  "Bride  of  Corinth"?  Is  yours  perhaps  a  case  that  involves

differences in religious belief like those that play an important part in

the poem?’

 

                                                                (Keimt ein Glaube neu,
                                                                Wird oft Lieb’ und Treu

                                                                Wie ein böses Unkraut ausgerauft.)¹

 

   My guess was wrong; but it was curious to see how a single well-

aimed question gave him a sudden perspicacity, so that he was able

to bring me as an answer something of which he had certainly been

unaware up to that time. He gave me a pained, even an indignantlook, muttered a later passage from the poem:

 

                                                                Sieh sie an genau!

                                                                Morgen ist sie grau.²

 

and added shortly: ‘She is rather older than I.’ To avoid distressing

him  further  I  broke  off  the  enquiry.  The  explanation  struck  me  as

sufficient. But it was certainly surprising that the attempt to trace a

harmless  failure  of  memory  back  to  its  cause  should  have  had  to

come  up  against  matters  in  the  subject’s  private  life  that  were  so

remote and intimate, and that were cathected with such distressing

affect.

 

   ¹ [‘When a faith is newly sprung up, love and troth are often torn out like an evil weed.’]

   ² [‘Look on her carefully. Tomorrow she will be grey.’] My colleague has incidentally made

changes in this beautiful passage from the poem, somewhat altering both the wording and
what the words refer to. The ghostly maiden says to her bridegroom:
                                                                ‘Meine Kette hab’ ich dir gegeben;
                                                                Deine Locke nehm’ ich mit mir fort.
                                                                Sieh sie an genau!
                                                                Morgen bist du grau,
                                                                Und nur braun erscheinst du wieder dort.’
 
   [‘My necklace I have given thee; your lock of hair I take away with me. Look on it carefully.
Tomorrow you will be grey, and you will appear brown again only there.’ (The context shows
that ‘sie’ (‘it’ or ‘her’) in the third line refers to the lock of hair. In a different context the line
could mean: ‘Look on her carefully’.)]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1115

 

 

   Here is another instance, given by Jung (1907, 64), of the forgetting

of a set of words in a well-known poem. I shall quote the author’s own

words.

   ‘A man was trying to recite the well-known poem that begins "Ein

Fichtenbaum steht einsam  . . ."¹ In the line beginning "Ihn schläfert"²

he became hopelessly stuck; he had completely forgotten the words

"mit  weisser  Decke  ".  Forgetting  something  in  so  familiar  a  verse

struck me as surprising, and I therefore made him reproduce whatoccurred to him in connection with "mit weisser Decke". He had the

following train of associations: "A white sheet makes one think of a

shroud - a linen sheet to cover a dead body" - (a pause) - "now a close

friend occurs to me - his brother died recently quite suddenly - he is

supposed to have died of a heart attack - he was also very stout - my

friend is also stout, and I have thought before now that it might also

happen to him - probably he takes too little exercise - when I heard of

his  brother’s  death  I  suddenly  became  anxious  that  it  might also

happen to me; for in our family we have in any case a tendency to

fatness, and my grandfather, too, died of a heart attack; I have noticed

that  I  too  am  over-stout  and  I  have  therefore  begun  a  course  of

slimming recently."

      ‘Thus,’  comments  Jung,  ‘the  man  had,  unconsciously,  identified

himself at once with the fir-tree wrapped in the white shroud.’

 

   ¹ [‘A fir-tree stands alone.’]

   ² [The relevant lines are:

                                                                Ihn schläfert; mit weisser Decke
                                                                Umhüllen ihn Eis und Schnee.
 
                                                                He slumbers; with a white sheet
                                                                Ice and snow cover him.]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1116

 

 

   The following example of the forgetting of a set of words which I owe

to my friend Sándor Ferenczi of Budapest, differs from the preceding

ones in that it concerns a phrase coined by the subject himself and not

a  sentence  taken  from  a  writer.  It  may  also  present  us  with  the

somewhat unusual case in which the forgetting ranges itself on the

side of our good sense, when the latter threatens to succumb to a

momentary  desire.  The  parapraxis  thus  comes  to  serve  a  useful

function. When we have sobered down once more we appreciate the

rightness of this internal current, which had previously only been able

to  express  itself  in  a  failure  to  function  -  a  forgetting,  a  psychical

impotence.   ‘At a social gathering someone quoted "Tout comprendre c’est tout

pardonner". I made the comment that the first part of the sentence

was enough; "pardoning" was a piece of arrogance: it should be left to

God and the priests. One of those present thought this observation

very  good,  and  this  emboldened  me  to  say  -  probably  with  the

intention of securing the good opinion of the benevolent critic - that I

had recently thought of something better. But when I tried to repeat it I

found it had escaped me. I immediately withdrew from the company

and wrote down the screen-associations. There first occurred to me

the names of the friend and of the street in Budapest that witnessed

the birth of the idea I was looking for; next came the name of another

friend,  Max,  whom  we  usually  call  Maxi.  This  led  me  to  the  word

"maxim" and to the recollection that what we were after was, like my

original remark, a variation on a well-known maxim. Strangely enough

my next thought was not a maxim but the following sentence: "God

created man in His own image" and the same idea in reverse: "Man

created God in his." Thereupon the memory of what I was looking for

immediately appeared. On that occasion my friend had said to me in

Andrássy Street: "Nothing human is foreign to me", whereupon I had

answered,  in  allusion  to  the  discoveries  of  psycho-analysis:  "You

ought to have gone further and have admitted that nothing animal is

foreign to you."

   ‘But after I had at last remembered what I wanted, I was less than

ever able to repeat it in the company I happened to be in. The young

wife of the friend whom I had reminded of the animal nature of the

unconscious was among those present, and I had to recognize that

she was by no means prepared to receive such disagreeable truth. My

forgetting spared me a number of unpleasant questions from her and

a  pointless  discussion.  This  and  nothing  else  must  have  been  the

motive for my "temporary amnesia".

      ‘It  is  interesting  that  a  screen-association  was  provided  by  a

sentence  in  which  the  Deity  is  debased  to  the  status  of  a  human

invention,  while  in  the  missing  sentence  there  is  an  allusion  to  the

animal in man. Capitis diminutio is therefore the element common to

both. The whole subject is clearly only the continuation of the train of

thought about understanding and forgiving which the conversation had

instigated.   ‘The fact that what I was looking for in this case was so quick in

presenting itself may perhaps be due also to my immediate withdrawal

from the company where it was censored to an empty room.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1117

 

 

   I have since undertaken numerous other analyses where forgetting

or faulty reproduction of a set of words took place, and the consistent

result  of  these  investigations  has  inclined  me  to  assume  that  the

mechanism  of  forgetting  demonstrated  above  in  the  instances  of

‘aliquis’ and ‘The Bride of Corinth’ has an almost universal validity. It is

generally a little awkward to give an account of such analyses since,

like those just mentioned, they constantly lead to matters which are of

an intimate sort and are distressing to the person analysed. I shall

therefore not give any further examples. What is common to all these

cases,  irrespective  of  the  material,  is  the  fact  that  the  forgotten  or

distorted matter is brought by some associative path into connection

with an unconscious thought-content - a thought-content which is the

source of the effect manifested in the form of forgetting.

 

      I  now  return  to  the  forgetting  of  names.  So  far  we  have  not

exhaustively  considered  either  the  case-material  or  the  motives

behind it. As this is exactly the kind of parapraxis that I can from time

to time observe abundantly in myself, I am at no loss for examples.

The mild attacks of migraine from which I still suffer usually announce

themselves  hours  in  advance  by  my  forgetting  names,  and  at  the

height of these attacks, during which I am not forced to abandon my

work, it frequently happens that all proper names go out of my head.

Now it is precisely cases like mine which could furnish the grounds for

an  objection  on  principle  to  our  analytic  efforts.  Should  it  not

necessarily be concluded from such observations that the cause of

forgetfulness,  and  in  particular  of  the  forgetting  of  names,  lies  in

circulatory and general functional disturbances of the cerebrum, and

should we not therefore spare ourselves the search for psychologicalexplanations of these phenomena? Not at all, in my view; that would

be to confuse the mechanism of a process, which is of the same kind

in all cases, with the factors favouring the process, which are variable

and not necessarily essential. Instead of a discussion, however, I shall

bring forward an analogy to deal with the objection.

   Let us suppose that I have been imprudent enough to go for a walk

at night in a deserted quarter of the city, and have been attacked and

robbed  of  my  watch  and  purse.  I  report  the  matter  at  the  nearest

police station in the following words: ‘I was in such and such a street,

and there loneliness and darkness took away my watch and purse.’

Although I should not have said anything in this statement that was

not true, the wording of my report would put me in danger of being

thought not quite right in the head. The state of affairs could only be

described correctly by saying that favoured by the loneliness of the

place and under the shield of darkness unknown malefactors robbed

me of my valuables. Now the state of affairs in the forgetting of names

need  not  be  any  different;  favoured  by  tiredness,  circulatory

disturbances and intoxication, an unknown psychical force robs me of

my access to the proper names belonging to my memory - a force

which can in other cases bring about the same failure of memory at a

time of perfect health and unimpaired efficiency.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1118

 

   If I analyse the cases of the forgetting of names that I observe in

myself, I almost always find that the name which is withheld from me

is  related  to  a  topic  of  close  personal  importance  to  me,  and  one

capable  of  evoking  in  me  strong  and  often  distressing  affects.  In

accordance  with  the  convenient  and  commendable  practice  of  the

Zurich school (Bleuler, Jung, Riklin) I can also formulate this fact as

follows: The lost name has touched on a ‘personal complex’ in me.

The  relation  of  the  name  to  myself  is  one  that  I  should  not  have

expected  and  is  usually  arrived  at  through  superficial  associations

(such  as  verbal  ambiguity  or  similarity  in  sound);  it  can  be

characterized quite generally as an oblique relation. Its nature will bestbe illustrated by some simple examples.

   (1) A patient asked me to recommend him a health resort on the

Riviera.  I  knew  of  such  a  resort  quite  close  to  Genoa,  and  I  also

remembered the name of a German colleague of mine who practised

there; but the name of the resort itself escaped me, well as I thought I

knew that too. There was nothing left for me but to ask the patient to

wait while I hurriedly consulted the ladies of my family. ‘What on earth

is  the  name  of  the  place  near  Genoa  where  Dr.  N.  has  his  little

sanatorium, the one in which so and so was under treatment for so

long?’  ‘Of  course  you  of  all  people  would  be  the  one  to  forget  the

name. The place is called Nervi.’ I must admit I have plenty to do with

nerves.

   (2) Another patient was talking about a neighbouring summer resort,

and declared that besides its two well-known inns there was a third

one  there  with  which  a  certain  memory  of  his  was  connected;  he

would tell me the name in a moment. I disputed the existence of this

third inn, and appealed to the fact that I had spent seven summers at

the place and must therefore know it better than he did. But under the

provocation of my contradiction he had already got hold of the name.

The inn was called the ‘Hochwartner’. At this point I was obliged to

give in and I even had to confess that I had lived for seven whole

summers close by the inn whose existence I had denied. Why in this

instance  should  I  have  forgotten  both  the  name  and  the  thing?  I

believe it was because the name was only too similar in sound to that

of a colleague, a specialist in Vienna and, once again, had touched

upon the ‘professional complex’ in me.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1119

 

   (3) On another occasion, as I was on the point of booking a ticket at

Reichenhall railway station, the name of the next main station would

not  come  into  my  mind.  It  was  perfectly  familiar  to  me,  and  I  had

passed through it very frequently. I had actually to look it up in the

time-table. It was ‘Rosenheim’. But I then knew at once owing to what

association I had lost it. An hour before, I had paid a visit to my sisterat her home close to Reichenhall; as my sister’s name is Rosa this

was also a ‘Rosenheim’. The ‘family complex’ had robbed me of this

name.

      (4)  I  have  a  whole  quantity  of  examples  to  illustrate  further  the

positively predatory activities of the ‘family complex’.

   There came to my consulting-room one day a young man who was

the younger brother of a woman patient. I had seen him countless

times and used to refer to him by his first name. When I wanted to

speak about his visit I found I had forgotten his first name (which was,

I  knew,  not  at  all  an  unusual  one  ),  and  nothing  could  help  me  to

recover it. I thereupon went out into the street to read the names over

the shops, and recognized his name the first time I ran across it. The

analysis  of  the  episode  showed  me  that  I  had  drawn  a  parallel

between the visitor and my own brother, a parallel which was trying to

come to a head in the repressed question: ‘Would my brother in the

same circumstances have behaved in a similar way, or would he have

done the opposite?’ The external link between the thoughts concerned

with  my  own  and  with  the  other  family  was  made  possible  by  the

chance fact that in both cases the mothers had the same first name of

Amalia. Later in retrospect I also understood the substitute names,

Daniel and Franz, which had forced themselves on me without making

me any wiser. These, like Amalia too, are names from Schiller’s Die

Räuber which were the subject of a jest made by Daniel Spitzer, the

‘Vienna walker’.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1120

 

   (5) Another time I was unable to recall a patient’s name; it belonged

to associations from my youth. My analysis followed a very devious

path before it provided me with the name I was looking for. The patient

had expressed a fear of losing his sight; this awoke the memory of a

young man who had been blinded by a gunshot; and this in turn was

connected  with  the  figure  of  yet  another  youth,  who  had  injured

himself by shooting. This last person had the same name as the first

patient, though he was not related to him. However, I did not find thename until I had become conscious that an anxious expectation was

being transferred by me from these two young men who had been

injured to a member of my own family.

      There  thus  runs  though  my  thoughts  a  continuous  current  of

‘personal reference’, of which I generally have no inkling, but which

betrays itself by such instances of my forgetting names. It is as if I

were obliged to compare everything I hear about other people with

myself; as if my personal complexes were put on the alert whenever

another person is brought to my notice. This cannot possibly be an

individual peculiarity of my own: it must rather contain an indication of

the  way  in  which  we  understand  ‘something  other  than  ourself’  in

general. I have reasons for supposing that other people are in this

respect very similar to me.

   The neatest instance of this sort was reported to me by a Herr

Lederer,  who  had  experienced  it  himself.  While  he  was  on  his

honeymoon in Venice he came across a gentleman with whom he was

superficially acquainted and whom he had to introduce to his young

wife. Since however he had forgotten the stranger’s name, he helped

himself out the first time by means of an unintelligible mumble. On

meeting  the  gentleman  a  second  time,  as  he  was  bound  to  do  in

Venice,  he  drew  him  aside  and  asked  him  to  save  him  from

embarrassment by telling him his name, which he had unfortunately

forgotten.  The  stranger’s  reply  gave  evidence  of  an  unusual

knowledge  of  human  nature.  ‘I  can  readily  imagine  your  failing  to

remember my name. I have the same name as you - Lederer!’ - One

cannot help having a slightly disagreeable feeling when one comes

across one’s own name in a stranger. Recently I was very sharply

aware  of  it  when  a Herr  S.  Freud  presented  himself  to  me  in  my

consulting hour. (However, I must record the assurance of one of my

critics that in this respect his feelings are the opposite of mine.)

   (6) The effects that can be produced by personal reference can also

be seen in the following example, reported by Jung (1907, 52):

   ‘A Herr Y. fell in love with a lady; but he met with no success, and

shortly afterwards she married a Herr S. There after, Herr Y., in spite

of having known Herr X. for a long time and even having business

dealings  with  him,  forgot  his  name  over  and  over  again,  so  that

several times he had to enquire what it was from other people whenhe wanted to correspond with Herr X’.

   The motivation of the forgetting is however more transparent in this

case than in the preceding ones that fall within the constellation of

personal reference. Here the forgetting seems a direct consequence

of Herr Y’s antipathy to his more fortunate rival; he wants to know

nothing about him: ‘never thought of shall he be.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1121

 

   (7) The motive for forgetting a name may also be a more refined

one;  it  may  consist  in  what  might  be  called  a  ‘sublimated’  grudge

against the bearer of it. A Fräulein I. von K. writes from Budapest as

follows:

   ‘I have propounded a little theory of my own. I have noticed that

people who have a talent for painting have no feeling for music, and

vice versa. Some time ago I had a conversation with someone on this

point, in which I remarked: "So far my observation has always held

good, with the exception of only one person." When I wanted to recall

that person’s name, I found it had been irretrievably forgotten, even

though  I  knew  that  the  owner  of  it  was  one  of  my  closest  friends.

When I heard the name mentioned quite by chance a few days later, I

knew at once, of course, that it was the destroyer of my theory who

was being spoken of. The grudge I unconsciously bore against him

was expressed by my forgetting his name, which, apart from that, I

knew so well.’

   (8) The following case, reported by Ferenczi, shows a somewhat

different  way  in  which  the  personal  reference  led  to  a  name  being

forgotten.  Its  analysis  is  particularly  instructive  because  of  the

explanation it gives of the substitute associations (like Botticelli and

Boltraffio as substitutes for Signorelli).

   ‘A lady, who had heard something about psycho-analysis, could not

recall the name of the psychiatrist Jung.¹

   ‘The following names came to her mind instead: Kl--- (a name),

Wilde, Nietzsche, Hauptmann.

   ‘I did not tell her the name and invited her to give free associationsto each name in turn.

   ‘Starting from Kl--- she immediately thought of Frau Kl---, and of how

she was a prim and affected person, but looked very well for her age.

"She’s not  ageing."  As  a  common  characterization  of  Wilde  and

Nietzsche  she  named  "insanity".  Then  she  said  chaffingly:  "You

Freudians will go on looking for the causes of insanity till you’re insane

yourselves."  Then:  "I  can’t  bear  Wilde  and  Nietzsche.  I  don’t

understand  them.  I  hear  they  were  both  homosexuals;  Wilde  had

dealings with young people." (In spite of having uttered the correct

name - in Hungarian, it is true - in this sentence, she was still unable t

recall it.)

   ‘Starting from Hauptmann, first "Halbe" and then "Jungend’ occurred

to her; and it was there for the first time, after I had drawn her attention

to the word "Jungend", that she realized she had been in search of the

name Jung.

   ‘This lady had lost her husband when she was thirty-nine and had

no prospect of marrying again. Thus she had certainly reason enough

to  avoid  recalling  anything  that  reminded  her  of youth or age. It is

striking that the ideas screening the missing name were associated

entirely  with  its  content  and  that  associations  with  its  sound  were

absent.’

 

   ¹ [‘Jung’ is also the German for ‘young’.]

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1122

 

   (9) Here is an example of name-forgetting with yet another and a

very subtle motivation, which the subject of it has explained himself:

   ‘When I was being examined in philosophy as a subsidiary subject I

was questioned by the examiner about the teachings of Epicurus, and

after that I was asked if I knew who had taken up his theories in later

centuries. I answered with the name of Pierre Gassendi, whom I had

heard described as a disciple of Epicurus while I was sitting in a café

only a couple of days before. To the surprised question how I knew

that, I boldly answered that I had long been interested in Gassendi.

The  result  of  this  was  a  certificate magna  cum  laude,  but  alsounfortunately  a  subsequent  obstinate  tendency  to  forget  the  name

Gassendi. My guilty conscience is, I think, to blame for my inability to

remember the name in spite of all my efforts; for I really ought not to

have known it on that occasion either.’

   In order to appreciate the intensity of our informant’s aversion to

recalling this examination episode, the reader would have to know the

high value he sets on his doctorate and for how many other things it

has to serve as a substitute.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1123

 

   (10) At this point I shall insert another example of the name of a

town being forgotten. It is not perhaps as simple as the ones given

above,  but  it  will  strike  any  one  who  is  fairly  well  versed  in

investigations of this nature as authentic and valuable. The name of a

town in Italy escaped the subject’s memory as a consequence of its

great similarity in sound to a woman’s first name, with which a number

of memories charged with affect were connected, which are doubtless

not here reported in full. Sándor Ferenczi of Budapest, who observed

this case of forgetting in himself, has treated it in the way in which one

analyses  a  dream  or  a  neurotic  idea  a  -  procedure  which  is  fully

justified.

   ‘To-day I was with a family that I know, and the conversation turned

to cities of North Italy. Someone observed that they still showed traces

of  Austrian  influence.  A  few  of  these  cities  were  mentioned,  and  I

wanted to give the name of one too, but it escaped me, although I

knew I had spent two very pleasant days there - a fact which did not

agree very well with Freud’s theory of forgetting. In place of the name I

was looking for, the following associations forced themselves on me:

Capua, Brescia, The Lion of Brescia.

   ‘The picture that I had of this "Lion" took the form of a marble statue

standing  before  my  eyes  like  a  solid  object;  I  noticed  at  once,

however,  that  it  had  less  of  a  resemblance  to  the  lion  on  the

Monument  to  Freedom  at  Brescia  (of  which  I  have  only  seen

illustrations)  than  to  the  other  celebrated  marble  lion  which  I  haveseen on the monument to the dead at Lucerne - the monument to the

Swiss guards who fell at Tuileries, and of which I have a miniature

replica on my bookcase. And now at last the missing name came back

to me: it was Verona.

   ‘At the same time I knew at once who was to blame for my amnesia.

It was no other than a former servant of the family whose guest I was

at the time. Her name was Veronika (Verona in Hungarian), and I had

a strong antipathy to her because of her repulsive looks, her shrill,

raucous  voice  and  her  insufferable  assertiveness,  to  which  she

believed herself entitled by her length of service. At the same time the

tyrannical way in which she used to treat the children of the house

was  intolerable  to  me.  I  now  also  understood  the  meaning  of  the

associations.

   ‘My immediate association to Capua was caput mortuum. I very

often compared Veronika’s head to a death’s head. The Hungarian

word  "kapszi"  (avaricious)  doubtless  provided  an  additional

determinant for the displacement. I also, of course, found the much

more direct associative paths which connect Capua and Verona as

geographical idea and as Italian words that have the same rhythm.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1124

 

   ‘The same is true for Brescia; but here too there were winding by-

paths in the linkage of ideas.

      ‘My  antipathy  was  at  one  time  so  violent  that  I  found  Veronika

positively  nauseating,  and  I  had  more  than  once  expressed  my

astonishment that all the same it was possible for her to have an erotic

life and be loved by someone. "Why," I said, "to kiss her would make

one feel sick!"¹ Nevertheless, she could certainly long since have been

brought into connection with the idea of the fallen Swiss Guards.

   ‘Brescia is very often mentioned, at any rate here in Hungary, in

connection not with the lion but with another wild animal. The most

hated name in this country, and in the north of Italy too, is that of

General Haynau, commonly known as the "Hyaena of Brescia". Thus

one  thread  in  my  thoughts  ran  from  the  hated tyrant  Haynau viâBrescia to the town of Verona, while the other led, viâ the idea of the

animal that haunts the graves of the dead (which helped to determine

the emergence in my mind of a monument to the dead), to the death’s

head and to the disagreeable voice of Veronika - the victim of such

gross abuse by my unconscious - who in her time had acted almost as

tyrannically  in  this  house  as  had  the  Austrian  general  after  the

Hungarian and Italian struggles for freedom.

      ‘Lucerne  is  connected  with  the  thought  of  the  summer  which

Veronika spent with her employers in the neighbourhood of the town

of Lucerne, on the lake of that name. The Swiss Guard in turn recalls

that she knew how to play the tyrant not only to the children but also to

the grown-up members of the family, and fancied herself in the part of

a "Garde-Dame ".

      ‘I  must  expressly  remark  that  this  antipathy  of  mine  towards

Veronika is - consciously - something that has long been surmounted.

Since  those  times  both  her  appearance  and  her  manner  have

changed, greatly to her advantage, and I can meet her, though I have

in fact little occasion for doing so, with genuinely warm feelings. As

usual, my unconscious clings more tenaciously to my impressions: it is

"retrospective" and resentful.²

   ‘The Tuileries are an allusion to another person, an elderly French

lady, who on many occasions actually "guarded" the women of the

house; she was respected by everyone, young and old - and no doubt

somewhat feared as well was feared. For a while I was her élève for

French conversation. The word élève further recalls that when I was

on  a  visit  to  the  brother-in-law  of  my  present  host,  in  northern

Bohemia, I was very much amused because the local country-people

called  the élèves  at  the  school  of  forestry  there  by  the  name  of

"Löwen"³. This entertaining memory may also have played a part in

the displacement from the hyaena to the lion.’

 

   ¹ [The first half of the German word for ‘nausea’ (‘Brechreiz’) has a sound similar to the first

syllable of ‘Brescia’.]

   ² [In German: ‘"nachträglich"  und nachtragend.’]

   ³ [The dialect pronunciation of the first syllable of this word would resemble that of the

second syllable of ‘élèves’.]
                     The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1125

 

   (11) The next example, too, shows how a personal complex which is

dominating someone at the time may cause a name to be forgotten in

some very remote connection.

   ‘Two men, an older and a younger one, who six months before had

made a trip together in Sicily, were exchanging recollections of those

pleasant and memorable days. "Let’s see," said the younger, "what

was the name of the place where we spent the night before making

our trip to Selinunte? Wasn’t it Calatafimi?" The older one rejected it:

"No, it certainly wasn’t, but I’ve forgotten the name too, though I recall

most  clearly  all  the  details  of  our  stay  there.  I  only  need  to  find

someone else has forgotten a name, and it at once makes me forget it

too. Let’s look for the name. But the only thing that occurs to me is

Caltanisetta, which certainly isn’t right." "No," said the younger man,

"the name begins with a ‘w’ or has a ‘w’ in it." "But there’s no ‘w’ in

Italian," objected the older. "I really meant a ‘v’, and I only said ‘w’

because I’m so used to it in my own language." The older man still

opposed  the  "v".  "As  a  matter  of  fact,"  he  declared,  "I  believe  I’ve

forgotten a lot of the Sicilian names already; this would be a good time

to make some experiments. For example, what was the name of the

place  on  a  hill  that  was  called  Enna  in  antiquity?  Oh,  I  know  -

Castrogiovanni." The next moment the younger man had recalled the

lost name as well. "Castelvetrano," he exclaimed, and was pleased at

being able to point to the "v" he had insisted on. For a short while the

older one had no sense of recognition; but after he had accepted the

name it was for him to explain why he had forgotten it. "Obviously," he

said,  "because  the  second  half,  ’-vetrano’,  sounds  like  ‘veteran’.  I

know I don’t much like to think about growing old, and I have strange

reactions when I’m reminded of it. For instance, I recently charged a

very dear friend of mine in the strangest terms with having ‘left his

youth far behind him’, for the reason that once before, in the middle of

the most flattering remarks about me, he had added that I was ‘no

longer a young man’. Another sign that my resistance was directed

against the second half of the name Castelvetrano is that the initial

sound recurred in the substitute name Caltanisetta." "What about thename Caltanisetta itself?" asked the younger man. "That," confessed

the older one, "has always seemed to me like a pet name for a young

woman."

   ‘Some time later he added: "Of course the name for Enna was also

a substitute name. And it occurs to me now that Castrogiovanni - a

name that forced its way to the front with the help of a rationalization -

sounds  like  ‘giovane’  (young)  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  the  lost

name Castelvetrano sounds like ‘veteran’ (old)."

   ‘The older man believed that in this way he had accounted for his

forgetting the name. No investigation was made of the motive for the

similar failure of the younger man’s memory.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1126

 

 

      Not  only  the  motives,  but  also  the  mechanism  governing  the

forgetting of names, deserve our interest. In a large number of cases a

name is forgotten not because the name itself arouses such motives,

but  because  -  owing  to  similarity  in  sound  and  to  assonance  -  it

touches upon another name against which these motives do operate.

If  the  determinants  are  relaxed  in  this  way,  the  occurrence  of  the

phenomenon  will  obviously  be  made  very  much  easier,  as  the

following examples show.

   (12) Reported by Dr. Eduard Hitschmann (1913a): ‘Herr N. wanted

to give someone the name of the firm of book sellers Gilhofer and

Ranschburg.  But  however  much  he  thought  over  it,  only  the  name

Ranschburg occurred to him, though he knew the firm perfectly well.

He  returned  home  feeling  somewhat  dissatisfied,  and  thought  it

sufficiently important to ask his brother (who was apparently already

asleep) what the first half of the firm’s name was. His brother gave him

the  name  without  hesitation.  Thereupon  the  word  "Gallhof"

immediately sprang to Herr N.’s mind as an association to "Gilhofer".

Gallhof was the place where a few months before he had gone for a

memorable walk with an attractive young lady. As a momento the lady

had given him a present which was inscribed "A souvenir of the happyhours at Gallhof ". In the course of the days just before the name was

forgotten,  this  present  had  been  badly  damaged,  seemingly  by

accident, through N.’s shutting a drawer too hastily. He noticed this

with a certain sense of guilt, for he was familiar with the meaning of

symptomatic  acts.  At  the  time  his  feelings  towards  the  lady  were

somewhat ambivalent: he certainly loved her, but he felt hesitation in

the face of her desire that they should get married.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1127

 

   (13) Reported by Dr. Hanns Sachs: ‘In a conversation about Genoa

and its immediate surroundings, a young man wanted to mention the

place called Pegli, but could only recall the name with an effort after

racking his brains. On the way home he thought of the distressing

manner in which so familiar a name had slipped away, and in doing so

was led to a word sounding very similar: Peli. He knew that there was

a South Sea island of that name, whose inhabitants still retained a few

remarkable  customs.  He  had  read  about  them  recently  in  an

ethnological work and had at the time made up his mind to use the

information in support of a hypothesis of his own. It then occurred to

him that Peli was also the setting of a novel which he had read with

interest  and  enjoyment  -  namely Van  Zanten’s  glücklichste  Zeit  by

Laurids  Bruun.  The  thoughts  that  had  occupied  his  mind  almost

incessantly during the day centred round a letter he had received that

same morning from a lady he was very fond of. This letter gave him

reason to fear that he would have to forgo a meeting that had been

arranged. After being in a very bad mood all day, he had gone out in

the  evening  resolved  not  to  plague  himself  any  longer  with  the

tiresome thought but to enjoy the social occasion in front of him, on

which he in fact set an extremely high value, in as serene a mood as

possible.  It  is  clear  that  his  resolution  could  have  been  gravely

imperilled by the word Pegli, as its connection in sound with Peli was

so close; and Peli in turn, having acquired a personal connection with

himself by its ethnological interest, embodied not only Van Zanten’s

but also his own "happiest time", and therefore the fears and anxietiesas well which he had nursed all day long. It is characteristic that this

simple explanation only became clear after a second letter from his

friend had transformed his doubt into the happy certainty of seeing her

again soon.’

      This  example  may  recall  what  might  be  described  as  its

geographical neighbour, in which the name of the town of Nervi could

not be remembered (Example 1). Thus we see how a pair of words

that are similar in sound can have the same effect as a single word

that has two meanings.

   (14) When war broke out with Italy in 1915 I was able to make the

observation upon myself that a whole quantity of Italian place-names

which  at  ordinary  times  were  readily  available  to  me  had  suddenly

been withdrawn from my memory. Like so many other Germans I had

made it my habit to spend a part of my holidays on Italian soil, and I

could  not  doubt  that  this  large-scale  forgetting  of  names  was  the

expression  of  an  understandable  hostility  to  Italy  which  had  now

replaced  my  former  partiality.  In  addition  to  this  directly  motivated

forgetting  of  names,  however,  an  indirect  amnesia  could  also  be

detected, which it was possible to trace back to the same influence. I

showed a tendency to forget non-Italian place-names as well; and on

investigating the incidents I found that these names were in some way

connected  by  means  of  remote  similarities  of  sound  with  the

proscribed enemy names. Thus I tormented myself one day in trying

to  recall  the  name  of  the  Moravian  town  of  Bisenz.  When  it  finally

came to my mind I at once recognized that this act of forgetting was to

be laid to the charge of the Palazzo Bisenzi at Orvieto. The Hotel Belle

Arti, where I had stayed on all my visits to Orvieto, is located in this

palazzo. The most precious memories had naturally been the most

severely damaged by the change in my emotional attitude.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1128

 

      Some  examples  may  also  help  to  remind  us  of  the  variety  of

purposes that can be served by the parapraxis of name-forgetting.

   (15) Reported by A. J. Storfer (1914): ‘One morning a lady who livedin Basle received news that a friend of her youth, Selma X. of Berlin,

who was just then on her honeymoon, was passing through Basle, but

staying  only  one  day.  The  Basle  lady  hurried  straight  away  to  her

hotel. When the friends separated, they made an arrangement to meet

again in the afternoon and to be with each other up to the time of the

Berlin lady’s departure.

   ‘In the afternoon the Basle lady forgot about the rendezvous. I do

not  know  what  determined  her  forgetting  it,  yet  in  this  particular

situation (a meeting with a school-friend who has just married) various

typical constellations are possible which could determine an inhibition

against the repetition of the meeting. The point of interest in this case

lies  in  a further  parapraxis,  which  represents  an  unconscious

safeguarding of the first one. At the time when she was to have met

her friend from Berlin the Basle lady happened to be in company at

another place. The recent marriage of the Viennese opera singer Kurz

came up in conversation; the Basle lady gave vent to some critical

remarks (!) about this marriage, but when she wanted to mention the

singer by name, she found to her very great embarrassment that she

could  not  think  of  her  first  name.  (There  is,  as  is  well  known,  a

particular  tendency  to  give  the  first  name  also,  precisely  in  cases

where the surname is a monosyllable.) The Basle lady was all the

more put out by her lapse of memory since she had often heard Kurz

sing  and  ordinarily  knew  her  (whole)  name  perfectly  well.  Before

anyone had mentioned the missing first name the conversation took

another direction.

      ‘In  the  evening  of  the  same  day  our  Basle  lady  was  among  a

number of people, some of whom were the same as those she had

been with in the afternoon. By a coincidence the conversation again

turned  to  the  marriage  of  the  Viennese  singer;  and  without  any

difficulty the lady produced the name "Selma Kurz". "Oh dear!" she at

once exclaimed, "it’s just struck me - I’ve completely forgotten I had an

appointment  with  my  friend  Selma  this  afternoon."  A  glance  at  the

clock showed that her friend must have left already.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1129 

   We are perhaps not ready yet to appreciate all the aspects of this

pretty example. The following is a simpler specimen, though here it

was not a name but a foreign word that was forgotten, from a motive

arising out of the situation. (We can already see that we are dealing

with the same processes, whether they apply to proper names, first

names, foreign words or sets of words.) Here it was a case of a young

man forgetting the English word for ‘Gold’ - which is identical with the

German word - so as to find an opportunity for carrying out an action

he desired.

      (16)  Reported  by  Dr.  Hanns  Sachs:  ‘A  young  man  became

acquainted in a pension with an English lady, whom he took a liking

to.  On  the  first  evening  of  their  acquaintance  he  was  having  a

conversation  with  her  in  her  native  language,  which  he  knew  fairly

well; and in the course of it he wanted to use the English word for

"Gold". In spite of strenuous efforts the word would not come to him.

Instead,  the  French or,  the  Latin aurum  and  the  Greek chrysos

obstinately forced themselves on him as substitutes, so that it needed

quite an effort to reject them, though he knew for certain that they

were not related at all to the word he was looking for. In the end the

only way he could find of making himself understood was by touching

a gold ring on the lady’s hand; and he was very much abashed on

learning from her that the long-lost word for gold was exactly the same

as the German one, namely "gold". The great value of this touching,

for which the forgetting gave an opportunity, did not lie merely in the

unobjectionable satisfaction of the instinct for laying hold or touching -

for there are other opportunities for this which are eagerly exploited by

lovers. It lay much more in the way in which it assisted in clarifying the

prospects of the courtship. The lady’s unconscious would divine the

erotic  aim  of  the  forgetting,  hidden  by  its  mask  of  innocence,

especially if her unconscious was sympathetically drawn to the man

she was talking with. The manner in which she treated his touching of

her and accepted its motivation could in this way become a means -

unconscious for both of them, yet full of significance - of reaching an

understanding on the chances of the flirtation just begun.’

                     The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1130

 

   (17) From J. Stärcke (1916) I report another interesting observation

that  concerns  the  forgetting  and  subsequent  recovery  of  a  proper

name. This case is distinguished by the fact that the forgetting of the

name was connected with the misquoting of a set of words from a

poem, as in the example of the ‘Bride of Corinth’.

   ‘Z., an old jurist and philologist, was describing in company how in

his  student  days  in  Germany  he  had  known  a  quite  exceptionally

stupid student, and had some anecdotes to tell of his stupidity. He

could not, however, recall the student’s name; he believed it began

with a "W", but later took back the idea. He recalled that the stupid

student later became a wine merchant. He then told another anecdote

about the student’s stupidity, and once again expressed surprise that

his name did not come back to him. "He was such an ass," he then

remarked, "that I still don’t understand how I succeeded in drumming

Latin into his head." A moment later he remembered that the name he

was looking for ended in ". . . man". At this point we asked him if any

other name ending in "man" occurred to him, and he gave "Erdmann ".

"Who  is  that?"  "That  was  another  student  of  those  days."  His

daughter,  however,  observed  that  there  was  also  a  Professor

Erdmann.  Some  closer  questioning  revealed  that  this  Professor

Erdmann, who was the editor of a periodical, had recently refused to

accept  a  piece  of  work  submitted  by  Z.,  with  which  he  partly

disagreed, except in a shortened form; and Z. had been considerably

put out. (In addition, I later discovered that years before, Z. had very

probably expected to become professor in the same department in

which Professor Erdmann now lectured. This, then, may have been

another reason why the name touched on a sensitive spot.)

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1131

 

   ‘At this point the stupid student’s name suddenly came back to him:

"Lindeman". Since he had already recalled that the name ended in

"man", it was "Linde " that had remained repressed for longer. Whenhe has asked what came to his mind when he thought of "Linde", he at

first said "Absolutely nothing." When I urged that something connected

with  this  word  would  no  doubt  occur  to  him,  he  remarked  with  an

upward gaze and a gesture of his hand in the air: "A linden - well, a

linden is a beautiful tree." Nothing further would come to his mind. No

one spoke and everyone went on with their reading or other activity, till

a  few  moments  later  Z.  quoted  the  following  passage  in  a  dreamy

voice:

 

                                                                Steht er mit festen
                                                                Gefügigen Knochen
                                                                Auf der erde,
                                                                So reicht er nicht auf
                                                                Nur mit der Linde
                                                                Oder der Rebe

                                                                Sich zu vergleichen.¹

 

   ‘I gave a cry of triumph. "There’s our Erdmann," I said. "The man

who ‘stands on the earth’, that is to say the earthman or Erdmann,

cannot  reach  up  far  enough  to  bear  comparison  with  the  linden

(Lindeman)  or  the  vine  (wine  merchant).  In  other  words,  our

Lindeman,  the  stupid  student,  who  later  became  a  wine  merchant,

was certainly an ass, but our Erdmann is a much greater ass than

that,  and  cannot  even  be  compared  with  this  Lindeman."  -  Such

derisive or abusive language in the unconscious is quite usual; so it

seemed to me that the chief cause of the name being forgotten had

probably now been found.

 

   ¹ [Literally: ‘If he stands with firm, pliant bones on the earth, he does not reach up far

enough to bear comparison even with the linden or the vine.’]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1132

 

   ‘I now asked what the poem was from which the lines were quoted.

Z. said it was a poem by Goethe, which he thought began:

 

                                                                Edel sei der Mensch

                                                                Hilfreich und gut!¹ 

and which later contained the lines:

 

                                                                Und hebt er sich aufwärts,

                                                                So spielen mit ihm die Winde.²

 

   ‘The next day I looked up this poem of Goethe’s, and it turned out

that the case was even prettier (though also more complex) than it

had seemed at first.

    (a) ‘The first lines that he quoted run (cf. above):

 

                                                                Steht er mit festen

                                                                Markigen Knochen . . .³

 

   ‘"Gefügige Knochen" would be a rather peculiar combination; but I

shall not go further into this point.

    (b) ‘The next lines of this stanza run (cf. above):

 

                                                                . . . Auf der wohlgegründeten

                                                                Dauernden Erde,

                                                                Reicht er nicht auf,
                                                                Nur mit der Eiche
                                                                Oder der Rebe
                                                                Sich zu vergleichen.4

 

   So in the whole poem there is no mention of a linden. The change of

"oak" into "linden" had taken place (in his unconscious) only in order to

make the play on the words "earth-linden-vine" possible.

    (c) ‘This poem is called "Grenzen der Menschheit" and compares

the omnipotence of the gods with man’s puny strength. But the poem

beginning:

 

                                                                Edel sei der Mensch,
                                                                Hilfreich und gut!

 

is a different one, appearing some pages further on. Its title is "Das

Göttliche [The Divine Nature]", and it too contains thoughts about gods

and men. As the matter was not gone into further I can at the most

offer an opinion that thoughts about life and death, the temporal andthe  eternal,  and  the  subject’s  own  frail  life  and  future  death  also

played a part in bringing about the occurrence of this case.’

 

   ¹ [‘Let Man be noble, helpful and good.’]

   ² [‘And if he raises himself upwards the winds play with him.’]

   ³ [‘If he stands with firm, sturdy bones . . .’]

   4 [‘. . . on the firmly-based, enduring earth, he does not reach up far enough to bear
comparison even with the oak or the vine.’]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1133

 

      In  some  of  these  examples  all  the  subtleties  of  psycho-analytic

technique have to be called upon in order to explain the forgetting of a

name. Anyone who wishes to learn more about such work may be

referred to a paper by Ernest Jones of London (1911a). It has been

translated into German.

   (18) Ferenczi has observed that forgetting a name may also make

its appearance as a hysterical symptom. In this situation it displays a

very different mechanism from that of a parapraxis . The nature of this

distinction may be seen from what he says:

   ‘At the moment I am treating a patient, a spinster getting on in years,

in whose mind the most familiar and best-known proper names fail to

appear, although her memory is otherwise good. In the course of the

analysis it has become clear that this symptom is intended by her as a

documentation  of  her  ignorance.  This  demonstrative  parade  of  her

ignorance is, however, really a reproach against her parents, who did

not let her have any higher education. Her tormenting obsession to

clean  things  ("housewife’s  psychosis")  also  comes  in  part  from  the

same source. What she means by this is something like: "You have

turned me into a housemaid."'

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1134

 

    I could cite further instances of the forgetting of names and explore

the matter much more fully if I were not reluctant to anticipate at this

first stage almost all the points of view that will come up for discussion

under later topics. But I may perhaps allow myself to summarize in a

few sentences the conclusions to be drawn from the analyses that

have been reported here:

   The mechanism of names being forgotten (or, to be more accurate,

the mechanism of names escaping the memory, of being temporarily

forgotten) consists in the interference with the intended reproduction

of  the  name  by  an  alien  train  of  thought  which  is  not  at  the  time

conscious.  Between  the  name  interfered  with  and  the  interfering

complex either a connection exists from the outset, or else such a

connection has established itself, often in ways that appear artificial,

viâ superficial (external) associations.

   Among the interfering complexes those of personal reference (i.e.

the personal, family and professional complexes) prove to have the

greatest effect.

      A  name  which  has  more  than  one  meaning  and  consequently

belongs to more than one group of thoughts (complexes)  is frequently

interfered with in its connection with one train of thought owing to its

participation in another, stronger complex.

   Among the motives for these interferences the purpose of avoiding

arousing unpleasure by remembering is conspicuous.

   In general two main types of name-forgetting may be distinguished:

those cases where the name itself touches on something unpleasant,

and those where it is brought into connection with another name which

has  that  effect.  Thus  names  can  have  their  reproduction  interfered

with  on  their  own  account,  or  because  of  their  closer  or  remoter

associative relations.

   A survey of these general propositions shows us why the temporary

forgetting of names is the most frequently to be observed of all our

parapraxes.

 

   (19) We are however far from having outlined all the characteristics

of  this  phenomenon.  There  is  a  further  point  I  wish  to  make.  The

forgetting of names is highly contagious. In a conversation between

two people it is often sufficient for one of them merely to mention thathe has forgotten such and such a name, and the result will be that it

slips the other’s mind as well. In cases like these, however, where the

forgetting is induced, the forgotten name returns more readily. - This

‘collective’  forgetting,  strictly  speaking  a  phenomenon  of  group

psychology,  his  not  yet  been  made  the  subject  of  psycho-analytic

study. In a single instance (but an especially, neat one) Reik (1920)

has  been  able  to  offer  a  good  explanation  of  this  curious

phenomenon.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1135

 

   ‘In a small gathering of university people, which included two women

students  of  philosophy,  there  was  a  discussion  on  the  numerous

questions raised in the fields of religious studies and the history of

civilization by the origin of Christianity. One of the young ladies who

took part in the conversation recalled that in an English novel she had

read  recently  she  had  found  an  interesting  picture  of  the  many

religious currents by which that age had been stirred. She added that

the novel portrayed the whole of Christ’s life from his birth up to his

death; but the name of the work refused to come to her mind. (The

visual memory she had of the cover of the book and the appearance

of the lettering in the title was excessively clear.) Three of the men

who  were  present  also  said  that  they  knew  the  novel,  and  they

remarked that - strange to relate - they too were unable to produce the

name.’

   The young lady was the only one to subject herself to analysis in

order to discover why this name was forgotten. The title of the book

was Ben Hur, by Lewis Wallace. The ideas that had occurred to her as

substitutes for it had been: ‘Ecce homo’ - ‘Homo sum’ - ‘Quo vadis?’

The girl herself realized that she had forgotten the name ‘because it

contains an expression that I (like any other girl) do not care to use -

especially  in  the  company  of  young  men’.¹  In  the  light  of  the  very

interesting  analysis,  this  explanation  took  on  a  profounder

significance. In the context already alluded to, the translation of ‘homo’

(man)  also  has  a  disreputable  meaning.  Reik’s  conclusion  is  asfollows: ‘The young lady treated the word as though by uttering the

questionable  title  in  front  of  young  men  she  would  have  been

acknowledging the wishes which she had rejected as out of keeping

with  her  character  and  distressing  to  her.  More  briefly:  saying  the

words "Ben Hur"² was unconsciously equated by her with a sexual

offer, and her forgetting accordingly, corresponded to the fending-off

of  an  unconscious  temptation  of  that  kind.  We  have  reason  for

supposing that similarly unconscious processes had determined the

young  men’s  forgetting.  Their  unconscious  understood  the  real

significance of the girl’s forgetting and, so to speak, interpreted it. The

men’s forgetting shows respect for this modest behaviour. . . . It is as if

the girl who was talking with them had by her sudden lapse of memory

given a clear sign which the men had unconsciously understood well

enough.’

 

   ¹ [‘Hure’ is the German for ‘whore’.]

   ² [The German words ‘bin Hure’ (‘I am a whore’) sound not unlike ‘Ben Hur’.]

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1136

 

 

   A type of continued forgetting of names occurs also, in which whole

chains of names are withdrawn from the memory. If in the attempt to

recover  a  lost  name  other  names  closely  connected  with  it  are

pursued, it frequently happens that these new names, which were to

serve as stepping stones to the other one, disappear in just the same

way. The forgetting thus jumps from one name to another, as if to

prove  the  existence  of  an  obstacle  which  cannot  easily  be

surmounted.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1137

 

                                    CHAPTER IV

           CHILDHOOD MEMORIES AND SCREEN MEMORIES

 

In  a  second  paper,  which  was  published  in  the Monatsschrift  für

Psychiatrie und Neurologie (1899a), I was in a position to demonstrate

at an unexpected point the tendentious nature of the workings of our

memory.  I  started  from  the  striking  fact  that  a  person’s  earliest

childhood  memories  seem  frequently  to  have  preserved  what  is

indifferent and unimportant, whereas (frequently, though certainly not

universally)  no  trace  is  found  in  an  adult’s  memory  of  impressions

dating  from  that  time  which  are  important,  impressive  and  rich  in

affect.  It  might  be  assumed  from  this  -  since  it  is  known  that  the

memory makes a selection from among the impressions offered to it -

that  in  childhood  the  selection  is  conducted  on  entirely  different

principles from those which apply at the time of intellectual maturity.

Careful investigation nevertheless shows that such an assumption is

unnecessary.  The  indifferent  memories  of  childhood  owe  their

existence  to  a  process  of  displacement:  they  are  substitutes,  in

reproduction, for other impressions which are really significant. The

memory of these significant impressions can be developed out of the

indifferent  ones  by  means  of  psychical  analysis,  but  a  resistance

prevents  them  from  being  directly  reproduced.  As  the  indifferent

memories owe their preservation not to their own content but to an

associative  relation  between  their  content  and  another  which  is

repressed, they have some claim to be called ‘screen memories’, the

name by which I have described them.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1138

 

   In the paper which I have mentioned I only touched on and in no

way exhausted the multiplicity of the relations and meanings of screen

memories. In the example quoted there, of which I gave a detailed

analysis, I laid special stress on the peculiarity of the chronological

relation  between  the  screen  memory  and  the  content  which  is

screened off by it. In that example the content of the screen memory

belonged to one of the earliest years of childhood, while the mentalexperiences which were replaced by it in the memory and which had

remained  almost  unconscious  occurred  in  the  subject’s  later  life,  I

described this sort of displacement as a retroactive or retrogressive

one. The opposite relation is found perhaps still more frequently: an

indifferent impression of recent date establishes itself in the memory

as  a  screen  memory,  although  it  owes  that  privilege  merely  to  its

connection with an earlier experience which resistances prevent from

being reproduced directly. These would be screen memories that have

pushed ahead  or  been displaced forward.  Here  the  essential  thing

with which the memory is occupied precedes the screen memory in

time.  Finally,  we  find  yet  a  third  possibility,  in  which  the  screen

memory is connected with the impression that it screens not only by

its content but also by contiguity in time: these are contemporary or

contiguous screen memories.

   How large a part of our store of memory falls into the category of

screen memories, and what role they play in various neurotic thought-

processes, are problems whose significance I neither discussed in my

earlier  paper  nor  shall  enter  into  here.  My  only  concern  is  to

emphasize  the  similarity  between  the  forgetting  of  proper  names

accompanied by paramnesia, and the formation of screen memories.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1139

 

   At first sight the differences between the two phenomena are much

more  striking  than  any  analogies  that  may  be  found.  The  former

phenomenon relates to proper names; the latter to whole impressions,

things  experienced  either  in  reality  or  in  thought.  In  the  former  we

have a manifest failure of the function of memory; in the latter, an act

of memory that strikes us as strange. In the former it is a case of

momentary disturbance - for the name that has just been forgotten

may have been produced correctly a hundred times before, and from

tomorrow may be produced once again; in the latter it is a case of a

permanent  and  constant  memory,  since  the  indifferent  childhood

memories seem to have the power of staying with us through a large

part of our life. The problem in these two cases appears to be quitedifferently focused. In the former it is the forgetting, in the latter the

retention which arouses our scientific curiosity. Closer study reveals

that in spite of the dissimilarity between the two phenomena in regard

to their psychical material and their duration, the points at which they

agree  far  outbalance  it.  Both  have  to  do  with  mistakes  in

remembering:  what  the  memory  reproduces  is  not  what  it  should

correctly have reproduced, but something else as a substitute. In the

case of the forgetting of names the act of memory occurs, though in

the  form  of  substitute  names;  the  case  of  the  formation  of  screen

memories  has  as  its  basis  a  forgetting  of  other  more  important

impressions.  In  both  instances  an  intellectual  feeling  gives  us

information of interference by some disturbing factor; but it takes two

different  forms.  With  the  forgetting  of  names  we know  that  the

substitute names are false: with screen memories we are surprised

that  we  possess  them  at  all.  If,  now,  psychological  analysis

establishes that the substitutive formation has come about in the same

way  in  both  cases,  by  means  of  displacement  along  a  superficial

association,  it  is  precisely  the  dissimilarities  between  the  two

phenomena, in regard to their material, their duration and their focal

point,  which  serve  to  heighten  our  expectation  that  we  have

discovered  something  of  importance  and  of  general  validity.  This

general principle would assert that when the reproducing function fails

or goes astray, the occurrence points, far more frequently than we

suspect, to interference by a tendentious factor - that is, by a purpose

which favours one memory while striving to work against another.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1140

 

 

      The  subject  of  childhood  memories  seems  to  me  to  be  of  such

significance  and  interest  that  I  should  like  to  devote  to  it  a  few

additional observations which go beyond the views that I have so far

expressed.

   How far back into childhood do our memories extend? I am familiar

with a few investigations into this question, such as those by V. and C.Henri (1897) and by Potwin (1901). They show that great individual

differences  exist  among  the  persons  examined:  a  few  assign  their

earliest memories to the sixth month of life, while others remember

nothing of their lives up to the end of their sixth or even eighth year.

But with what are these differences in retaining childhood memories

connected, and what significance attaches to them? Clearly it is not

sufficient  to  assemble  the  material  for  answering  these  points  by

means of a questionnaire; what is required in addition is that it should

be  worked  over  -  a  process  in  which  the  person  supplying  the

information must participate.

   In my opinion we take the fact of infantile amnesia - the loss, that is,

of the memories of the first years of our life - much too easily; and we

fail to look upon it as a strange riddle. We forget how high are the

intellectual  achievements  and  how  complicated  the  emotional

impulses of which a child of some four years is capable, and we ought

to be positively astonished that the memory of later years has as a

rule preserved so little of these mental processes, especially as we

have every reason to suppose that these same forgotten childhood

achievements have not, as might be thought, slipped away without

leaving their mark on the subject’s development, but have exercised a

determining influence for the whole of his later life. And in spite of this

unique efficacy they have been forgotten!  This suggests that there

are  conditions  for  remembering  (in  the  sense  of  conscious

reproducing) of a quite special kind, which have evaded recognition by

us up to now. It may very well be that the forgetting of childhood can

supply us with the key to the understanding of those amnesias which

lie,  according  to  our  more  recent  discoveries,  at  the  basis  of  the

formation of all neurotic symptoms.

   Of the childhood memories that have been retained a few strike us

as perfectly understandable, while others seem odd or unintelligible. It

is  not  difficult  to  correct  certain  errors  regarding  both  sorts.  If  the

memories  that  a  person  has  retained  are  subjected  to  an  analytic

enquiry,  it  is  easy  to  establish  that  there  is  no  guarantee  of  their

accuracy.  Some  of  the  mnemic  images  are  certainly  falsified,

incomplete or displaced in time and place. Any such statement by the

subjects of the enquiry as that their first recollection comes from about

their second year is clearly not to be trusted. Moreover, motives cansoon be discovered which make the distortion and displacement of the

experience intelligible, but which show at the same time that these

mistakes  in  recollection  cannot  be  caused  simply  by  a  treacherous

memory.  Strong  forces  from  later  life  have  been  at  work  on  the

capacity of childhood experiences for being remembered - probably

the same forces which are responsible for our having become so far

removed in general from understanding our years of childhood.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1141

 

   Remembering in adults, as is well known, makes use of a variety of

psychical  material.  Some  people  remember  in  visual  images;  their

memories  have  a  visual  character  .  Other  people  can  scarcely

reproduce in their memory even the scantiest outlines of what they

have  experienced.  Following  Charcot’s  proposal,  such  people  are

called auditifs and moteurs in contrast to the visuels. In dreams these

distinctions disappear: we all dream predominantly in visual images.

But this development is similarly reversed in the case of childhood

memories:  they  are  plastically  visual  even  in  people  whose  later

function  of  memory  has  to  do  without  any  visual  element.  Visual

memory  accordingly  preserves  the  type  of  infantile  memory.  In  my

own  case  the  earliest  childhood  memories  are  the  only  ones  of  a

visual character: they are regular scenes worked out in plastic form,

comparable only to representations on the stage. In these scenes of

childhood, whether in fact they prove to be true or falsified, what one

sees invariably includes oneself as a child, with a child’s shape and

clothes. This circumstance must cause surprise: in their recollections

of  later  experiences  adult visuels  no  longer  see  themselves.¹

Furthermore it contradicts all that we have learnt to suppose that in his

experiences  a  child’s  attention  is  directed  to  himself  instead  of

exclusively to impressions from outside. One is thus forced by various

considerations  to  suspect  that  in  the  so-called  earliest  childhood

memories  we  possess  not  the  genuine  memory-trace  but  a  later

revision  of  it,  a  revision  which  may  have  been  subjected  to  the

influences of a variety of later psychical forces. Thus the ‘childhoodmemories’ of individuals come in general to acquire the significance of

‘screen memories’ and in doing so offer a remarkable analogy with the

childhood memories that a nation preserves in its store of legends and

myths.

 

   ¹ This statement is based on a number of enquiries I have made.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1142

 

   Anyone who has investigated a number of people psychologically by

the  method  of  psycho-analysis  will  in  the  course  of  his  work  have

collected  numerous  examples  of  every  kind  of  screen  memory.

However,  the  reporting  of  these  examples  is  made  extraordinarily

difficult  owing  to  the  nature  of  the  relations,  which  I  have  just

discussed,  between  childhood  memories  and  later  life.  In  order  to

show that a childhood memory is to be regarded as a screen memory,

it would often be necessary to present the complete life history of the

person  in  question.  Only  rarely  is  it  possible  to  lift  a  single  screen

memory out of its context in order to give an account of it, as in the

following good example.

   A man of twenty-four has preserved the following picture from his

fifth year. He is sitting in the garden of a summer villa, on a small chair

beside his aunt, who is trying to teach him the letters of the alphabet.

He is in difficulties over the difference between m and n and he asks

his aunt to tell him how to know one from the other. His aunt points out

to him that the m has a whole piece more than the n - the third stroke.

There appeared to be no reason for challenging the trustworthiness of

this childhood memory; it had, however, only acquired its meaning at a

later  date,  when  it  showed  itself  suited  to  represent  symbolically

another of the boy’s curiosities. For just as at that time he wanted to

know the difference between m and n, so later he was anxious to find

out the difference between boys and girls, and would have been very

willing  for  this  particular  aunt  to  be  the  one  to  teach  him.  He  also

discovered then that the difference was a similar one - that a boy, too,

has a whole piece more than a girl; and at the time when he acquired

this piece of knowledge he called up the recollection of the parallelcuriosity of his childhood.

   Here is another example, from the later years of childhood. A man

who is severely inhibited in his erotic life, and who is now over forty, is

the  eldest  of  nine  children.  At  the  time  that  the  youngest  of  his

brothers and sisters was born he was fifteen, yet he maintains firmly

and  obstinately  that  he  had  never  noticed  any  of  his  mother’s

pregnancies. Under pressure from my scepticism a memory presented

itself to him: once at the age of eleven or twelve he had seen his

mother hurriedly unfasten her skirt in front of the mirror. He now added

of his own accord that she had come in from the street and had been

overcome by unexpected labour pains. The unfastening of the skirt

was a screen memory for the confinement. We shall come across the

use of ‘verbal bridges’ of this kind in further cases.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1143

 

   I should like now to give a single example of the way in which a

childhood memory, which previously appeared to have no meaning,

can acquire one as a result of being worked over by analysis. When I

began in my forty-third year to direct my interest to what was left of my

memory of my own childhood there came to my mind a scene which

had for a long while back (from the remotest past, as it seemed to me)

come  into  consciousness  from  time  to  time,  and  which  I  had  good

evidence for assigning to a date before the end of my third year. I saw

myself  standing  in  front  of  a  cupboard  demanding  something  and

screaming, while my half-brother, my senior by twenty years, held it

open. Then suddenly my mother, looking beautiful and slim, walked

into the room, as if she had come in from the street. These were the

words in which I described the scene, of which I had a plastic picture,

but I did not know what more I could make of it. Whether my brother

wanted to open or shut the cupboard - in my first translation of the

picture I called it a ‘wardrobe’ - why I was crying, and what the arrival

of  my  mother  had  to  do  with  it  all  this  was  obscure  to  me.  The

explanation  I  was  tempted  to  give  myself  was  that  what  was  in

question was a memory of being teased by my elder brother and ofmy mother putting a stop to it. Such misunderstandings of a childhood

scene  which  is  preserved  in  the  memory  are  by  no  means  rare:  a

situation is recalled, but it is not clear what its central point is, and one

does not know on which of its elements the psychical accent is to be

placed. Analytic effort led me to take a quite unexpected view of the

picture. I had missed my mother, and had come to suspect that she

was shut up in this wardrobe or cupboard; and it was for that reason

that  I  was  demanding  that  my  brother  should  open  the  cupboard.

When he did what I asked and I had made certain that my mother was

not in the cupboard, I began to scream. This is the moment that my

memory has held fast; and it was followed at once by the appearance

of my mother, which allayed my anxiety or longing. But how did the

child get the idea of looking for his absent mother in the cupboard?

Dreams which I had at the same time contained obscure allusions to a

nurse of whom I had other recollections, such as, for example, that

she used to insist on my dutifully handing over to her the small coins I

received as presents - a detail which can itself claim to have the value

of a screen memory for later experiences. I accordingly resolved that

this time I would make the problem of interpretation easier for myself

and  would  ask  my  mother,  who  was  by  then  grown  old,  about  the

nurse. I learned a variety of details, among them that this clever but

dishonest  person  had  carried  out  considerable  thefts  in  the  house

during my mother’s confinement and had been taken to court on a

charge preferred by my half-brother. This information threw a flood of

light on the childhood scene, and so enabled me to understand it. The

sudden  disappearance  of  the  nurse  had  not  been  a  matter  of

indifference to me: the reason why I had turned in particular to this

brother, and had asked him where she was, was probably because I

had noticed that he played a part in her disappearance; and he had

answered in the elusive and punning fashion that was characteristic of

him: ‘She’s "boxed up".’ At the time, I understood this answer in a

child’s way, but I stopped asking any more questions as there was

nothing more to learn. When my mother left me a short while later, I

suspected that my naughty brother had done the same thing to her

that he had done to the nurse and I forced him to open the cupboard

for  me.  I  now  understand,  too,  why  in  the  translation  of  this  visual

childhood scene my mother’s slimness was emphasized: it must havestruck me as having just been restored to her. I am two and a half

years older than the sister who was born at that time, and when I was

three years old my half-brother and I ceased living in the same place.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] Anyone who is interested in the mental life of these years of

childhood will find it easy to guess the deeper determinant of the demand made on the big
brother. The child of not yet three had understood that the little sister who had recently arrived
had grown inside his mother. He was very far from approving of this addition to the family, and
was full of mistrust and anxiety that his mother’s inside might conceal still more children. The
wardrobe or cupboard was a symbol for him of his mother’s inside. So he insisted on looking
into this cupboard, and turned for this to his big brother, who (as is clear from other material)
had taken his father’s place as the child’s rival. Besides the well-founded suspicion that this
brother had had the lost nurse ‘boxed up’, there was a further suspicion against him - namely
that he had in some way introduced the recently born baby into his mother’s inside. The affect
of disappointment when the cupboard was found to be empty derived, therefore, from the
superficial motivation for the child’s demand. As regards the deeper trend of thought, the
affect was in the wrong place. On the other hand, his great satisfaction over his mother’s
slimness on her return can only be fully understood in the light of this deeper layer.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1144

 

                                      CHAPTER V

 

                            SLIPS OF THE TONGUE

 

The ordinary material which we use for talking in our native language

appears to be protected against being forgotten; but it succumbs all

the more frequently to another disturbance, which is known as a ‘slip

of  the  tongue’.  The  slips  of  the  tongue  that  we  observe  in  normal

people give an impression of being the preliminary stages of the so-

called ‘paraphasias’ that appear under pathological conditions. This is

a subject on which I find myself in the exceptional position of being

able to acknowledge the value of a previous work. In 1895 Meringer

and C. Mayer published a study on ‘Slips in Speaking and Reading’.

Their lines of approach differ widely from my own. One of the authors,

who acts as spokesman in the text, is in fact a philologist, and it was

his linguistic interests which led him to attempt to discover the rules

that govern the making of slips of the tongue. He hoped to be able to

conclude  from  these  rules  that  there  exists  ‘a  certain  mentalmechanism, in which the sounds of a word, or of a sentence, and the

words as well, are mutually linked and connected in a quite peculiar

way’ (10).¹

 

   ¹ [Page references in this chapter, unless otherwise specified, are to Meringer and Mayer

(1895).]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1145

 

   The examples of slips of the tongue collected by the authors are first

grouped by them in purely descriptive categories. They are classed as

transpositions (e. g. ‘the Milo of Venus’ instead of ‘the Venus of Milo’);

pre-sonances or anticipations (e. g. ‘es war mir auf der Schwest . . .

auf der Brust so schwer’¹); post-sonances or perseverations (e. g. ‘Ich

fordere Sie auf; auf das Wohl unseres Chefs aufzustossen’ instead of

‘anzustossen’);² contaminations  (e.  g.  ‘er  setzt  sich  auf  den

Hinterkopf’, combined from ‘er setzt sich einen Kopf auf’ and ‘er stellt

sich  auf  die  Hinterbeine’);³  and substitutions  (e.  g.  ‘ich  gebe  die

                                                                        4
Präparate in den Briefkasten’ instead of ‘Brütkasten’). There are in

addition  to  these  main  categories  a  few  others  which  are  less

important (or less significant from our own point of view). In the above

arrangement  into  groups  it  makes  no  difference  whether  the

transposition, distortion, amalgamation, etc., is concerned with single

sounds in a word, with syllables, or with complete words forming part

of the intended sentence.

   To explain the various kinds of slips of the tongue he had observed,

Meringer  postulates  that  different  spoken  sounds  hare  a  different

psychical valency. When we innervate the first sound in a word or the

first word in a sentence, the excitatory process already extends to the

later  sounds  and  the  following  words,  and  in  so  far  as  these

innervations are simultaneous with one another they can exercise a

modifying influence on one another. The excitation of the sound that is

psychically more intense anticipates other excitations or perseverates

after  them,  and  in  this  way  disturbs  the  less  valent  process  of

innervation. The question has therefore to be decided which sounds in

a word have the highest valency. Here is Meringer’s view: ‘If we wantto know which sound in a word has the highest intensity, we must

observe ourselves when we are searching for a forgotten word, e. g.

for a name. Whichever is the first to come back into consciousness is

in every case the one that had the greatest intensity before the word

was forgotten’ (160). ‘The sounds which are of high valency are the

initial sound in the root syllable, and the initial sound in the word, and

the accentuated vowel or vowels’ (162).

 

   ¹ [The  intended  phrase  was:  ‘it  lay  so  heavily  on  my  breast  (Brust).’  The  substituted

‘Schwest’ is a non-existent word.]

   ² [‘I call on you to hiccough to the health of our Principal’ instead of ‘drink to’.]

   ³ [‘He  stands  on  the  back  of  his  head’  (a  meaningless  phrase)  combined  from  ‘He  is

obstinate’ (Iiterally, ‘he puts on a head’) and ‘He gets on his hind legs’.]
4
    [‘I put the preparation into the letter-box’ instead of ‘incubator’, literally ‘hatching-box’.]

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1146

 

   I cannot help contradicting him here. Whether the initial sound of the

name is one of the elements of highest valency: a word or not, it is

certainly  untrue  that  in  a  forgotten  word;  is  the  first  to  return  to

consciousness. The rule stated above is therefore inapplicable. If we

observe  ourselves  while  searching  for  a  forgotten  name,  we  are

comparatively often obliged to express a conviction that it begins with

a particular letter. This conviction proves to be unfounded just as often

as not. Indeed I should like to assert that in the majority of cases the

initial sound which we announce is a wrong one. In our example of

‘Signorelli’, in fact, the substitute names had lost the initial sound and

the essential syllables: it was precisely the less valent pair of syllables

- elli - which returned to memory in the substitute name Botticelli.

      How  little  attention  is  paid  by  the  substitute  names  to  the  initial

sound of the missing name may be learned, for instance, from the

following case:

   One day I found it impossible to recall the name of the small country

of which Monte Carlo is the chief town. The substitute names for it ran:

Piedmont, Albania, Montevideo, Colico. Albania was soon replaced in

my mind by Montenegro; and it then occurred to me that the syllable‘Mont’  (pronounced  ‘Mon’)  was  found  in  all  the  substitute  names

except the last. Thus it was easy for me, starting from the name of

Prince Albert, to find the forgotten name Monaco. Colico gives a pretty

close  imitation  of  the  sequence  of  syllables  and  the  rhythm  of  the

forgotten name.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1147

 

   If we allow ourselves to suppose that a mechanism similar to that

which has been demonstrated for the forgetting of names could also

play a part in the phenomena of slips of the tongue, we are led to form

a  more  deeply  based  judgement  of  instances  of  the  latter.  The

disturbance in speaking which is manifested in a slip of the tongue can

in the first place be caused by the influence of another component of

the  same  speech  -  by  an  anticipatory  sound,  that  is,  or  by  a

perseveration - or by another formulation of the ideas contained within

the sentence or context that it is one’s intention to utter. This is the

type to which all the above examples borrowed from Meringer and

Mayer belong. The disturbance could, however, be of a second kind,

analogous to the process in the Signorelli case; it could result from

influences outside  this  word,  sentence  or  context,  and  arise  out  of

elements which are not intended to be uttered and of whose excitation

we only learn precisely through the actual disturbance. What these

two ways in which slips of the tongue arise have in common would be

the simultaneity of the interfering excitation; what differentiates them

would be the position of the excitation inside or outside the sentence

or context. The difference does not at first appear great in so far as it

concerns  certain  deductions  that  can  be  made  from  the

symptomatology of slips of the tongue. It is clear, however, that only in

the former case is there any prospect of drawing conclusions from the

phenomena  of  slips  of  the  tongue  about  a  mechanism  which  links

sounds and words with one another so that they mutually influence

their articulation - conclusions, that is, such as the philologist hoped to

arrive at from studying slips of the tongue. In the case of interference

from influences outside the same sentence or context of what is beingsaid,  it  would  be  above  all  a  matter  of  getting  to  know  that  the

interfering elements are - after which the question would arise whether

the mechanism of this disturbance, too, can reveal the supposed laws

of speech formation.

      Meringer  and  Mayer  cannot  be  said  to  have  overlooked  the

possibility  that  disturbances  of  speech  may  be  the  result  of

‘complicated  psychical  influences’,  of  elements  outside  the  same

word, sentence or sequence of spoken words. They were bound to

observe  that  the  theory  which  asserts  that  sounds  are  of  unequal

psychical  valency  is  strictly  speaking  only  adequate  for  explaining

sound-disturbances,  together  with  sound-anticipations  and

perseverations.  Where  word-disturbances  cannot  be  reduced  to

sound-disturbances  (as,  for  instance,  in  substitutions  and

contaminations of words), they have not hesitated to look outside the

intended context for the cause of the slip - a procedure which they

justify by some good examples. I quote the following passages:

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1148

 

      ‘Ru.  was  speaking  of  occurrences  which,  within  himself  he

pronounced  to  be  "Schweinereien  [disgusting,  literally  piggish]".  He

tried, however, to express himself mildly, and began: "But then facts

came  to  ‘Vorschwein’   .  .  ."¹  Mayer  and  I  were  present  and  Ru.

confirmed his having thought "Schweinereien". The fact of this word

which  he  thought  being  betrayed  in  "Vorschwein"  and  suddenly

becoming  operative  is  sufficiently  explained  by  the  similarity  of  the

words.’ (62)

   Just as in contaminations, so also - and probably to a much higher

degree - in substitutions an important role is played by ‘floating" or

"wandering" speech images. Even if they are beneath the threshold of

consciousness  they  are  still  near  enough  to  be  operative,  and  can

easily be brought into play by any resemblance they may have to the

complex that is to be spoken. When this is so they cause a deviation

in the train of words or cut across it. "Floating" or "wandering" speech

images are often, as we have said, stragglers following after speechprocesses which have recently terminated (perseverations).’ (73)

   ‘Resemblance can also cause a deviation when another, similar

word lies a short way below the threshold of consciousness, without a

decision  to  speak  it  having  been  reached.  This  is  the  case  with

substitutions.  -  Thus  I  hope  that  my  rules  will  of  necessity  be

confirmed  when  they  are  tested.  But  for  this  it  is  necessary  (if  the

speaker  is  someone  else) that  we  should  obtain  a  clear  notion  of

everything that was in the speaker’s thoughts.² Here is an instructive

case. Li., a schoolmaster, said in our presence: "Die Frau würde mir

Furcht  einlagen."³  I  was  taken  aback,  for  the l  struck  me  as

inexplicable. I ventured to draw the speaker’s attention to his slip in

saying "einlagen" for "einjagen", upon which he at once replied: "Yes,

the  reason  was  that  I  thought:  I  should  not  be  ‘in  der Lage  [in  a

position]’, etc."

 

   ¹ [Ru. intended to say ‘came to “light”’ and should have used the word ‘Vorschein’. Instead

he used the meaningless word ‘Vorschwein’.]

   ² My italics.

   ³ [He intended to say: ‘The lady would strike (einjagen) terror into me.’ But instead of

‘einjagen’ he said ‘einlagen’, which is a non-existent verb - though ‘Lage’ is a familiar noun
meaning ‘position’.]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1149

 

   ‘Here is another case. I asked R. von Schid. how his sick horse was

getting on. He replied: "Ja, das draut  . . . dauert vielleicht noch einen

Monat."¹  I  could  not  understand  the  "draut",  with  an r,  for  the r in

"dauert" could not possibly had had this result. So I drew his attention

to it, whereupon he explained that his thought had been: "das ist eine

traurige  Geschichte  [it’s  a sad  story]."  Thus  the  speaker  had  two

answers in his mind and they had been intermixed.’ (97)

      It  is  pretty  obvious  that  the  consideration  of  ‘wandering’  speech

images which lie below the threshold of consciousness and are not

intended  to  be  spoken,  and  the  demand  for  information  about

everything that had been in the speaker’s mind, are procedures which

constitute  a  very  close  approach  to  the  state  of  affairs  in  our‘analyses’. We too are looking for unconscious material; and we even

look for it along the same path, except that, in proceeding from the

ideas that enter the mind of the person who is being questioned to the

discovery of the disturbing element, we have to follow a longer path,

through a complicated series of associations.

   I shall dwell for a moment on another interesting process, to which

Meringer’s examples bear witness. The author himself holds that it is

some sort of similarity between a word in the sentence intended to be

spoken and another word not so intended which permits the latter to

make  itself  felt  in  consciousness  by  bringing  about  a  distortion,  a

composite figure, or a compromise‑formation (contamination):

 

            jagen,                             dauert,                         Vorschein

            lagen,                             traurig,                         . . . schwein.

 

   Now in my Interpretation of Dreams (1900a) I have demonstrated

the part played by the work of condensation in forming what is called

the  manifest  dream-content  out  of  the  latent  dream-thoughts.  A

similarity  of  any  sort  between  two  elements  of  the  unconscious

material - a similarity between the things themselves or between their

verbal presentations - is taken as an opportunity for creating a third,

which is a composite or compromise idea. In the dream-content this

third  element  represents  both  its  components;  and  it  is  as  a

consequence  of  its  originating  in  this  way  that  it  so  frequently  has

various  contradictory  characteristics.  The  formation  of  substitutions

and contaminations which occurs in slips of the tongue is accordingly

a beginning of the work of condensation which we find taking a most

vigorous share in the construction of dreams.

 

   ¹ [What he intended to say was: ‘Well, it will last (dauerti) another month perhaps.’ Instead

of ‘dauert’ he used the meaningless word ‘draut’]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1150

 

   In a short essay designed for a wider circle of readers Meringer

(1900)  has  claimed  that  a  special  practical  significance  attaches  toparticular cases in which one word is put for another - viz. to those

cases in which a word is replaced by another that has the opposite

meaning. ‘You probably still recall’, he writes, ‘the way in which the

President of the Lower House of the Austrian Parliament opened the

sitting a short while ago: "Gentlemen: I take notice that a full quorum

of members is present and herewith declare the sitting closed!" His

attention was only drawn by the general merriment and he corrected

his mistake. In this particular case the explanation no doubt was that

the President secretly wished he was already in a position to close the

sitting,  from  which  little  good  was  to  be  expected.  But  this

accompanying  idea,  as  frequently  happens,  broke  through,  at  least

partially, and the result was "closed" instead of "open" - the opposite,

that  is,  of  what  was  intended  to  be  expressed.  Now  extensive

observations have taught me that words with opposite meanings are,

quite generally, very often interchanged; they are already associated

in our linguistic consciousness, they lie very close to each other and it

is easy for the wrong one to be evoked.’

   It cannot be said that in all cases where words are replaced by their

opposites it is as easy as in this instance of the President to show the

probability of the slip being a consequence of a contradiction arising in

the  speaker’s  mind  against  the  uttered  sentence.  We  found  an

analogous mechanism in our analysis of the aliquis example. There

the internal contradiction expressed itself in a word being forgotten,

instead of its being replaced by its opposite. But in order to soften the

distinction we may note that the word aliquis is in fact incapable of

having an opposite like ‘to close’ and ‘to open’, and that ‘to open’ is a

word  that  cannot  be  forgotten  as  it  is  too  familiar  a  part  of  our

vocabulary.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1151

 

      If  the  last  examples  of  Meringer  and  Mayer  show  that  the

disturbance of speech can arise on the one hand from the influence of

anticipatory or perseverating sounds and words of the same sentence

which  are  intended  to  be  spoken,  and  on  the  other  hand  from  theeffect of words outside the intended sentence whose excitation would

not  otherwise  have  been  revealed,  the  first  thing  we  shall  want  to

know is whether the two classes of slips of the tongue can be sharply

divided, and how an example of one class can be distinguished from a

case of the other. At this point in the discussion one must however

bear  in  mind  the  views  expressed  by  Wundt,  who  deals  with  the

phenomena of slips of the tongue in the course of his comprehensive

discussion of the laws of the development of speech.

   According to him, a feature that is never missing from these and

other related phenomena is the activity of certain psychical influences.

‘First  of  all  they  have  a  positive  determinant  in  the  form  of  the

uninhibited  stream  of sound-associations  and word-associations

evoked by the spoken sounds. In addition there is a negative factor in

the form of the suppression or relaxation of the inhibitory effects of the

will on this current, and of the attention which is also active here as a

function of the will. Whether this play of association manifests itself by

a coming sound being anticipated, or by the preceding sounds being

reproduced,  or  by  a  habitually  practised  sound  being  intercalated

between others, or finally by quite different words, which stand in an

associative relation to the sounds that are spoken, having an effect

upon them - all these indicate only differences in the direction and at

the  most  in  the  scope  of  the  associations  taking  place,  and  not

differences  in  their  general  nature.  In  some  cases,  too,  it  may  be

doubtful  to  which  form  a  certain  disturbance  is  to  be  assigned,  or

whether  it  would  not  be  more  justifiable, in  accordance  with  the

principle  of  the  complication  of  causes,¹  to  trace  it  back  to  a

concurrence of several motive forces.’ (Wundt, 1900, 380-1.)

 

   ¹ My italics.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1152

 

      I  consider  these  observations  of  Wundt’s  fully  justified  and  very

instructive. Perhaps it would be possible to emphasize more definitely

than  Wundt  does  that  the  positive  factor  favouring  the  slip  of  the

tongue (the uninhibited stream of associations) and the negative factor(the relaxation of the inhibiting attention) invariably achieve their effect

in combination, so that the two factors become merely different ways

of  regarding  the  same  process.  What  happens  is  that,  with  the

relaxation of the inhibiting attention - in still plainer terms, as a result of

this  relaxation  -  the  uninhibited  stream  of  associations  comes  into

action.

   Among the slips of the tongue that I have collected myself I can find

hardly one in which I should be obliged to trace the disturbance of

speech simply and solely to what Wundt calls the ‘contact effect of

sounds’. I almost invariably discover a disturbing influence in addition

which comes from something outside the intended utterance; and the

disturbing  element  is  either  a  single  thought  that  has  remained

unconscious, which manifests itself in the slip of the tongue and which

can often be brought to consciousness only by means of searching

analysis,  or  it  is  a  more  general  psychical  motive  force  which  is

directed against the entire utterance.

   (1) My daughter had made an ugly face when she took a bite at an

apple, and I wanted to quote to her:

 

                                                Der Affe gar possierlich ist,

                                                Zumal wenn er vom Apfel frisst.¹

 

   But I began: ‘Der Apfe . . .’ [a non-existent word]. This looks like a

contamination  of  ‘Affe  [ape]’  and  ‘Apfel  [apple]’  (a  compromise-

formation),  or  it  might  be  regarded  as  an  anticipation  of  the  word

‘Apfel’  that  was  in  preparation.  The  circumstances  were,  however,

more  precisely  as  follows.  I  had  already  begun  the  quotation  once

before and had not made a slip of the tongue the first time. I only

made a slip when I repeated it. The repetition was necessary because

the  person  I  was  addressing  had  had  her  attention  distracted  from

another quarter and she had not been listening to me. I must include

the fact of the repetition, together with my impatience to have done

with  my  sentence,  among  the  motives  of  the  slip  which  made  its

appearance as a product of condensation.

 

   ¹ [The ape’s a very comic sight when from an apple he takes a bite.]

                     The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1153

 

   (2) My daughter said: ‘I am writing to Frau Schresinger . . .’ The

lady’s  name  is  Schlesinger.  This  slip  of  the  tongue  is  probably

connected with a trend towards making articulation easier, for an l is

difficult to pronounce after a repeated r. I must add, however, that my

daughter made this slip a few minutes after I had said ‘Apfe’ for ‘Affe’.

Now  slips  of  the  tongue  are  in  a  high  degree  contagious,  like  the

forgetting of names - a peculiar fact which Meringer and Mayer have

noticed in the case of the latter. I cannot suggest any reason for this

psychical contagiousness.

   (3) ‘I shut up like a Tassenmescher - I mean Taschenmesser ', said

a woman patient at the start of the hour of treatment. Here again a

difficulty  in  articulation  (cf.  ‘Wiener  Weiber  Wäscherinnen  waschen

weisse Wäsche’, ‘Fischflosse’ and similar tongue-twisters) could serve

as an excuse for her interchanging the sounds. When her attention

was drawn to her slip, she promptly replied: ‘Yes, that’s only because

you said "Ernscht" to-day.’ I had in fact received her with the remark:

‘To-day we shall really be in earnest ' (because it was going to be the

last session before the holidays), and had jokingly broadened ‘Ernst’

into ‘Ernscht’. In the course of the hour she repeatedly made further

slips of the tongue, and I finally observed that she was not merely

imitating me but had a special reason for dwelling in her unconscious

on the word ‘Ernst’ in its capacity as a name.¹

 

   ¹ In fact she turned out to be under the influence of unconscious thoughts about pregnancy

and contraception. By the words ‘shut up like a pocket-knife’, which she uttered consciously
as a complaint, she wanted to describe the position of a child in the womb. The word ‘Ernst’ in
my opening remark had reminded her of the name (S. Ernst) of a well known Viennese firm in
the Kärntnerstrasse which used to advertise the sale of contraceptives.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1154

 

   (4) ‘I’ve got such a cold, I can’t durch die Ase natmen - I mean, Nase

atmen’,¹ the same patient happened to say another time. She knew

immediately how she had come to make the slip. ‘Every day I get onthe tram in Hasenauer Street, and while I was waiting for one to come

along  this  morning  it  struck  me  that  if  I  was  French  I  should  say

"Asenauer", as the French always drop their aitches at the beginning

of a word.’ She then brought a series of reminiscences about French

people of her acquaintance, and came in a very roundabout manner to

a  memory  of  having  played  the  part  of  Picarde  in  the  short  play

Kürmarker und Picarde when she was a girl of fourteen, and of having

spoken broken German in the part. The chance arrival at her boarding

house  of  a  guest  from  Paris  had  awoken  the  whole  series  of

memories. The interchanging of the sounds was therefore the result of

a  disturbance  by  an  unconscious  thought  from  an  entirely  different

context.

   (5) A slip of the tongue had a similar mechanism in the case of

another  woman  patient,  whose  memory  failed  her  in  the  middle  of

reproducing a long-lost recollection of childhood. Her memory would

not tell her what part of her body had been grasped by a prying and

lascivious hand. Immediately afterwards she called on a friend with

whom  she  discussed  summer  residences.  When  she  was  asked

where  her  cottage  at  M.  was  situated  she  answered:  ‘on  the

Berglende [hill-thigh]’ instead of Berglehne [hill-side].

   (6) When I asked another woman patient at the end of the session

how her uncle was, she answered: ‘I don’t know, nowadays I only see

him in flagranti.’ Next day she began: ‘I am really ashamed of myself

for having given you such a stupid answer. You must of course have

thought me a very uneducated person who is always getting foreign

words mixed up. I meant to say: en passant.’ We did not as yet know

the source of the foreign phrase which she had wrongly applied. In the

same session, however, while continuing the previous day’s topic, she

brought up a reminiscence in which the chief role was played by being

caught in  flagranti.  The  slip  of  the  tongue  of  the  day  before  had

therefore  anticipated  the  memory  which  at  the  time  had  not  yet

become conscious.

 

   ¹ [She meant to say: ‘I can’t breathe through my nose.’ Her actual last two words, ‘Ase

natmen’, have no meaning.]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life                                                                                      1155

 

   (7) At a certain point in the analysis of another woman patient I had

to tell her that I suspected her of having been ashamed of her family

during the period we were just then concerned with, and of having

reproached her father with something we did not yet know about. She

remembered  nothing  of  the  kind  and  moreover  declared  it  was

unlikely. However, she continued the conversation with some remarks

about her family: ‘One thing must be granted them: they are certainly

unusual people, they all possess Geiz  - I meant to say "Geist ".’ And

this  was  in  fact  the  reproach  which  she  had  repressed  from  her

memory. It is a frequent occurrence for the idea one wants to withhold

to be precisely the one which forces its way through in the form of a

slip  of  the  tongue.  We  may  compare  Meringer’s  case  of  ‘zum

Vorschwein  gekommen’.  The  only  difference  is  that  Meringer’s

speaker  wanted  to  keep  back  something  that  was  in  his

consciousness, whereas my patient did not know what was being kept

back,  or,  to  put  it  in  another  way,  did  not  know  she  was  keeping

something back and what that something was.

   (8) The next example of a slip of the tongue is also to be traced back

to something intentionally withheld. I once met two old ladies in the

Dolomites who were dressed up in walking clothes. I accompanied

them part of the way, and we discussed the pleasures and also the

trials of spending a holiday in that way. One of the ladies admitted that

spending the day like that entailed a good deal of discomfort. ‘It is

certainly not at all pleasant’, she said, ‘if one has been tramping all

day  in  the  sun  and  has  perspired  right  through  one’s  blouse  and

chemise.’ In this sentence she had to overcome a slight hesitation at

one point. Then she continued: ‘But then when one gets "nach Hose"

and can change . . .’ No interpellation, I fancy, was necessary in order

to explain this slip. The lady’s intention had obviously been to give a

more  complete  list  of  her  clothes:  blouse,  chemise  and Hose.

Reasons  of  propriety  led  her  to  suppress  any  mention  of  the  third

article  of  linen.  But  in  the  next  sentence,  with  its  different  subject-

matter, the suppressed word emerged against her will, in the form of a

distortion of the similar word ‘nach Hause '.

                     The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1156

 

   (9) ‘If you want to buy carpets,’ a lady said to me, ‘you must go to

Kaufmann  [a  proper  name,  also  meaning  ‘merchant’]  in  the

Matthäusgasse  [Matthew  Street].  I  think  I  can  give  you

recommendation  there.’  ‘At  Matthäus  .  .  .’  I  repeated,  ‘I  mean

Kaufmann’s.’ My repeating one name in the other’s place looks like a

result of my thoughts being distracted. They really were distracted by

what  the  woman  said,  for  she  diverted  my  attention  to  something

much  more  important  to  me  than  carpets.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the

house in which my wife lived when she was my fiancée was in the

Matthäusgasse. The entrance to the house was in another street, and

I now noticed that I had forgotten its name and could only make it

conscious in a round about way. The name Matthäus, which I was

lingering  over,  was  therefore  a  substitute  name  for  the  forgotten

street-name.  It  was  more  suitable  for  this  purpose  than  the  name

Kaufmann,  for  Matthäus  is  exclusively  a  personal  name,  while

Kaufmann is not, and the forgotten street also bears the name of a

person: Radetzky.

   (10) The following case could just as appropriately be included in the

chapter  below  on  ‘Errors’,  but  I  quote  it  here,  since  the  phonetic

relations,  which  were  the  basis  of  one  word  being  put  in  place  of

another, are quite unusually clear. A woman patient told me a dream:

A child had resolved to kill itself by means of a snake-bite. It carried

out its resolution. She watched it writhing in convulsions, and so on.

She had now to find the impressions of the previous day which the

dream had taken as its starting point. She immediately recalled that on

the previous evening she had listened to a public lecture on first aid

for snake-bites. If an adult and a child were bitten at the same time,

the child’s injury should be attended to first. She also remembered

what the lecturer had prescribed by way of treatment. It would very

much depend, he had said, on what kind of snake caused the bite. I

interrupted at this point and asked: Surely he must have said that we

have very few poisonous kinds in these parts and he must have told

you which are the dangerous ones? ‘Yes, he particularly mentioned

the "Klapperschlange [rattlesnake]".’ My laughter drew her attention toher having said something wrong. She did not correct the name, but

took back her statement: ‘Yes, of course, they aren’t found here; he

was  talking  of  the  viper.  How  can  I  have  got  the  idea  of  the

rattlesnake?’ I suspected it was due to interference by the thoughts

which had hidden behind her dream. Suicide by means of a snake-bite

could  hardly  be  anything  other  than  an  allusion  to  the  beautiful

Cleopatra [in German: ‘Kleopatra’]. The great similarity between the

sound of the two words, the occurrence in both of the same letters

‘Kl. . .  p. . .’ in the same order, and of the same stressed ‘a’, was

unmistakable.  The  close  connection  between  the  names

‘Klapperschlange’  and  ‘Kleopatra’  resulted  in  her  judgement  being

momentarily restricted, so that she saw no objection to asserting that

the lecturer had given his audience in Vienna instructions on how to

treat rattlesnake bites. In the ordinary way she knew as well as I did

that that species of snake is not among the fauna of our country. We

will not blame her for her equal lack of hesitation in transferring the

rattlesnake to Egypt, for it is usual for us to lump together everything

which is non-European and exotic, and I had myself to reflect for a

moment before declaring that the rattlesnake is confined to the New

World.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1157

 

   The continuation of the analysis brought further confirmation. On the

previous day the dreamer had for the first time inspected the Mark

Antony monument by Strasser, which stood in the vicinity of her home.

This then was the second exciting cause of the dream (the first having

been the lecture on snake bites). In the continuation of the dream she

was rocking a child in her arms. This scene reminded her of Gretchen.

Further ideas which occurred to her brought reminiscences of Arria

und Messalina. From the fact that the names of so many plays made

their  appearance  in  the  dream-thoughts  we  may  already  have  a

suspicion that in her earlier years the dreamer had cherished a secret

passion for the profession of actress. The beginning of the dream -’A

child had resolved to put an end to its life by means of a snake-bite’ -had in fact no other meaning than that when she was a child she had

made up her mind to become a famous actress one day. Finally, from

the name ‘Messalina’ the path of thoughts branched off which led to

the essential content of the dream. Certain recent events had made

her  apprehensive  that  her  only  brother  might  make  a  socially

unsuitable marriage, a mésalliance with a non-Aryan [the latter from

the ‘Arria’ part of the tragedy’s title]

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1158

 

   (11) I will reproduce here an entirely innocent example (of perhaps

one whose motives were insufficiently elucidated), because it displays

a transparent mechanism.

   A German who was travelling in Italy needed a strap to tie up his

damaged trunk. For ‘strap’ the dictionary gave him the Italian word

‘corregia’.  It  will  be  easy,  he  thought,  to  remember  the  word  by

thinking of the painter Corregio. After that he went into a shop and

asked for ‘una ribera’.

   He had apparently not been successful in replacing the German

word  by  the  Italian  one  in  his  memory  but  his  efforts  were

nevertheless not entirely unsuccessful. He knew he had to keep in

mind the name of a painter, and in this way he hit upon the name not

of the painter who sounded much the same as the Italian word, but of

another one who resembled the German word ‘Riemen’. I could of

course  have  quoted  the  present  case  just  as  appropriately  as  an

example  of  the  for  getting  of  a  name  rather  than  of  a  slip  of  the

tongue.

   When I was collecting slips of the tongue for the first edition of this

book I proceeded by subjecting to analysis every case I was able to

observe,  and  accordingly  included  the  less  impressive  ones.  Since

then a number of other people have undertaken the amusing task of

collecting and analysing slips of the tongue, and have thus enabled

me to select from a richer material.

   (12) A young man said to his sister: ‘I’ve completely fallen out with

the D.’s now. We’re not on speaking terms any longer.’ ‘Yes indeed!’she  answered,  ‘they’re  a  fine Lippschaft.’¹  She  meant  to  say

‘Sippschaft’ [lot, crew]’, but in the slip she compressed two ideas: viz.

that her brother had himself once begun a flirtation with the daughter

of this family, and that this daughter was said to have recently become

involved in a serious and irregular Liebschaft [love-affair].

 

   ¹ [A non-existent word.]

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1159

 

   (13) A young man addressed a lady in the street in the following

words: ‘If you will permit me, madam, I should like to "begleit-digen"

you.’  It  was  obvious  what  his  thoughts  were:  he  would  like  to

‘begleiten ' her, but was afraid his offer would ‘beleidigen ' her. That

these two conflicting emotional impulses found expression in one word

- in the slip of the tongue, in fact - indicates that the young man’s real

intentions were at any rate not of the purest, and were bound to seem,

even  to  himself,  insulting  to  the  lady.  But  while  he  attempted  to

conceal  this  from  her,  his  unconscious  played  a  trick  on  him  by

betraying his real intentions. But on the other hand he in this way, as it

were, anticipated the lady’s conventional retort: ‘Really! What do you

take me for? How dare you insult me!’ (Reported by O. Rank.)

   I will next quote a number of examples from an article by Stekel,

entitled ‘Unconscious Admissions’, in the Berliner Tageblatt of January

4, 1904.

   (14) ‘An unpleasant part of my unconscious thoughts is disclosed by

the following example. I may start by stating that in my capacity as a

doctor I never consider my remuneration but only have the patient’s

interest in mind: that goes without saying. I was with a woman patient

to whom I was giving medical attention in a period of convalescence

after  a  serious  illness.  We  had  been  though  hard  days  and  nights

together. I was happy to find her improved; I painted a picture for her

benefit of the delights of a stay in Abbazia, and concluded by saying:

"If, as I hope, you will not leave your bed soon. . . ." This obviously

owed its origin to an egoistic motive in the unconscious, namely that I

should be able to continue treating this well-to-do patient some timelonger - a wish that is entirely foreign to my waking consciousness and

which I would indignantly repudiate.’

   (15) Here is another example from Stekel. ‘My wife was engaging a

French governess for the afternoons, and after agreement had been

reached  on  the  terms,  wanted  to  retain  her  testimonials.  The

Frenchwoman  asked  to  be  allowed  to  keep  them,  giving  as  her

reason: Je  cherche  encore  pour  les  après-midis,  pardon,  pour  le

avant-midis [I am still looking for work in the afternoons - I mean, in

the  forenoons].  She  obviously  had  the  intention  of  looking  round

elsewhere and perhaps finding better terms - an intention which she in

fact carried out.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1160

 

   (16) From Stekel: ‘I had to give a stiff lecture to a wife; and her

husband, at whose request I did it, stood outside the door listening. At

the end of my sermon, which had made a visible impression, I said:

"Good-bye, sir." To any well-informed person I was thus betraying the

fact that my words were addressed to the husband and that I had

spoken them for his benefit.’

   (17) Stekel reports of himself that at one time he had two patients

from Trieste in treatment whom he always used to address the wrong

way round. ‘Good morning, Herr Peloni’, he would say to Askoli, and

‘Good morning, Herr Askoli’ to Peloni. He was at first inclined not to

attribute any deeper motive to this confusion but to explain it as being

due  to  the  numerous  points  of  resemblance  between  the  two

gentlemen. However it was easy for him to convince himself that the

interchanging  of  the  names  corresponded  in  this  case  to  a  kind  of

boastfulness: he was able in this way to let each of his Italian patients

know that he was not the only visitor from Trieste who had come to

Vienna in search of his medical advice.

   (18) Stekel reports that during a stormy General Meeting he said:

‘We shall now streiten ' (instead of ‘schreiten ') ‘to point four on the

agenda.’

   (19) A professor declared in his inaugural lecture: ‘I am not geneigt '(instead of ‘geeignet ') ‘to describe the services of my most esteemed

predecessor.’

   (20) To a lady whom he suspected of having Graves’ disease Stekel

said:  ‘You  are  about  a Kropf  '  (instead  of  ‘Kopf  ')  ‘taller  than  your

sister.’

   (21) Stekel reports: ‘Someone wanted to describe the relationship of

two friends and to bring out the fact that one of them was Jewish. He

said: "They lived together like Castor and Pollak."¹ This was certainly

not said as a joke; the speaker did not notice the slip himself until I

drew his attention to it.’

 

   ¹ [Castor and Pollux were the ‘heavenly twins’ of Greek mythology. Pollak is a common

Jewish name in Vienna.]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1161

 

   (22) Occasionally a slip of the tongue takes the place of a detailed

characterization. A young woman who wore the breeches in her home

told me that her sick husband had been to the doctor to ask what diet

he ought to follow for his health. The doctor, however, had said that a

special diet was not important. She added: ‘He can eat and drink what

I want.’

   The following two examples given by Reik (1915) have their origin in

situations where slips of the tongue occur especially easily - situations

in which more must be kept back than can be said.

   (23) A gentleman was offering his condolences to a young lady

whose husband had recently died, and he intended to add: ‘You will

find consolation in devoting yourself entirely to your children.’ Instead

he said ‘widwen’.¹ The suppressed thought referred to consolation of

another kind: a young and pretty widow will soon enjoy fresh sexual

pleasures.

      (24)  At  an  evening  party  the  same  gentleman  was  having  a

conversation  with  the  same  lady  about  the  extensive  preparations

being made in Berlin for Easter, and asked: ‘Have you seen today’s

display at Wertheim’s? The place is completely decollated.’ He had

not  dared  to  express  his  admiration  for  the  beautiful  lady’sdécolletage, while the word ‘Auslage’ was used unconsciously in two

senses.

   The same condition applies to another case, observed by Dr. Hanns

Sachs, of which he has tried to give an exhaustive account:

   (25) ‘A lady was telling me about a common acquaintance. The last

time she saw him, he was, she said, as elegantly dressed as ever: in

particular  he  was  wearing  strikingly  beautiful  brown Halbschuhe.

When I asked where she had met him she replied: "He rang at the

door of my house and I saw him through the blinds, which were down.

But I didn’t open the door or give any other sign of life, as I didn’t want

him to know I was already back in town." While I was listening to her I

had  an  idea  that  she  was  concealing  something  from  me,  most

probably the fact that her reason for not opening the door was that she

was  not  alone  and  not  properly  dressed  to  receive  visitors;  and  I

asked  her  somewhat  ironically:  "So  you  were  able  to  admire  his

Hausschuhe  - Halbschuhe, I mean - through the blinds when they

were drawn?" In Hausschuhe I was giving expression to the thought of

her Hauskleid which I had refrained from uttering. There was on the

other hand a temptation to set rid of the word "Halb " for the reason

that  it  was  precisely  this  word  which  contained  the  core  of  the

forbidden answer: "You are only telling me half the truth and are hiding

the  fact  that  you  were half  dressed."  The  slip  of  the  tongue  was

encouraged by the additional circumstance that we had been talking

directly before about this particular gentleman’s married life, about his

häuslich  happiness;  this  no  doubt  helped  to  determine  the

displacement on to him. Finally, I must confess that envy on my part

may perhaps have contributed to my placing this elegant gentleman in

the  street  in  house  shoes;  only  recently  I  myself  bought  a  pair  of

brown  low  shoes,  which  are  certainly  not  "strikingly  beautiful"  any

longer.’

 

   ¹ [A non-existent word.]

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1162

 

   Times of war like the present produce numerous slips of the tonguewhich there is not much difficulty in understanding.

      (26)  ‘What  regiment  is  your  son  with?’  a  lady  was  asked.  She

replied: ‘With the 42nd murderers’.

   (27) Lieutenant Henrik Haiman writes from the front (1917): ‘While I

was reading an absorbing book, I was torn away to act temporarily as

reconnaissance telephone operator. When the artillery post gave the

signal to test the line I reacted with: "Duly tested and in order; Ruhe."¹

According to regulations the message should have run: "Duly tested

and  in  order; Schluss."  My  aberration  is  to  be  explained  by  my

annoyance at being interrupted while I was reading.’

   (28) A sergeant instructed his men to give their people at home their

correct addresses, so that ‘Gespeckstücke’ should not go astray.²

 

   ¹ [‘Quiet’; often used as an exclamation: ‘Silence!’]

   ² [He meant to say ‘Gepäckstücke’ (‘parcels’). ‘Gespeckstücke’ is a non-existent word; but

‘Speckstücke’ would mean ‘bits of bacon’. The vowel after the ‘p’ has practically the same
sound in each case (whether written ‘e’ or ‘ä').]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1163

 

      (29)  The  following  exceedingly  fine  example,  which  is  also

significant in view of its most unhappy background, I owe to Dr. L.

Czeszer, who observed it while he was living in neutral Switzerland

during  the  war  and  who  analysed  it  exhaustively.  I  quote  his  letter

verbatim with some inessential omissions:

   ‘I am taking the liberty of sending you an account of a slip of the

tongue of which Professor M. N. of O. University was the victim in one

of the lectures that he gave on the psychology of feelings during the

summer term which has just ended. I must start by saying that these

lectures took place in the Aula of the University before a great crowd

of interned French prisoners-of-war as well as of students, most of

whom were French-Swiss whose sympathies lay strongly on the side

of the Entente. In the town of O., as in France itself, "boche" is the

name in universal and exclusive use for the Germans. But in public

announcements, and in lectures and the like, senior public servants,

professors and other persons in responsible positions make an effort,for the sake of neutrality, to avoid the ominous word.

      ‘Professor  N,  was  in  the  middle  of  discussing  the  practical

significance of affects, and intended to quote an example illustrating

how  an  affect  can  be  deliberately  exploited  in  such  a  way  that  a

muscular activity which is uninteresting in itself becomes charged with

pleasurable feelings, and so made more intense. He accordingly told a

story - he was, of course, speaking in French - which had just then

been reproduced in the local papers from a German one. It concerned

a German schoolmaster who had put his pupils to work in the garden,

and in order to encourage them to work with greater intensity invited

them to imagine that with every clod of earth that they broke up they

were breaking a French skull. Every time the word for "German" came

up  in  the  course  of  his  story  N.  of  course  said  "allemand"  quite

correctly and not "boche". But when he came to the point of the story

he gave the school-master’s words in the following form: Imaginez-

vous qu’en chaque moche vous écrasez le cráne d’un Français. That

is to say, instead of motte [the French word for ‘clod’] - moche!

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1164

 

   ‘One can see very clearly how this scrupulous scholar took a firm

grip on himself at the beginning of his story, to prevent himself from

yielding to habit - perhaps even to temptation and from permitting a

word that had actually been expressly proscribed by a federal decree

to  fall  from  the  rostrum  of  the  University  Aula!  And  at  the  precise

moment at which he had successfully said "instituteur allemand " with

perfect correctness for what was the last time, and was hurrying with

an inward sigh of relief to the conclusion, which seemed to offer no

pitfalls  -  the  word  which  had  been  suppressed  with  so  much  effort

caught  hold  of  the  similar-sounding  ‘motte",  and  the  damage  was

done.  Anxiety  about  committing  a  political  indiscretion,  perhaps  a

suppressed desire to employ the usual word in spite of everything -

the word that everyone expected - and the resentment of one who

was born a republican and a democrat at every restriction on the free

expression of opinion - all these interfered with his main intention ofgiving a punctilious rendering of the illustration. The interfering trend

was known to the speaker and he had, as we cannot but suppose,

thought of it directly before he made the slip of the tongue.

   ‘Professor N. did not notice his slip: at least he did not correct it,

which is something one usually does quite automatically. On the other

hand the slip was received by the mainly French audience with real

satisfaction  and  its  effect  was  exactly  as  though  it  had  been  an

intentional play upon words. I myself followed this seemingly innocent

occurrence with real inner excitement. For although I had for obvious

reasons to forgo asking the professor the questions prompted by the

psycho-analytic method, I nevertheless took his slip of the tongue as

conclusive  evidence  of  the  correctness  of  your  theory  about  the

determining  of  parapraxes  and  the  deep-lying  analogies  and

connections between slips of the tongue and jokes.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1165

 

   (30) The following slip of the tongue, which was reported by an

Austrian officer, Lieutenant T., on his return home, also had its origin

among the melancholy impressions of war-time:

   ‘For several months of the time that I was a prisoner-of-war in Italy I

was  one  of  two  hundred  officers  accommodated  in  a  small  villa.

During this time one of our number died of influenza. The impression

made by this event was naturally a deep one, for the circumstances in

which  we  found  ourselves,  the  lack  of  medical  assistance  and  the

helplessness of our condition at the time made it more than probable

that an epidemic would break out. - We had laid out the dead man in a

cellar-room. In the evening, after I had taken a walk around our house

with a friend, we both expressed a wish to see the dead body. The

sight which greeted me on entering the cellar (I was the one in front)

startled me violently, for I had not expected to find the bier so near the

entrance  and  to  be  confronted  at  such  close  quarters  with  a  face

transformed  by  the  play  of  the  candle  light  into  something  set  in

movement.  While  the  effects  of  this  scene  were  still  on  us  we

continued our walk around the house. When we came to a place fromwhere there was a view of the park bathed in the light of a full moon, a

brightly-lit meadow and beyond it a thing veil of mist, I described the

picture that it conjured up; it was as if I saw a ring of elves dancing

under the fringe of the neighbouring pine trees.

   ‘The next afternoon we buried our dead comrade. The course of our

walk from our prison to the cemetery of the small neighbouring village

was both bitter and humiliating for us; for a mocking, jeering crowd

made up of shouting half-grown lads and rough, noisy villagers took

advantage of the occasion to give open vent to their emotions, which

were a mixture of curiosity and hatred. My feeling that even in this

defenceless condition we could not escape insults and my disgust at

the demonstration of coarseness overwhelmed me with bitterness until

the evening. At the same hour as on the previous day and with the

same companion, I began to walk along the gravel path around our

house, just as I had done before; and as we passed by the grating of

the cellar behind which the dead body had lain I was seized by the

memory of the impression which the sight of it had made on me. At

the place where the brightly lit park once more lay before me, in the

light of the same, full moon, I stopped and said to my companion: "We

could sit down here in the grave - grass and sink a serenade." My

attention was not caught until I made the second slip; I had corrected

the  first  one  without  having  become  conscious  of  the  meaning  it

contained.  I  now  reflected  on  them  and  put  them  together:  "in  the

grave - to sink!" The following pictures flashed through my mind with

lightning  rapidity:  elves  dancing  and  hovering  in  the  moonlight;  our

comrade lying on his bier, the impression of movement; some scenes

from  the  burial,  the  sensation  of  the  disgust  I  had  felt  and  of  the

disturbance  of  our  mourning;  the  memory  of  some  conversations

about the infectious illness that had appeared, and the forebodings

expressed by several of the officers. Later I remembered that it was

the date of my father’s death; in view of my usually very poor memory

for dates I found this striking.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1166

    ‘Subsequent reflection brought home to me the sameness of the

external circumstances on the two evenings: the same time of day and

lighting conditions, the identical place and companion. I recalled my

uneasy feelings when there had been an anxious discussion of the

possibility of the influenza spreading; and I remembered at the same

time my inner prohibition against letting myself be overcome by fear. I

also became conscious of the significance attaching to the order of the

words "we could - in the grave - sink",¹ and I realized that only the

initial  correction  of  "grave"  into  "grass",  which  had  taken  place

unobtrusively, had led to the second slip ("sink" for "sing") in order to

ensure that the suppressed complex should have its full expression.

   ‘I may add that I suffered at the time from alarming dreams about a

very close relative. I repeatedly saw her ill and once actually dead.

Just  before  I  was  taken  prisoner  I  had  received  news  that  the

influenza was raging with particular virulence in her part of the world,

and I had expressed my lively fears to her about it. Since then I had

been out of touch with her. Some months later I received news that

she had fallen a victim to the epidemic a fortnight before the episode I

have described!’

   (31) The next example of a slip of the tongue throws a flash of light

on one of those painful conflicts which fall to the lot of a doctor. A man

whose illness was in all probability a fatal one, though the diagnosis

had  not  as  yet  been  confirmed,  had  come  to  Vienna  to  await  the

solution of his problem, and had begged a friend whom he had known

since  his  youth,  and  who  had  become  a  well-known  physician,  to

undertake  his  treatment.  This  the  friend  had  with  some  reluctance

finally agreed to do. It was intended that the sick man should stay in a

nursing home and the doctor proposed that it should be the ‘Hera’

sanatorium. ‘Surely’, objected the patient, ‘that is a home for a special

type  of  case  only  (a  maternity  home).’  ‘Oh  no!’  replied  the  doctor

hastily, ‘in the "Hera" they can umbringen  - I mean, unterbringen  -

every type of patient.’ He then violently disputed the interpretation of

his slip. ‘Surely you won’t believe I have hostile impulses against you?’

A quarter of an hour later, as the doctor was going out with the lady

who had undertaken to nurse the invalid, he said: ‘I can’t find anything,

and I still don’t believe in it. But if it should be so, I am in favour of a

strong  dose  of  morphia  and  a  peaceful  finish.’  It  emerged  that  hisfriend had stipulated that he (the doctor) should shorten his sufferings

by means of a drug as soon as it was confirmed that he was past

helping. Thus the doctor had in fact undertaken to put an end to his

friend.

 

   ¹ [‘Wir könnten ins Grab sinken’ - ‘we could sink in the grave’. The order of the words, on

which the present point turns, is different in English and in German.]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1167

 

   (32) Here is a quite especially instructive slip of the tongue which I

should not like to omit, although according to my authority it is some

twenty years old. ‘A lady once advanced the following opinion at a

social  gathering  -  and  the  words  show  that  they  were  uttered  with

fervour and under the pressure of a host of secret impulses: "Yes, a

woman must be pretty if she is to please men. A man is much better

off; as long as he has his five straight limbs he needs nothing more!"

This example allows us a good view of the intimate mechanism of a

slip  of  the  tongue  that  results  from condensation  or  from  a

contamination (cf. p. 1144). It is plausible to suppose that we have

here a fusion of two turns of phrase with similar meanings:

 

                                                as long as he has his four straight limbs
                                                as long as he has his five wits about him.

 

Or  the  element straight  [‘gerade’]  may  have  been  common  to  two

intended expressions which ran:

 

                                                as long as he has his straight limbs

                                                to treat all five(s) as even numbers¹

 

   ‘There is nothing in fact to prevent us from assuming that both turns

of phrase, the one about his five wits and the one about ‘the even

number five’, played their separate parts in causing first a number,

and  then  the  mysterious  five  instead  of  the  simple  four,  to  be

introduced into the sentence dealing with the straight limbs. But this

fusion  would  certainly  not  have  come  about  if,  in  the  form  thatappeared in the slip of the tongue, it had not had a good meaning of

its own - one expressing a cynical truth which could not of course be

admitted to undisguised, coming as it did from a woman. - Finally we

should not omit to draw attention to the fact that the lady’s remark, as

worded, could pass just as well for a capital joke as for an amusing

slip of the tongue. It is simply a question of whether she spoke the

words with a conscious or an unconscious intention. In our case the

way the speaker behaved certainly ruled out any notion of conscious

intention and excluded the idea of its being a joke.’

 

   ¹ [‘Alle fünf gerade sein lassen.’ The German ‘gerade’ means both ‘straight and ‘even’. The

meaning of the phrase, literally translated in the text, is: ‘To close one’s eyes to irregularities.’]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1168

 

   How closely a slip of the tongue can approximate to a joke is shown

in the following case, reported by Rank (1913), in which the woman

responsible for the slip actually ended by herself treating it as a joke

and laughing at it.

      (33)  ‘A  recently  married  man,  whose  wife  was  concerned  about

preserving  her  girlish  appearance  and  only  with  reluctance  allowed

him to have frequent sexual intercourse, told me the following story

which in retrospect both he and his wife found extremely funny. After a

night  in  which  he  had  once  again  disobeyed  his  wife’s  rule  of

abstinence, he was shaving in the morning in the bedroom which they

shared, while his wife was still in bed; and, as he had often done to

save trouble, he made use of his wife’s powder-puff which was lying

on the bedside table. His wife, who was extremely concerned about

her complexion, had several times told him not to, and therefore called

out angrily: "There you go again, powdering me with your puff!" Her

husband’s laughter drew her attention to her slip (she had meant to

say: "you are powdering yourself again with my puff") and she herself

ended by joining in his laughter. "To powder" is an expression familiar

to every Viennese for "to copulate"; and a powder-puff is an obvious

phallic symbol.’

                     The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1169

 

   (34) In the following example, too - supplied by Storfer - it might be

thought that a joke was intended:

      Frau  B.,  who  was  suffering  from  an  affection  of  obviously

psychogenic  origin,  was  repeatedly  recommended  to  consult  a

psycho-analyst, Dr. X. She persistently declined to do so, saying that

such  treatment  could  never  be  of  any  value,  as  the  doctor  would

wrongly trace everything back to sexual things. A day finally came,

however, when she was ready to follow the advice, and she asked:

‘Nun gut, wann ordinärt also dieser Dr. X.?’¹

   (35) The connection between jokes and slips of the tongue is also

shown in the fact that in many cases a slip of the tongue is nothing

other than an abbreviation:

   On leaving school, a girl had followed the ruling fashion of the time

by taking up the study of medicine. After a few terms she had changed

over from medicine to chemistry. Some years later she described her

change  of  mind  in  the  following  words:  ‘I  was  not  on  the  whole

squeamish about dissecting, but when I once had to pull the finger-

nails off a dead body, I lost my pleasure in the whole of - chemistry.’

   (36) At this point I insert another slip of the tongue which it needs

little  skill  to  interpret.  ‘In  an  anatomy  lesson  the  professor  was

endeavouring  to  explain  the  nasal  cavities,  which  are  notoriously  a

very difficult department of enterology. When he asked whether his

audience had understood his presentation of the subject, he received

a general reply in the affirmative. Whereupon the professor, who was

known  for  his  high  opinion  of  himself,  commented:  ‘I  can  hardly

believe  that,  since,  even  in  Vienna  with  its  millions  of  inhabitants,

those  who  understand  the  nasal  cavities  can  be  counted  on one

finger, I mean on the fingers of one hand.’

   (37) On another occasion the same professor said: ‘In the case of

the female genitals, in spite of many Versuchungen [temptations] - I

beg you pardon, Versuche [experiments] . . .’

 

   ¹ [What she meant to say was: ‘All right, then, when does this Dr. X. have his consulting

hours?’ She should have used the word ‘ordiniert’ for ‘has his consulting hours’. Instead shesaid ‘ordinärt’, which is a non-existent word. ‘Ordinär’, however, means ‘common’, ‘vulgar’.]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1170

 

   (38) I am indebted to Dr. Alfred Robitsek of Vienna for drawing my

attention to two slips of the tongue which were recorded by an old

French writer. I reproduce them without translating them:

   Brantôme (1527-1614), Vies des Dames galantes, Discours second:

‘Si ay-je cogneu une très-belle et honneste dame de par le monde,

qui, devisant avec un honneste gentilhomme de la cour des affaires

de la guerre durant ces civiles, elle luy dit: "J’ay ouy dire que le roy a

faict rompre tous les c . . . de ce pays là." Elle vouloit dire les ponts.

Pensez que, venant de coucher d’avec son mary, ou songeant à son

amant, elle avoit encor ce nom frais en la bouche; et le gentilhomme

s’en eschauffa en amours d’elle pour ce mot.

   ‘Une autre dame que i’ai cogneue, entretenant une autre grand’

dame plus qu’elle, et luy louant et exaltant ses beautez, elle luy dit

après: "Non, madame, ce que je vous en dis, ce n’est point pour vous

adultérer"; voulant dire adulater comme elle le rhabilla ainsi: pensez

qu’elle songeoit à adultérer.’¹

   (39) There are of course more modern examples as well of sexual

doubles entendres  originating  in  a  slip  of  the  tongue.  Frau  F.  was

describing her first hour in a language course. ‘It is very interesting;

the teacher is a nice young Englishman. In the very first hour he gave

me to understand "durch die Bluse" [through the blouse] - I mean,

"durch die Blume" [literally, ‘through flowers’, i.e. ‘indirectly’] that he

would rather take me for individual tuition.’ (From Storfer.)

 

   ¹ [‘Thus I knew a very beautiful and virtuous lady of the world who, discoursing with a

virtuous gentleman on the court on the affairs of the war during those civil disturbances, said
to him: "I have heard tell that the king had a breach made in all the c . . . of that region." She
meant to say the ‘ponts’. One may suppose that, having just lain with her husband, or thinking
of her lover, she had this word freshly on her tongue; and the gentleman was fired with love of
her on account of this word.
   ‘Another lady whom I knew, entertaining another lady of higher rank than herself, and
praising her and extolling her beauties, she said after to her: "No, madame, what I say to you
is not in order to adulterate you"; meaning to say adulate, as she clad the word thus anew,
one may suppose that she was thinking of adultery.’] 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1171

 

   In the psychotherapeutic procedure which I employ for resolving and

removing neurotic symptoms I am very often faced with the task of

discovering,  from  the  patient’s  apparently  casual  utterances  and

associations, a thought-content which is at pains to remain concealed

but  which  cannot  nevertheless  avoid  unintentionally  betraying  its

existence in a whole variety of ways. Slips of the tongue often perform

a  most  valuable  service  here,  as  I  could  show  by  some  highly

convincing and at the same time very singular examples. Thus, for

instance, a patient will be speaking of his aunt and, without noticing

the slip, will consistently call her ‘my mother’; or another will refer to

her husband as her ‘brother’. In this way they draw my attention to the

fact that they have ‘identified’ these persons with one another - that

they have put them into a series which implies a recurrence of the

same type in their emotional life. To give another example: a young

man of twenty introduced himself to me during my consulting hours in

these  words:  ‘I  am  the  father  of  So-and-so  who  came  to  you  for

treatment. I beg your pardon, I meant to say I am his brother: he is

four  years  older  than  I  am.’  I  inferred  that  he  intended  this  slip  to

express the view that, like his brother, he had fallen ill through the fault

of his father; that, like his brother, he wished to be cured; but that his

father was the one who most needed to be cured. - At other times an

arrangement  of  words  that  sounds  unusual,  or  an  expression  that

seems  forced,  is  enough  to  reveal  that  a  repressed  thought  is

participating  in  the  patient’s  remarks,  which  had  a  different  end  in

view.

   What I find, therefore, both in grosser disturbances of speech and in

those  more  subtle  ones  which  can  still  be  subsumed  under  the

heading of ‘slips of the tongue’, is that it is not the influence of the

‘contact effects of the sounds’ but the influence of thoughts that lie

outside the intended speech which determines the occurrence of the

slip and provides an adequate explanation of the mistake. It is not my

wish to throw doubt on the laws governing the way in which sounds

modify one another; but by themselves these laws do not seem to meto be sufficiently effective to disturb the process of correct speaking. In

the cases that I have studied and explored in some detail these laws

represent  no  more  than  the  preformed  mechanism  which  a  more

remote  psychical  motive  makes  use  of  for  its  convenience,  though

without becoming subject to the sphere of influence of these relations.

In a large number of substitutions resulting from slips of the tongue

such phonetic laws are completely disregarded. In this respect I find

myself in full agreement with Wundt, who assumes as I do that the

conditions governing slips of the tongue are complex and extend far

beyond the contact effects of the sounds.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1172

 

   If I accept these ‘remoter psychical influences’ (as Wundt calls them

) as established, there is nothing, on the other hand, to prevent me at

the  same  time  from  allowing  that,  in  situations  where  speaking  is

hurried  and  attention  is  to  some  extent  diverted,  the  conditions

governing slips of the tongue may easily be confined within the limits

defined by Meringer and Mayer. For some of the examples collected

by these authors a more complicated explanation nevertheless seems

more plausible. Take, for instance, one of those quoted above:

 

                                                                ‘Es war mir auf der Schwest . . .

                                                                Brust so schwer.’

 

   Was what happened here simply that the sound ‘schwe’ forced back

the equally valent sound ‘bru’ by ‘anticipating’ it? The idea can hardly

be dismissed that the sounds making up ‘schwe’ were further enabled

to obtrude in this manner because of a special relation. That could

only be the association Schwester  - Bruder; perhaps also Brust der

Schwester, which leads one on to other groups of thoughts. It is this

invisible helper behind the scenes which lends the otherwise innocent

‘schwe’ the strength to produce a mistake in speaking.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life                                                                                      1173

 

   There are other slips of the tongue where we may assume that the

true disturbing factor is some similarity in sound to obscene words and

meanings.  Deliberate  distortion  and  deformation  of  words  and

expressions, which is so dear to vulgar minds, has the sole purpose of

exploiting innocent occasions for hinting at forbidden topics; and this

playing  with  words  is  so  frequent  that  there  would  be  nothing

remarkable in its occurring even when not intended and against one’s

wishes.  To  this  category  no  doubt  belong  such  examples  as

Eischeissweibchen  (for Eiweissscheibchen),¹ Apopos  Fritz  (for à

propos),² Lokuskapitäl (for Lotuskapitäl),³ etc.; and perhaps also the

                                              45
Alabüsterbachse  (Alabasterbüchse)  of  St.  Mary  Magdalen.    -’Ich

fordere  Sie  auf,  auf  das  Wohl  unseres  Chefs auf  zustossen’  can

hardly  be  anything  other  than  an  unintentional  parody  which  is  a

perseveration  of  an  intended  one.  If  I  were  the  Principal  who  was

being honoured at the ceremony to which the speaker contributed this

slip,  I  should  probably  reflect  on  the  cleverness  of  the  Romans  in

permitting  the  soldiers  of  a  general  who  was  enjoying  a  Triumph

openly to express in the form of satirical songs their inner criticisms of

the man who was being honoured. - Meringer relates that he himself

once said to someone, who by reason of being the eldest member of

the company was addressed familiarly by the honorific title of ‘Senexl’

or ‘altes Senexl’: ‘Prost, Senex altesl!’ He was himself shocked at this

mistake (Meringer and Mayer, 1895, 50). We can perhaps interpret his

emotion if we reflect how close ‘Altesl’ comes to the insulting phrase

‘alter Esel’. There are powerful internal punishments for any breach of

the respect due to age (that is, reduced to childhood terms, of the

respect due to the father).

 

   ¹ [A meaningless term (literally: ‘egg-shit-female’), for ‘small slices of white of egg’.]

   ² [‘Apopos’ is a non-existent word; but ‘Popo’ is the nursery word for ‘buttocks’.]

   ³ [A meaningless word, literally: ‘W.C. capital’, for ‘lotus capital’, an architectural term] ‘,

4
    [A non-existent word (though the middle part of it ‘Büste’ means ‘breast’), for ‘alabaster

box’.]
5
    Making slips of the tongue was a symptom of a woman patient of mine which persisted

until  it  was  traced  back  to  the  childhood  joke  of  replacing  ‘ruinieren  [ruin]’  by  ‘urinieren
[urinate]’. - [Added 1924:] The temptation to employ the artifice of a slip of the tongue forenabling  improper  and  forbidden  words  to  be  freely  used  forms  the  basis  of  Abraham’s
observations on parapraxes ‘with an overcompensating purpose’ (Abraham, 1922a). A woman
patient was very liable to duplicate the first syllable of proper names by stammering. She
changed  the  name  ‘Protagoras’  to  ‘Protragoras’,  shortly  after  having  said  ‘A-alexander’
instead of ‘AIexander’. Inquiry revealed that in childhood she had been especially fond of the
vulgar joke of repeating the syllables ‘a’ and ‘po’ when they occurred at the beginnings of
words, a form of amusement which quite commonly leads to stammering in children. [‘A-a’
and ‘Popo’ are the German nursery words for ‘faeces’ and ‘buttocks’.] On approaching the
name ‘Protagoras’ she became aware of the risk that she might omit the ‘r’ in the first syllable
and say ‘Po-potagoras’. As a protection against this danger she held on firmly to this ‘r’, and
inserted another ‘r’ in the second syllable. She acted in the same way on other occasions,
distorting  the  words  ‘Parterre  [ground  floor]’  and  ‘Kondolenz  [condolence]’  so  as  to  avoid
‘Pater (father)' and ‘Kondom [condom]’ which were closely linked to them in her associations.
Another  of  Abraham’s  patients  confessed  to  an  inclination  to  say  ‘Angora’  every  time  for
‘angina’ - very probably because of a fear of being tempted to replace ‘angina’ by ‘vagina’.
These slips of the tongue owed their existence therefore to the fact that a defensive trend had
retained the upper hand instead of the distorting one; and Abraham justly draws attention to
the analogy between this process and the formation of symptoms in obsessional neurosis.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1174

 

   I hope that readers will not overlook the difference in value between

these interpretations, of which no proof is possible, and the examples

that I have myself collected and explained by means of an analysis.

But  if  I  still  secretly  cling  to  my  expectation  that  even  apparently

simple slips of the tongue could be traced to interference by a half-

suppressed idea that lies outside the intended context, I am tempted

to do so by an observation of Meringer’s which is highly deserving of

attention. This author says that it is a curious fact that no one is ready

to  admit  having  made  a  slip  of  the  tongue.  There  are  some  very

sensible  and  honest  people  who  are  offended  if  they  are  told  they

have made one. I would not venture to put it so generally as does

Meringer in saying ‘no one’. But the trace of affect which follows the

revelation of the slip, and which is clearly in the nature of shame, has

a definite significance. It may be compared to the annoyance we feel

when we cannot recall a forgotten name, and to our surprise at the

tenacity of an apparently indifferent memory; and it invariably indicates

that  some  motive  has  contributed  to  the  occurrence  of  the

interference.

   The twisting round of a name when it is intentional amounts to aninsult; and it might well have the same significance in a whole number

of cases where it appears in the form of an unintentional slip of the

tongue.  The  person  who,  as  Mayer  reports,  said  ‘Freuder’  on  one

occasion instead of ‘Freud’ because he had shortly before mentioned

Breuer’s name (Meringer and Mayer, 1895, 38), and who another time

spoke of the ‘Freuer-Breudian’ method of treatment (ibid., 28), was

probably a professional colleague - and one who was not particularly

enthusiastic about that method. In the chapter below on slips of the

pen  I  shall  report  an  instance  of  the  distortion  of  a  name  which

certainly cannot be explained in any other way.¹

   In these cases the disturbing factor which intervenes is a criticism

which has to be set aside since at the moment it does not correspond

to the speaker’s intention.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1907:] It can in fact be observed that members of the aristocracy in

particular are prone to distort the names of the doctors they consult. We may conclude from
this that inwardly they despise them, in spite of the courtesy they habitually show them. -
[Added  1912:] I quote here some pertinent observations on the forgetting of names which
comes from an account of our subject written in English by Dr Ernest Jones, at that time in
Toronto (Jones, 1911b):
   ‘Few people can avoid feeling a twinge of resentment when they find that their name has
been forgotten, particularly if it is by some one with whom they had hoped or expected it
would be remembered. They instinctively realize that if they had made a greater impression
on the person’s mind he would certainly have remembered them again, for the name is an
integral part of the personality. Similarly, few things are more flattering to most people than to
find themselves addressed by name by a great personage where they could hardly have
anticipated it. Napoleon, like most leaders of men, was a master of this art. In the midst of the
disastrous Campaign of France, in 1814, he gave an amazing proof of his memory in this
direction. When in a town near Craonne he recollected that he had met the mayor, De Bussy,
over twenty years ago in the La Fère regiment; the delighted De Bussy at once threw himself
into his service with extraordinary zeal. Conversely there is no surer way of affronting some
one than by pretending to forget his name; the insinuation is thus conveyed that the person is
so unimportant in our eyes that we cannot be bothered to remember his name. This device is
often exploited in literature. In Turgenev’s Smoke the following passage occurs. "‘So you still
find  Baden  entertaining,  M’sieu-Litvinov.’  Ratmirov  always  uttered  Litvinov’s  surname  with
hesitation, every time, as though he had forgotten it, and could not at once recall it. In this
way, as well as by the lofty flourish of his hat in saluting him, he meant to insult his pride." The
same author in his Fathers and Sons writes: "The Governor invited Kirsanov and Bazarov to
his ball, and within a few minutes invited them a second time, regarding them as brothers, and
calling them Kisarov." Here the forgetting that he had spoken to them, the mistake in the
names, and the inability to distinguish between the two young men, constitute a culmination of
disparagement. Falsification of a name has the same significance as forgetting it; it is only a
step towards complete amnesia.’
                     The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1175

 

   Conversely, replacing one name by another, assuming some one

else’s  name,  identification  by  means  of  a  slip  over  a  name,  must

signify an appreciative feeling which has for some reason to remain in

the background for the time being . An experience of this kind from his

schooldays is described by Sándor Ferenczi:

   ‘When I was in the first form at the Gymnasium I had, for the first

time in my life, to recite a poem in public (i.e. in front of the whole

class). I was well prepared and was dismayed at being interrupted at

the very start by a burst of laughter. The teacher subsequently told me

why I had met with this strange reception. I gave the title of the poem

"Aus der Ferne " quite correctly, but instead of attributing it to its real

author I gave my own name. The poet’s name is Alexander (Sándor )

Petöfi. The exchange of names was helped by our having the same

first name; but the real cause was undoubtedly the fact that at that

time I identified myself in my secret wishes with the celebrated hero-

poet. Even consciously my love and admiration for him bordered on

idolatry.  The  whole  wretched  ambition-complex  is  of  course  to  be

found as well behind this parapraxis.’

   A similar identification by means of an exchange of names was

reported  to  me  by  a  young  doctor.  He  had  timidly  and  reverently

introduced  himself  to  the  famous  Virchow  as  ‘Dr.  Virchow’.  The

professor  turned  to  him  in  surprise  and  asked:  ‘Ah!  is  your  name

Virchow too?’ I do not know how the ambitious young man justified the

slip of the tongue he had made - whether he relied upon the flattering

excuse that he felt himself so small beside the great name that his

own  could  not  fail  to  slip  away  from  him,  or  whether  he  had  the

courage to admit that he hoped one day to become as great a man as

Virchow, and to beg the Professor not to treat him so contemptuously

on that account. One of these two thoughts - or perhaps both of them

simultaneously  -  may  have  confused  the  young  man  while  he  was

introducing himself.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1176 

   From motives of an extremely personal nature I must leave it open

whether a similar interpretation is applicable to the following case as

well. At the International Congress at Amsterdam in 1907 my theory of

hysteria was the subject of lively discussion. In a diatribe against me

one  of  my  most  vigorous  opponents  repeatedly  made  slips  of  the

tongue  which  took  the  form  of  putting  himself  in  my  place  and

speaking in my name. For example, he said: ‘It is well known that

Breuer and I have proved . . .’ where he could only have meant ‘ . . .

Breuer  and Freud   .  .  .’  My  opponent’s  name  bears  not  the  least

resemblance  to  my  own.  This  example,  together  with  many  other

cases  where  a  slip  of  the  tongue  results  in  one  name  replacing

another, may serve to remind us that such slips can entirely dispense

with  the  assistance  afforded  by  similarity  in  sound  and  can  come

about with no more support than is provided by hidden factors in the

subject-matter.

      In  other,  far  more  significant,  cases  it  is  self-criticism,  internal

opposition to one’s own utterance, that obliges one to make a slip of

the  tongue  and  even  to  substitute  the  opposite  of  what  one  had

intended. One then observes in astonishment how the wording of an

assertion cancels out its own intention, and how the slip has exposed

an inner insincerity.¹ The slip of the tongue here becomes a mode of

mimetic expression - often, indeed, for the expression of something

one did not wish to say: it becomes a mode of self-betrayal. This was

the case, for instance, when a man who did not care for what is called

normal sexual intercourse in his relations with women broke into a

conversation about a girl who was said to be a flirt, with the words: ‘If

she had to do with me, she’d soon give up her koëttieren.’ There is no

doubt  that  it  can  only  have  been  another  word,  namely  ‘koitieren’,

whose influence was responsible for making this change in the word

that  was  intended,  ‘kokettieren’  [to  flirt,  coquette].  -  Or  take  the

following case: ‘We have an uncle who for months past had been very

much offended because we never visited him. We took his move to a

new house as an occasion for paying him a long overdue visit. He

seemed very glad to see us, and as we were leaving he said with

much feeling: "I hope from now on I shall see you still more seldom

than in the past."' 

    ¹ Slips  of  the  tongue  of  this  type  are  used,  for  instance,  by  Anzengruber  in  his Der

G’wissenswurm to expose the character of the hypocritical legacy-hunter.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1177

 

      When  the  linguistic  material  happens  to  be  favourable,  it  often

causes  slips  of  the  tongue  to  occur  which  have  the  positively

shattering result of a revelation, or which produce the full comic effect

of a joke. - This is the case in the following example observed and

reported by Dr. Reitler:

      ‘"That  smart  new  hat  -  I  suppose  you  ‘aufgepatzt’  [instead  of

‘aufgeputzt’  (trimmed)]  it  yourself?"  said  one  lady  in  a  voice  of

admiration to another. She could proceed no further with her intended

praise; for the criticism she had silently felt that the hat’s trimmings

were  a  "Patzerei  "  had  been  indicated  much  too  clearly  by  the

unfriendly slip of the tongue for any further phrases of conventional

admiration to sound convincing.’

   The criticism contained in the following example is milder but none

the less unambiguous:

   ‘A lady who was visiting an acquaintance became very impatient

and weary at her tedious and long-winded conversation. When at last

she succeeded in tearing herself away and taking her leave she was

detained by a fresh deluge of words from her companion, who had

meanwhile accompanied her into the front hall and now forced her, as

she was on the very point of departing, to stand at the door and listen

once more. At last she interrupted her hostess with the question: "Are

you  at  home  in  the  front  hall?"  It  was  not  till  she  saw  the  other’s

astonished  face  that  she  noticed  her  slip  of  the  tongue.  Weary  of

being kept standing so long in the front hall she had meant to break off

the conversation by asking: "Are you at home in the mornings?", and

her slip betrayed her impatience at the further delay.’

      The  next  example,  which  was  witnessed  by  Dr.  Max  Graf,  is  a

warning that one should keep a watch on oneself.

      ‘At  the  General  Meeting  of  the  "Concordia",  the  Society  of

Journalists,  a  young  member  who  was  invariably  hard-up  made  aviolently  aggressive  speech,  and  in  his  excitement  spoke  of  the

"Vorschussmitglieder  "  (instead  of  "Vorstandsmitglieder  "  or

"Ausschussmitglieder  ").  The  latter  have  the  authority  to  sanction

loans, and the young speaker had in fact put in an application for a

loan.’

   We have seen from the example of ‘vorschwein’ that a slip of the

tongue  can  easily  occur  if  an  effort  has  been  made  to  suppress

insulting words. In this way one gives vent to one’s feelings:

      A  photographer  who  had  made  a  resolution  to  refrain  from

zoological terms in dealing with his clumsy employees, addressed an

apprentice - who tried to empty out a large dish that was full to the

brim and in doing so naturally spilt half the contents on the floor - in

the following words: ‘But, man, schöpsen sie¹ some of it off first.’ And

soon after this, in the course of a tirade against a female assistant

who had nearly spoilt a dozen valuable plates by her carelessness, he

said: ‘Are you so hornverbrannt. . . .?’²

 

    ¹ [He  meant  to  say  ‘draw’,  which  would  have  been  ‘schöpfen  Sie’.  Instead  he  used

‘schöpsen Sie’, which is meaningless. The word ‘Schöps’, however, means ‘sheep’ or ‘silly
fellow’.]

   ² [Here he meant to say ‘hirnverbrannt’, ‘idiotic’, literally ‘with your brain (Hirn) burnt up’. The

word he used instead, a non-existent term, would mean ‘with your horn (Horn) burnt up’. The
word ‘Hornvieh’, literally ‘horned cattle’, is used in the sense of ‘fool’.]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1178

 

   The next example shows how a slip of the tongue resulted in a

serious self-betrayal. Certain details in it justify its repetition in full from

the  account  given  by  Brill  in  the Zentralblatt  für  Psychoanalyse,

Volume II.¹

   ‘I went for a walk one evening with Dr. Frink, and we discussed

some of the business of the New York Psychoanalytic Society. We

met a colleague, Dr. R., whom I had not seen for years and of whose

private life I knew nothing. We were very pleased to meet again, and

on my invitation he accompanied us to a café, where we spent two

hours in lively conversation. He seemed to know some details about

me, for after the usual greetings he asked after my small child and toldme that he heard about me from time to time from a mutual friend and

had been interested in my work ever since he had read about it in the

medical press. To my question as to whether he was married he gave

a negative answer, and added: "Why should a man like me marry?"

   ‘On leaving the café, he suddenly turned to me and said: "I should

like to know what you would do in a case like this: I know a nurse who

was named as co-respondent in a divorce case. The wife sued the

husband and named her as co-respondent, and he got the divorce." I

interrupted  him,  saying:  "You  mean she  got  the  divorce."  He

immediately  corrected  himself  saying:  "Yes,  of  course, she  got  the

divorce", and continued to tell how the nurse had been so affected by

the divorce proceedings and the scandal that she had taken to drink,

had become very nervous, and so on; and he wanted me to advise

him how to treat her.

 

   ¹ In the Zentralblatt the paper was ascribed in error to Ernest Jones.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1179

 

   ‘As soon as I had corrected his mistake I asked him to explain it, but

I received the usual surprised answers: had not everyone a right to

make a slip of the tongue? it was only an accident there was nothing

behind it, and so on. I replied that there must be a reason for every

mistake in speaking, and that, had he not told me earlier that he was

unmarried, I would be tempted to suppose he himself was the hero of

the story; for in that case the slip could be explained by his wish that

he had obtained the divorce rather than his wife, so that he should not

have (by our matrimonial laws) to pay alimony, and so that he could

marry again in New York State. He stoutly denied my conjecture, but

the exaggerated emotional reaction which accompanied it, in which he

showed  marked  signs  of  agitation  followed  by  laughter,  only

strengthened my suspicions. To my appeal that he should tell the truth

in the interests of science, he answered: "Unless you wish me to lie

you must believe that I was never married, and hence your psycho-

analytic interpretation is all wrong." He added that someone who paid

attention  to  every  triviality  was  positively  dangerous.  Then  hesuddenly remembered that he had another appointment and left us.

   ‘Both Dr. Frink and I were still convinced that my interpretation of his

slip  of  the  tongue  was  correct,  and  I  decided  to  corroborate  or

disprove  it  by  further  investigation.  Some  days  later  I  visited  a

neighbour,  an  old  friend  of  Dr.  R.,  who  was  able  to  confirm  my

explanation  in  every  particular.  The  divorce  proceedings  had  taken

place some weeks before, and the nurse was cited as co-respondent.

Dr.  R.  is  to-day  thoroughly  convinced  of  the  correctness  of  the

Freudian mechanisms.’

      The  self-betrayal  is  equally  unmistakable  in  the  following  case,

reported by Otto Rank:

   ‘A father who was without any patriotic feelings, and who wished to

educate  his  children  so  that  they  too  should  be  free  from  what  he

regarded  as  a  superfluous  sentiment,  was  criticizing  his  sons  for

taking part in a patriotic demonstration; when they protested that their

uncle had also taken part in it, he replied: "He is the one person you

should not imitate: he is an idiot."  On  seeing  his  children’s  look  of

astonishment at their father’s unusual tone, he realized that he had

made a slip of the tongue, and added apologetically: "I meant to say

‘patriot’, of course."'

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1180

 

   Here is a slip of the tongue which was interpreted as a self-betrayal

by the other party to the conversation. It is reported by Stärcke, who

adds  a  pertinent  comment,  though  it  goes  beyond  the  task  of

interpreting the slip.

   ‘A woman dentist promised her sister that she would have a look

some time to see if there was Kontakt between two of her molars (that

is, to see if the lateral surfaces of the molars were touching each other

so that no fragments of food could lodge in between). Her sister finally

complained  about  having  to  wait  so  long  for  this  inspection,  and

jokingly said: "She’s probably treating a colleague at the moment, but

her sister has to go on waiting." The dentist eventually examined her,

found there was in fact a small cavity in one of the molars, and said: "Ididn’t think it was in such a bad way - I thought it was merely that you

had no Kontant  - I mean Kontakt." "You see?" laughed her sister;

"your greed is the only reason why you made me wait so much longer

than your paying patients!"

   ‘(Obviously I should not add my own associations to hers or base

any conclusions on them, but when I heard of this slip of the tongue it

at once sprang to my mind that these two pleasant and gifted young

ladies are unmarried and have in fact very little to do with young men,

and I asked myself whether they would have more contact with young

people if they had more ready money.)'

   In the following example, too, reported by Reik (1915), the slip of the

tongue amounts to a self-betrayal:

   ‘A girl was to become engaged to a young man whom she did not

care for. To bring the two young people closer together, their parents

arranged a meeting which was attended by the parties to the intended

match. The young girl possessed sufficient self-control to prevent her

suitor, who behaved in a very on-coming manner towards her, from

detecting her antipathy to him. But when her mother asked her how

she liked the young man, she answered politely: "Well enough. He’s

most liebenswidrig!"'¹

 

   ¹ [She intended to say ‘liebenswürdig’, ‘agreeable’ (literally ‘worthy of love’). The word she

actually used, ‘liebenswidrig’, would mean literally ‘repelling to love’.]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1181

 

   Equally self-revealing is the following, which Rank (1913) describes

as a ‘witty slip of the tongue’.

   ‘A married woman, who enjoyed hearing anecdotes and who was

said not to be altogether averse to extra-marital affairs if they were

reinforced  by  adequate  gifts,  was  told  the  following  time-honoured

story, not without design on his part, by a young man who was eager

to obtain her favours. One of two business friends was trying to obtain

the favours of his partner’s somewhat prudish wife. In the end she

consented  to  grant  them  to  him  in  exchange  for  a  present  of  a

thousand gulden. When, therefore, her husband was about to start ona  journey,  his  partner  borrowed  a  thousand  gulden  from  him  and

promised to pay them back next day to his wife. He then, of course,

paid  the  sum  to  the  wife,  implying  that  it  was  the  reward  for  her

favours;  and  she  supposed  she  had  been  caught  at  last  when  her

husband on his return asked for the thousand gulden and thus found

insult added to injury. When the young man reached the point in his

story at which the seducer says: "I’II repay the money to your wife

tomorrow", his listener interrupted with the highly revealing words: "Let

me see, haven’t you repaid me that - I’m sorry - I mean told me that

already?" She could hardly have given a clearer indication, without

actually putting it into words, of her willingness to offer herself on the

same terms.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1182

 

   A good example of this kind of self-betrayal, which did not lead to

serious consequences, is reported by Tausk (1917) under the title of

‘The Faith of our Fathers’. ‘As my fiancée was a Christian’, Herr A.

related,  ‘and  was  unwilling  to  adopt  the  Jewish  faith,  I  myself  was

obliged to be converted from Judaism to Christianity so that we could

marry. I did not change my religion without some internal resistance,

but I felt it was justified by the purpose behind it, the more so because

it  involved  abandoning  no  more  than  an  outward  adherence  to

Judaism,  not  a  religious  conviction  (which  I  had  never  had).

Notwithstanding this, I always continued later on to acknowledge the

fact  of  my  being  a  Jew,  and  few  of  my  acquaintances  know  I  am

baptized. I have two sons by this marriage, who were given Christian

baptism. When the boys were sufficiently old they were told of their

Jewish background, so as to prevent them from being influenced by

anti-semitic views at their school and from turning against their father

for such a superfluous reason. Some years ago I and my children,

who were then at their primary school, were staying with the family of

a teacher at the summer resort in D. One day while we were sitting at

tea with our otherwise friendly hosts, the lady of the house, who had

no  inkling  of  her  summer  guests’  Jewish  ancestry,  launched  somevery  sharp  attacks  on  the  Jews.  I  ought  to  have  made  a  bold

declaration of the facts in order to set my sons the example of "having

the courage of one’s convictions", but I was afraid of the unpleasant

exchanges that usually follow an avowal of this sort. Besides, I was

alarmed at the possibility of having to leave the good lodgings we had

found  and  of  thus  spoiling  my  own  and  my  children’s  in  any  case

limited holiday period, should our hosts’ behaviour towards us take an

unfriendly turn because of the fact that we were Jews. As however I

had  reason  to  expect  that  my  sons,  in  their  candid  and  ingenuous

way, would betray the momentous truth if they heard any more of the

conversation,  I  tried  to  get  them  to  leave  the  company  by  sending

them into the garden. I said: "Go into the garden, Juden ", quickly

correcting it to "Jungen ". In this way I enabled the "courage of my

convictions" to be expressed in a parapraxis. The others did not in fact

draw any conclusions from my slip of the tongue, since they attached

no significance to it; but I was obliged to learn the lesson that the "faith

of our fathers" cannot be disavowed with impunity if one is a son and

has sons of one’s own.’

   The effect produced by the following slip of the tongue, which I

would not report had not the magistrate himself made a note of it for

this collection during the court proceedings, is anything but innocent:

   A soldier charged with housebreaking stated in evidence: ‘Up to now

I’ve  not  been  discharged  from  military Diebsstellung;¹  so  at  the

moment I’m still in the army.’

 

   ¹ [He meant to say ‘Dienststellung’, ‘service’, literally ‘service position '. Instead he said

‘Diebsstellung’, which would mean literally ‘thief position’.]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1183

 

      A  slip  of  the  tongue  has  a  more  cheering  effect  during  psycho-

analytic work, when it serves as a means of providing the doctor with

a confirmation that may be very welcome to him if he is engaged in a

dispute with the patient. I once had to interpret a patient’s dream in

which  the  name  ‘Jauner’  occurred.  The  dreamer  knew  someone  of

that  name,  but  it  was  impossible  to  discover  the  reason  for  hisappearing in the context of the dream; I therefore ventured to suggest

that it might be merely because of his name, which sounds like the

term of abuse ‘Gauner’. My patient hastily and vigorously contested

this; but in doing so he made a slip of the tongue which confirmed my

guess, since he confused the same letters once more. His answer

was: ‘That seems to me too jewagt.’¹ When I had drawn his attention

to his slip, he accepted my interpretation.

   If one of the parties involved in a serious argument makes a slip of

the tongue which reverses the meaning of what he intended to say, it

immediately  puts  him  at  a  disadvantage  with  his  opponent,  who

seldom fails to make the most of his improved position.

   This makes it clear that people give slips of the tongue and other

parapraxes the same interpretation that I advocate in this book, even if

they do not endorse theoretically the view I put forward, and even if

they are disinclined, so far as it applies to themselves, to renounce the

convenience  that  goes  along  with  tolerating  parapraxes.  The

amusement and derision which such oral slips are certain to evoke at

the crucial moment can be taken as evidence against what purports to

be the generally accepted convention that a mistake in speaking is a

lapsus linguae and of no psychological significance. It was no less a

person  than  the  German  Imperial  Chancellor  Prince  Bülow  who

protested on these lines in an effort to save the situation, when the

wording of his speech in defence of his Emperor (in November, 1907)

was given the opposite meaning by a slip of the tongue. ‘As for the

present, the new epoch of the Emperor Wilhelm II, I can only repeat

what I said a year ago, namely that it would be unfair and unjust to

speak of a coterie of responsible advisors round our Emperor  . . .’

(loud cries of ‘irresponsible’) ‘ . . . irresponsible advisors. Forgive the

lapsus linguae.’ (Laughter.)

 

   ¹ [In vulgar speech, particularly in North Germany, ‘g’ at the beginning of a word is often

pronounced like the German ‘i’ (English ‘y’) instead of like the hard English ‘g’.]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1184

 

   In this case, as a result of the accumulation of negatives, PrinceBülow’s sentence was somewhat obscure; sympathy for the speaker

and  consideration  for  his  difficult  position  prevented  this  slip  from

being put to any further use against him. A year later another speaker

in the same place was not so fortunate. He wished to appeal for a

demonstration with  no  reserves  in  support  of  the  Emperor,  and  in

doing so was warned by a bad slip of the tongue that other emotions

were to be found within his loyal breast. ‘Lattmann (German National

Party): On the question of the Address our position is based on the

standing orders of the Reichstag. According to them the Reichstag is

entitled to tender such an address to the Emperor. It is our belief that

the united thoughts and wishes of the German people are bent on

achieving a united demonstration in this matter as well, and if we can

do so in a form that takes the Emperor’s feelings fully into account,

then  we  should  do  so spinelessly  as  well.’  (Loud  laughter  which

continued  for  some  minutes.)  ‘Gentlemen,  I  should  have  said  not

"rückgratlos"  but  "rückhaltlos  "'  (laughter),  ‘and  at  this  difficult  time

even our Emperor accepts a manifestation by the people - one made

without reserve - such as we should like to see.’

   The Vorwärts of November 12, 1908, did not miss the opportunity of

pointing to the psychological significance of this slip of the tongue:

‘Probably never before in any parliament has a member, through an

involuntary self-accusation, characterized his own attitude and that of

the parliamentary majority towards the Emperor so exactly as did the

anti-Semitic Lattmann, when, speaking with solemn emotion on the

second day of the debate, he slipped into an admission that he and

his friends wished to express their opinion to the Emperor spinelessly.

Loud  laughter  from  all  sides  drowned  the  remaining  words  of  this

unhappy man, who thought it necessary explicitly to stammer out by

way of apology that he really meant "unreservedly".’

   I will add a further instance, in which the slip of the tongue assumed

the  positively  uncanny  characteristics  of  a  prophecy.  Early  in  1923

there was a great stir in the world of finance when the very young

banker X. - probably one of the newest of the ‘nouveaux riches’ in W.,

and at any rate the richest and youngest - obtained possession, after

a short struggle, of a majority of the shares of the -- Bank; and as a

further  consequence,  a  remarkable  General  Meeting  took  place  at

which the old directors of the bank, financiers of the old type, were notre-elected,  and  young  X.  became  president  of  the  bank.  In  the

valedictory  speech  which  the  managing  director  Dr.  Y.  went  on  to

deliver in honour of the old president, who had not been re-elected, a

number of the audience noticed a distressing slip of the tongue which

occurred  again  and  again.  He  continually  spoke  of  the expiring

president instead of the outgoing president. As it turned out, the old

president who was not re-elected died a few days after this meeting.

He was, however, over eighty years old! (From Storfer.)

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1185

 

   A good example of a slip of the tongue whose purpose is not so

much to betray the speaker as to give the listener in the theatre his

bearings, is to be found in Wallenstein (Piccolomini, Act I, Scene 5);

and it shows us that the dramatist, who here availed himself of this

device, was familiar with the mechanism and meaning of slips of the

tongue.  In  the  preceding  scene  Max  Piccolomini  has  ardently

espoused  the  Duke’s  cause,  and  has  been  passionately  describing

the blessings of peace, of which he has become aware on the course

of a journey while escorting Wallenstein’s daughter to the camp. As he

leaves the stage, his father and Questenberg, the emissary from the

court, are plunged in consternation. Scene 5 continues:

 

   QUESTENBERG  Alas, alas! and stands it so?

                             What friend! and do we let him go away
                             In this delusion - let him go away?
                             Not call him back immediately, not open
                             His eyes upon the spot?

   OCTAVIO (recovering himself out of a deep study)

                                                 He has now open’d mine,
                 And I see more than pleases me.

   QUEST.                                                  What is it?

   OCT.      Curse on this journey!

   QUEST.                                        But why so? What is it?

   OCT.      Come, come along, friend! I must follow up

                 The ominous track immediately. Mine eyes
                 Are open’d now, and I must use them. Come!
                      (Draws Q. on with him)   QUEST    What now? Where go you then?

   OCT.                                  To her herself.

   QUEST.                                               To -

   OCT. (correcting himself) To the Duke. Come let us go.

 

   The small slip of saying ‘to her’ instead of ‘to him’ is meant to reveal

to us that the father has seen through his son’s motive for espousing

the  Duke’s  cause,  while  the  courtier  complains  that  he  is  ‘talking

absolute riddles’ to him.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1186

 

   Another example in which a dramatist makes use of a slip of the

tongue has been discovered by Otto Rank (1910) in Shakespeare. I

quote Rank’s account:

   ‘A slip of the tongue occurs in Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice

(Act III, Scene 2), which is from the dramatic point of view extremely

subtly motivated and which is put to brilliant technical use. Like the slip

in Wallenstein  to  which  Freud  has  drawn  attention,  it  shows  that

dramatists have a clear understanding of the mechanism and meaning

of this kind of parapraxis and assume that the same is true of their

audience.  Portia,  who  by  her  father’s  will  has  been  bound  to  the

choice of a husband by lot, has so far escaped all her unwelcome

suitors by a fortunate chance. Having at last found in Bassanio the

suitor  who  is  to  her  liking,  she  has  cause  to  fear  that  he  too  will

choose the wrong casket. She would very much like to tell him that

even so he could rest assured of her love; but she is prevented by her

vow. In this internal conflict the poet makes her say to the suitor she

favours:

 

                                                I pray you tarry; pause a day or two,
                                                Before you hazard: for, in choosing wrong,
                                                I lose your company; therefore, forbear a while:
                                                There’s something tells me (but it is not love)
                                                I would not lose you . . .
 
                                                                                . . . I could teach you
                                                How to choose right, but then I am forsworn;                                                So will I never be; so may you miss me;
                                                But if you do you’ll make me wish a sin,
                                                That I have been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes,
                                                They have o’erlooked me, and divided me;
                                                One half of me is yours, the other half yours, -
                                                Mine own, I would say; but if mine, then yours,
                                                And so all yours.

 

   ‘The thing of which she wanted to give him only a very subtle hint,

because  she  should  really  have  concealed  it  from  him  altogether,

namely, that even before he made his choice she was wholly his and

loved  him  -  it  is  precisely  this  that  the  poet,  with  a  wonderful

psychological sensitivity, causes to break through openly in her slip of

the tongue; and by this artistic device he succeeds in relieving both

the  lover’s  unbearable  uncertainty  and  the  suspense  of  the

sympathetic audience over the outcome of his choice.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1187

 

   In view of the interest that is lent to our theory of slips of the tongue

by support of this nature from great writers, I feel justified in citing a

third such instance which has been reported by Ernest Jones (1911b,

496):

   ‘In a recently published article Otto Rank drew our attention to a

pretty  instance  of  how  Shakespeare  caused  one  of  his  characters,

Portia,  to  make  a  slip  of  the  tongue  which  revealed  her  secret

thoughts to an attentive member of the audience. I propose to relate a

similar  example  from The  Egoist,  the  masterpiece  of  the  greatest

English novelist, George Meredith. The plot of the novel is, shortly, as

follows: Sir Willoughby Patterne, an aristocrat greatly admired by his

circle, becomes engaged to a Miss Constantia Durham. She discovers

in him an intense egoism, which he skilfully conceals from the world,

and to escape the marriage she elopes with a Captain Oxford. Some

years later Patterne becomes engaged to a Miss Clara Middleton, and

most of the book is taken up with a detailed description of the conflict

that  arises  in  her  mind  on  also  discovering  his  egoism.  External

circumstances, and her conception of honour, hold her to her pledge,while he becomes more and more distasteful in her eyes. She partly

confides in his cousin and secretary, Vernon Whitford, the man whom

she ultimately marries; but from loyalty to Patterne and other motives

he stands aloof.

   ‘In a soliloquy about her sorrow Clara speaks as follows: "‘If some

noble gentleman could see me as I am and not disdain to aid me! Oh!

to be caught out of this prison of thorns and brambles. I cannot tear

my  own  way  out.  I  am  a  coward.  A  beckoning  of  a  finger  would

change me, I believe. I could fly bleeding and through hootings to a

comrade . . . Constantia met a soldier. Perhaps she prayed and her

prayer was answered. She did ill. But, oh, how I love her for it! His

name was Harry Oxford . . . She did not waver, she cut the links, she

signed herself over. Oh, brave girl, what do you think of me? But I

have no Harry Whitford; I am alone . . .’ The sudden consciousness

that  she  had  put  another  name  for  Oxford  struck  her  a  buffet,

drowning her in crimson."

   ‘The fact that both men’s names end in "ford" evidently renders the

confounding of them more easy, and would by many be regarded as

an  adequate  cause  for  this,  but  the  real  underlying  motive  for  it  is

plainly indicated by the author. In another passage the same lapsus

occurs,  and  is  followed  by  the  spontaneous  hesitation  and  sudden

change of subject that one is familiar with in psycho-analysis and in

Jung’s  association  experiments  when  a  half-conscious  complex  is

touched. Sir Willoughby patronisingly says of Whitford: "‘False alarm.

The resolution to do anything unaccustomed is quite beyond poor old

Vernon.’" Clara replies: "‘But if Mr Oxford - Whitford, . . . your swans,

coming  sailing  up  the  lake,  how  beautiful  they  look  when  they  are

indignant! I was going to ask you, surely men witnessing a marked

admiration  for  someone  else  will  naturally  be  discouraged?’  Sir

Willoughby stiffened with sudden enlightenment."

   ‘In still another passage, Clara by another lapsus betrays her secret

wish that she was on a more intimate footing with Vernon Whitford.

Speaking  to  a  boy  friend,  she  says:  "‘Tell  Mr.  Vernon  -  tell  Mr.

Whitford.’"'¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1920:] Other instances of slips of the tongue which the writer intends to

be  taken  as  having  a  meaning  and  usually  as  being  self-revealing  can  be  found  in
Shakespeare’s Richard II (Act II, Scene 2), and in Schiller’s Don Carlos (Act. II, Scene 8; aslip made by Princess Eboli). There would doubtless be no difficulty in extending this list.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1188

 

   The view of slips of the tongue which is advocated here can meet

the test even in the most trivial examples. I have repeatedly been able

to  show  that  the  most  insignificant  and  obvious  errors  in  speaking

have their meaning and can be explained in the same way as the

more  striking  instances.  A  woman  patient  who  was  acting  entirely

against my wishes in planning a short trip to Budapest, but who was

determined to have her own way, justified herself by telling me that

she was going for only three days; but she made a slip of the tongue

and actually said ‘only three weeks’. She was betraying the fact that,

to  spite  me,  she  would  rather  spend  three  weeks  than  three  days

there  in  the  company  which  I  considered  unsuitable  for  her.  -  One

evening  I  wanted  to  excuse  myself  for  not  having  fetched  my  wife

home from the theatre, and said: ‘I was at the theatre at ten past ten.’ I

was corrected: ‘You mean ten to ten.’ Of course I meant ten to ten.

After ten o’clock would have been no excuse. I had been told that the

theatre bills said the performance ended before ten. When I reached

the  theatre  I  found  the  entrance-hall  in  darkness  and  the  theatre

empty. The performance had in fact ended earlier and my wife had not

waited for me. When I looked at the clock it was only five to ten. But I

decided to make my case out more favourable when I got home and

to say it had been ten to ten. Unfortunately, my slip of the tongue

spoilt  my  plan  and  revealed  my  disingenuousness,  by  making  me

confess more than there was to confess.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1189

 

   This leads on to those speech-disturbances which cannot any longer

be described as slips of the tongue because what they affect is not the

individual  word  but  the  rhythm  and  execution  of  a  whole  speech:

disturbances like, for instance, stammering and stuttering caused byembarrassment. But here too, as in the former cases, it is a question

of an internal conflict, which is betrayed to us by the disturbance in

speech. I really do not think that anyone would make a slip of the

tongue in an audience with his Sovereign, in a serious declaration of

love of in defending his honour and name before a jury - in short, on

all those occasions in which a person is heart and soul engaged. Even

in forming an appreciation of an author’s style we are permitted and

accustomed to apply the same elucidatory principle which we cannot

dispense with in tracing the origins of individual mistakes in speech. A

clear  and  unambiguous  manner  of  writing  shows  us  that  here  the

author is at one with himself; where we find a forced and involved

expression which (to use an apt phrase) is aimed at more than one

target, we may recognize the intervention of an insufficiently worked-

out,  complicating  thought,  or  we  may  hear  the  stifled  voice  of  the

author’s self-criticism.¹

   Since this book first appeared friends and colleagues who speak

other  languages  have  begun  to  turn  their  attention  to  slips  of  the

tongue which they have been able to observe in countries where their

language is spoken. As was to be expected they have found that the

laws governing parapraxes are independent of the linguistic material;

and  they  have  made  the  same  interpretations  that  have  been

exemplified here in instances coming from speakers of the German

language. Of countless examples I include only one:

   Brill (1909) reports of himself: ‘A friend described to me a nervous

patient and wished to know whether I could benefit him. I remarked: "I

believe  that  in  time  I  could  remove  all  his  symptoms  by  psycho-

analysis because it is a durable case" - wishing to say "curable"!’

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1910:]

                                                Ce qu’on conçoit bien
                                                S’announce clairement
                                                Et les mots pour le dire
                                                Arrivent aisément.
 
                                                [What is well thought out
                                                Presents itself with clarity,
                                                And the words to express it
                                                Come easily.]
                                                                Boileau: Art poétique.
                     The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1190

 

   In conclusion, for the benefit of readers who are prepared to make a

certain effort and to whom psycho-analysis is not unfamiliar, I will add

an example which will enable them to form some picture of the mental

depths into which the pursuit even of a slip of the tongue can lead. It

has been reported by Jekels (1913).

   ‘On December 11, a lady of my acquaintance addressed me (in

Polish)  in  a  somewhat  challenging  and  overbearing  manner,  as

follows:  "Why  did  I  say  to-day  that  I  have  twelve  fingers?"  At  my

request she gave an account of the scene in which the remark was

made. She had got ready to go out with her daughter to pay a visit,

and had asked her daughter - a case of dementia praecox then in

remission  -  to  change  her  blouse;  and  this  she  in  fact  did,  in  the

adjoining room. On re-entering, the daughter found her mother busy

cleaning her nails, and the following conversation ensued:

   ‘Daughter: "There! I’m ready now and you’re not!"

   ‘Mother: "Yes, but you have only one blouse and I have twelve

nails."

   ‘Daughter: "What?"

   ‘Mother (impatiently): "Well, of course I have; after all, I have twelve

fingers."

   ‘A colleague who heard the story at the same time as I did asked

what occurred to her in connection with twelve. She answered equally

quickly and definitely: "Twelve means nothing to me - it is not the date

of anything (of importance).

   ‘To finger she gave the following association after a little hesitation:

"Some of my husband’s family were born with six fingers on their feet

(Polish has no specific word for ‘toe’). When our children were born

they were immediately examined to see if they had six fingers." For

external reasons the analysis was not continued that evening.

   ‘Next morning, December 12, the lady visited me and told me with

visible excitement: "What do you suppose has happened? For about

the  last  twenty  years  I  have  been  sending  congratulations  to  my

husband’s elderly uncle on his birthday which is to-day, and I have

always written him a letter on the 11th. This time I forgot about it andhad to send a telegram just now."

   ‘I myself remembered, and I reminded the lady, how positive she

had been the evening before in dismissing my colleague’s question

about the number twelve - which was in fact very well fitted to remind

her of the birthday - by remarking that the twelfth was not a date of

importance to her.

   ‘She then admitted that this uncle of her husband’s was a wealthy

man from whom she had in fact always expected to inherit something,

quite  especially  in  her  present  straitened  financial  circumstances.

Thus, for instance, it was he, or rather his death, that had immediately

sprung to her mind a few days before when an acquaintance of hers

had  predicted  from  cards  that  she  would  receive  a  large  sum  of

money. It flashed through her mind at once that the uncle was the only

person from whom money could possibly come to her or her children;

and this same scene also instantly reminded her of the fact that this

uncle’s wife had once promised to remember the lady’s children in her

will. But in the meanwhile she had died intestate; had she perhaps

given her husband appropriate instructions?

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1191

 

   ‘The death-wish against the uncle must clearly have emerged with

very great intensity, for she said to the friend who made the prophecy:

"You encourage people to make away with others." In the four or five

days that elapsed between the prophecy and the uncle’s birthday she

was  constantly  looking  at  the  obituary  columns  in  the  newspapers

from  the  town  where  the  uncle  lived.  Not  surprisingly,  therefore,  in

view of the intensity of her wish for his death, the event and the date

of the birthday he was about to celebrate were so strongly suppressed

that not only was a resolution which had been carried out for years

forgotten in consequence, but even my colleague’s question failed to

bring them to consciousness.

      ‘In  the  slip  "twelve  fingers"  the  suppressed  "twelve"  had  broken

through and had helped to determine the parapraxis. I say "helped to

determine", for the striking association to "finger" leads us to suspectthe  existence  of  some  further  motivations.  It  also  explains  why  the

"twelve"  had  falsified  precisely  this  most  innocent  phrase,  "ten

fingers". The association ran: "Some members of my husband’s family

were  born  with  six  fingers  on  their  feet."  Six  toes  are  a  sign  of  a

particular abnormality. Thus six fingers mean one abnormal child and

twelve fingers two abnormal children. And that was really the fact in

this  case.  The  lady  had  married  at  a  very  early  age;  and  the  only

legacy  left  her  by  her  husband,  a  highly  eccentric  and  abnormal

person who took his own life shortly after their marriage, were two

children whom the doctors repeatedly pronounced to be abnormal and

victims of a grave hereditary taint derived from their father. The elder

daughter recently returned home after a severe catatonic attack; soon

afterwards, the younger daughter, now at the age of puberty, also fell

ill from a serious neurosis.

      ‘The  fact  that  the  children’s  abnormality  is  here  linked  with  the

death-wish  against  the  uncle,  and  is  condensed  with  this  far  more

strongly suppressed and psychically more powerful element, enables

us to assume the existence of a second determinant for the slip of the

tongue, namely a death-wish against abnormal children.

   ‘But the special significance of twelve as a death wish is already

indicated  by  the  fact  that  the  uncle’s  birthday  was  very  intimately

associated  in  the  lady’s  mind  with  the  idea  of  his  death.  For  her

husband had taken his life on the 13th - one day, that is, after the

uncle’s birthday; and the uncle’s wife had said to the young widow:

"Yesterday he was sending his congratulations, so full of warmth and

kindness - and to-day . . .!"

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1192

 

   ‘I may add that the lady had real enough reasons as well for wishing

her children dead; for they brought her no pleasure at all, only grief

and severe restrictions on her independence, and she had for their

sake renounced all the happiness that love might have brought her.

On this occasion she had in fact gone to exceptional lengths to avoid

putting the daughter with whom she was going to pay the visit in a badmood; and it may be imagined what demands this makes on anyone’s

patience and self-denial where the case is one of dementia praecox,

and how many angry impulses have to be suppressed in the process.

   ‘The meaning of the parapraxis would accordingly be:

   ‘"The uncle shall die, these abnormal children shall die (the whole of

this abnormal family, as it were), and I will get their money."

   ‘This parapraxis bears, in my view, several indications of an unusual

structure:

   ‘(a) Two determinants were present in it, condensed in a single

element.

      ‘(b)  The  presence  of  the  two  determinants  was  reflected  in  the

doubling of the slip of the tongue (twelve nails, twelve fingers).

   ‘(c) It is a striking point that one of the meanings of "twelve", viz., the

twelve fingers which expressed the children’s abnormality, stood for

an indirect form of representation; the psychical abnormality was here

represented by the physical abnormality, and the highest part of the

body by the lowest.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1193

 

                                    CHAPTER VI

 

                  MISREADINGS AND SLIPS OF THE PEN

 

When we come to mistakes in reading and writing, we find that our

general  approach  and  our  observations  in  regard  to  mistakes  in

speaking hold good here too - not surprisingly, in view of the close

kinship  between  these  functions.  I  shall  confine  myself  here  to

reporting  a  few  carefully  analysed  examples,  and  shall  make  no

attempt to cover every aspect of the phenomena.

 

                                  (A) MISREADINGS

 

   (1) I was sitting in a café, turning over the pages of a copy of the

Leipziger Illustrierte  (which I was holding up at an angle), when I readthe following legend under a picture that stretched across the page: ‘A

Wedding  Celebration  in  the Odysee.’  It  caught  my  attention;  in

surprise I took hold of the paper in the proper way and then corrected

my error: ‘A Wedding Celebration on the Ostee.’  How did I come to

make this absurd mistake in reading? My thoughts at once turned to a

book  by  Ruths  (1898), Experimentaluntersuchungen  über

Musikphantome . . . , which had occupied me a good deal recently

since  it  trenches  on  the  psychological  problems  that  I  have  been

concerned with. The author promised that he would shortly be bringing

out  a  book  to  be  called  ‘Analysis  and  Principles  of  Dream

Phenomena’.  Seeing  that  I  have  just  published  an Interpretation of

Dreams  it  is  not  surprising  that  I  should  await  this  book  with  the

keenest interest. In Ruths’ work on music phantoms I found at the

beginning  of  the  list  of  contents  an  announcement  of  a  detailed

inductive proof that the ancient Greek myths and legends have their

main  source  of  origin  in  phantoms  of  sleep  and  music,  in  the

phenomena  of  dreams  and  also  in  deliria.  Thereupon  I  at  once

plunged  into  the  text  to  find  out  whether  he  also  realized  that  the

scene in which Odysseus appears before Nausicaä was derived from

the common dream of being naked. A friend had drawn my attention

to  the  fine  passage  in  Gottfried  Keller’s Der  Grüne  Heinrich  which

explains this episode in the Odyssey as an objective representation of

the dreams of a sailor wandering far from home; and I had pointed out

the  connection  with  exhibitionist  dreams  of  being  naked.¹  I  found

nothing on the subject in Ruths’ book. In this instance it is obvious that

my thoughts were occupied with questions of priority.

 

   ¹ The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a), p. 725-6.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1194

 

   (2) How did I come to read in a newspaper one day: ‘Im Fass across

Europe’,  instead  of  ‘Zu  Fuss  '?  Solving  this  problem  caused  me

prolonged difficulties. The first associations, it is true, indicated that it

must have been the tub of Diogenes that I had in mind; and I had

recently  been  reading  about  the  art  of  the  age  of  Alexander  in  ahistory of art. From there it was easy to recall Alexander’s celebrated

remark: ‘If I were not Alexander I should like to be Diogenes.’ I also

had some dim recollection of a certain Hermann Zeitung¹ who had set

out  on  his  travels  packed  in  a  trunk.  But  the  train  of  associations

declined to run on further, and I did not succeed in rediscovering the

page in the history of art on which the remark had caught my eye. It

was not till months later that the problem, which I had meanwhile set

aside, suddenly sprang to my mind once more; and this time it brought

its solution with it. I recalled the comment of a newspaper article on

the  strange  means  of transport  that  people  were  then  choosing  in

order to go to Paris for the International Exhibition; and the passage, I

believe, went on with a joking account of now one gentleman intended

to get himself rolled in a tub to Paris by another gentleman. Needless

to say the only motive of these people would be to draw attention to

themselves by such folly. Hermann Zeitung was in fact the name of

the  man  who  had  provided  the  first  instance  of  such  extraordinary

methods of transport. It then struck me that I once treated a patient

whose  pathological  anxiety  about  reading  newspapers  was  to  be

explained  as  a  reaction  against  his  pathological ambition  to  see

himself in print and to read of his fame in the newspapers. Alexander

of Macedon was undoubtedly one of the most ambitious men that ever

lived. He even complained that he would find no Homer to sing of his

exploits. But how could I possibly have failed to recall that there is

another Alexander who is closer to me, that Alexander is the name of

my  younger  brother?  I  now  immediately  found  the  objectionable

thought about this other Alexander that had had to be repressed, and

what it was that had given rise to it at the present time. My brother is

an authority on matters connected with tariffs and transport, and at a

certain date he was due to receive the title of professor for his work in

teaching at a commercial college. Several years ago my own name

had been suggested at the University for the same promotion, without

my having obtained it. At the time, our mother expressed her surprise

that her younger son was to become a professor before her elder.

This had been the situation when I was unable to solve my mistake in

reading.  Subsequently  my  brother  too  met  with  difficulties;  his

prospects of becoming professor sank even lower than my own. But at

that point the meaning of the misreading suddenly became clear tome;  it  was  as  though  the  fading  of  my  brother’s  prospects  had

removed  an  obstacle.  I  had  behaved  as  if  I  was  reading  of  my

brother’s  appointment  in  the  newspaper  and  was  saying  to  myself:

‘How curious that a person can appear in the newspaper (i.e. can be

appointed professor) on account of such stupidities (which is what his

profession amounts to)!’ Afterwards I had no difficulty in finding the

passage  about  Hellenistic  art  in  the  age  of  Alexander,  and  to  my

astonishment  convinced  myself  that  in  my  previous  search  I  had

repeatedly read parts of the same page and had each time passed

over  the  relevant  sentence  as  if  I  was  under  the  dominance  of  a

negative  hallucination.  However,  this  sentence  did  not  contain

anything at all to enlighten me - anything that would have deserved to

be forgotten. I suspect that the symptom consisting of my failure to

find the passage in the book was only formed with the purpose of

leading me astray. I was intended to search for a continuation of the

train  of  thought  in  the  place  where  my  enquiries  encountered  an

obstacle - that is, in some idea connected with Alexander of Macedon;

in this way I was to be more effectively diverted from my brother of the

same name. In fact the device was entirely successful; all my efforts

were directed towards rediscovering the lost passage in the history of

art.

      In  this  case  the  ambiguity  of  the  word  ‘Beförderung’  forms the

associative bridge between the two complexes, the unimportant one

which was aroused by the newspaper article, and the more interesting

but  objectionable  one  which  asserted  itself  here  in  the  form  of  a

disturbance of what was to be read. It can be seen from this example

that it is not always easy to explain occurrences such as this mistake

in  reading.  At  times  one  is  even  forced  to  postpone  solving  the

problem to a more favourable time. But the harder the work of solving

it  proves  to  be,  the  more  certainly  can  one  anticipate  that  the

disturbing  thought  which  is  finally  disclosed  will  be  judged  by  our

conscious thinking as something alien and opposed to it.

 

 ¹ [‘Zeitung’, here a proper name, is also the German for ‘newspaper’.]

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1195 

   (3) One day I received a letter from the neighbourhood of Vienna

which brought me a piece of news that shocked me. I immediately

called my wife and broke the news to her that ‘die arme¹ Wilhelm M.’

had fallen very seriously ill and been given up by the doctors. There

must, however, have been a false ring about the words I chose to

express my sorrow, for my wife grew suspicious, asked to see the

letter, and declared she was certain it could not read as I had said it

did, since no one called a wife by her husband’s first name, and in any

case the lady who wrote the letter knew the wife’s first name perfectly

well.  I  obstinately  defended  my  assertion  and  referred  to  the  very

common use of visiting cards on which a woman styles herself by her

husband’s first name. I was finally compelled to pick up the letter, and

what we in fact read in it was ‘der² arme W. M.’, or rather something

even plainer: ‘der arme Dr. W. M.’, which I had entirely overlooked. My

mistake in reading therefore amounted to a kind of convulsive attempt

to shift the sad news from the husband to the wife. The title that stood

between  the  article,  adjective  and  name  did  not  fit  in  well  with  my

requirement  that  the  wife  should  be  the  one  referred  to.  For  this

reason it was simply done away with in the process of reading. My

motive for falsifying the message was not, however, that my feelings

for the wife were less warm than those I had for her husband, but that

the poor man’s fate had excited my fears for another person in close

contact with me. This person shared with him what I knew to be one of

the determinants of the illness.

 

    ¹ [The  use  of  ‘die’,  the  feminine  form  of  the  definite  article,  implied  that  the  person

concerned was a woman.]
   ² [The masculine form of the definite article.]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1196

 

   (4) There is one misreading which I find irritating and laughable and

to which I am prone whenever I walk through the streets of a strange

town on my holidays. On these occasions I read every shop sign that

resembles  the  word  in  any  way  as  ‘Antiquities’.  This  betrays  thequesting spirit of the collector.

   (5) Bleuler relates in his important book, Affektivität, Suggestibilität,

Paranoia (1906, 121): ‘Once while I was reading I had an intellectual

feeling  that  I  saw  my  name  two  lines  further  down.  To  my

astonishment I only found the word "Blutkörperchen ". I have analysed

many thousands of misreadings in the peripheral as well as the central

visual field; but this is the grossest instance. Whenever I imagined I

saw my name, the word that gave rise to the notion usually resembled

my name much more, and in most cases every single letter of my

name had to be found close together before I could make such an

error. In this case, however, the delusion of reference and the illusion

could be explained very easily: what I had just read was the end of a

comment on a type of bad style found in scientific works, from which I

did not feel free.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1197

 

   (6) Hanns Sachs reports having read: ‘The things that strike other

people  are  passed  over  by  him  in  his  "Steifleinenheit  ".’  ‘This  last

word’, Sachs proceeds, ‘surprised me, and on looking more closely I

discovered  that  it  was  "Stilfeinheit  ".  The  passage  occurred  in  the

course of some remarks by an author whom I admired, which were in

extravagant  praise  of  a  historian  whom  I  do  not  find  sympathetic

because he exhibits the "German professorial manner" in too marked

a degree.’

      (7)  Dr.  Marcell  Eibenschütz  (1911)  describes  an  instance  of

misreading in the course of his philological studies. ‘I was engaged in

studying the literary tradition of the Book of Martyrs, a Middle High

German  legendary  which  I  had  undertaken  to  edit  in  the  series  of

"German Mediaeval Texts" published by the Prussian Akademie der

Wissenschaften.  Very  little  was  known  about  the  work,  which  had

never  seen  print.  There  was  a  single  essay  on  it  in  existence,  by

Joseph Haupt (1872, 101 ff.). Haupt based his work not on an old

manuscript  but  on  a  copy  of  the  principal  source,  Manuscript  C

(Klosterneuburg). This copy had been made at a comparatively recentdate (in the nineteenth century ). It is preserved in the Hofbibliothek.

At the end of the copy the following subscription¹ is to be found:

   ‘"Anno Domini MDCCCL in vigilia exaltacionis sancte crucis ceptus

est iste liber et in vigilia pasce anni subsequentis finitus cum adiutorio

omnipotentis  per  me  Hartmanum  de  Krasna  tunc  temporis  ecclesie

niwenburgensis custodem."²

   ‘Now in his essay Haupt quotes this subscription in the belief that it

comes from the writer of C himself, and supposes C to have been

written in 1350 - a view involving a consistent misreading of the date

1850  in  Roman  numerals  -  in  spite  of  his  having  copied  the

subscription perfectly correctly and in spite of its having been printed

perfectly  correctly  (i.e.  as  MDCCCL)  in  the  essay,  in  the  passage

referred to.

 

   ¹ [I.e. signature or explanatory paragraph at the end of a document.]

   ² [‘This book was begun on the Eve of Holy Cross Day in the Year of Our Lord 1850, and

was  finished  on  Easter  Saturday  in  the  following  year;  it  was  made,  with  the  aid  of  the
Almighty, by me, Hartman of Krasna, at that time sacrist of Klosterneuburg.’]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1198

 

   ‘Haupt’s information proved the source of much embarrassment to

me.  In  the  first  place,  being  an  entire  novice  in  the  world  of

scholarship, I was completely dominated by Haupt’s authority, and for

a long time I read the date given in the subscription lying in front of me

- which was perfectly clearly and correctly printed - as 1350 instead of

1850, just as Haupt had done. I did this even though no trace of any

subscription could be found in the original Manuscript C, which I used,

and though it further transpired that no monk by the name of Hartman

had lived at Klosterneuburg at any time in the fourteenth century. And

when at last the veil fell from before my eyes I guessed what had

happened;  and  further  investigation  confirmed  my  suspicion.  The

subscription so often referred to is in fact to be found only in the copy

used by Haupt, and is the work of its copyist, P. Hartman Zeibig, who

was born at Krasna in Moravia, was Master of the Augustinian choir at

Klosterneuburg, and who as sacrist of the monastery made a copy ofManuscript C and appended his name in the ancient fashion at the

end of his copy. The mediaeval phraseology and the old orthography

of  the  subscription  doubtless  played  their  part  in  inducing  Haupt

always to read 1350 instead of 1850, alongside his wish to be able to

tell  his  readers  as  much  as  possible  about  the  work  he  was

discussing, and therefore also to date Manuscript C. (This was the

motive for the parapraxis.)'

   (8) In Lichtenberg’s Witzige und Satirische Einfälle a remark occurs

which  is  no  doubt  derived  from  a  piece  of  observation  and  which

comprises  virtually  the  whole  theory  of  misreading:  ‘He  had  read

Homer  so  much  that  he  always  read  "Agamemnon"  instead  of

"angenommen  [supposed]".’

   For in a very large number of cases it is the reader’s preparedness

that alters the text and reads into it something which he is expecting or

with which he is occupied. The only contribution towards a misreading

which  the  text  itself  need  make  is  that  of  affording  some  sort  of

resemblance in the verbal image, which the reader can alter in the

sense  he  requires.  Merely  glancing  at  the  text,  especially  with

uncorrected vision, undoubtedly increases the possibility of such an

illusion, but it is certainly not a necessary precondition for it.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1199

 

      (9)  I  have  an  impression  that  no  parapraxis  was  so  greatly

encouraged by war conditions - which brought us all such constant

and protracted preoccupations - as this particular one of misreading. I

have  been  able  to  observe  a  large  number  of  instances  of  it,  but

unfortunately I have kept records of only a few of them. One day I

picked up a mid-day or evening paper and saw in large print: ‘Der

Friede von Görz [The Peace of Gorizia].’ But no, all it said was: ‘Der

Feinde vor Görz [The Enemy before Gorizia].’ It is easy for someone

who has two sons fighting at this very time in that theatre of operations

to  make  such  a  mistake  in  reading.  -  Someone  else  found  an  ‘old

Brotkarte [bread card]’ mentioned in a certain context; when he looked

at  this  more  attentively,  he  had  to  replace  it  by  ‘old Brokate[brocades]’. It is perhaps worth mentioning that at a particular house,

where  this  man  is  often  a  welcome  guest,  it  is  his  habit  to  make

himself agreeable to the mistress by handing his bread cards over to

her. - An engineer, whose equipment had never stood up for long to

the dampness in a tunnel that was under construction, was astonished

to  read  a  laudatory  advertisement  of  goods  made  of  ‘Schundleder

[shoddy leather]’. But tradesmen are not usually so candid; what was

being recommended was ‘Seehundleder [sealskin]’.

   The reader’s profession or present situation, too, determines the

outcome  of  his  misreading.  A  philologist,  whose  most  recent,  and

excellent,  works  had  brought  him  into  conflict  with  his  professional

colleagues, read ‘Sprachstrategie [language strategy]’ in mistake for

‘Schachstrategie [chess strategy]’. - A man who was taking a walk in a

strange town just when the action of his bowels was timed to occur by

a course of medical treatment read the word ‘Closet-House’ on a large

sign  on  the  first  storey  of  a  tall  shop-building.  His  satisfaction  on

seeing  it  was  mixed  with  a  certain  surprise  that  the  obliging

establishment should be in such an unusual place. The next moment,

however, his satisfaction vanished; a more correct reading of the word

on the sign was ‘Corset-House’.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1200

 

 

   (10) In a second group of cases the part which the text contributes

to the misreading is a much larger one. It contains something which

rouses  the  reader’s  defences  -  some  information  or  imputation

distressing to him - and which is therefore corrected by being misread

so as to fit in with a repudiation or with the fulfilment of a wish. In such

cases  we  are  of  course  obliged  to  assume  that  the  text  was  first

correctly  understood  and  judged  by  the  reader  before  it  underwent

correction,  although  his  consciousness  learnt  nothing  of  this  first

reading. Example (3) above is of this kind; and I include here a further,

highly topical one given by Eitingon (1915), who was at the military

hospital at Igló at the time.   ‘Lieutenant X., who is in our hospital suffering from a traumatic war

neurosis,  was  one  day  reading  me  a  poem  by  the  poet  Walter

Heymann, who fell in battle at so early an age. With visible emotion he

read the last lines of the final stanza as follows.

 

                                                Wo aber steht’s geschrieben, frag’ ich, dass von allen
                                                Ich übrig bleiben soll, ein andrer für mich fallen?
                                                Wer immer von euch fällt, der stirbt gewiss für mich;

                                                Und ich soll übrig bleiben? warum denn nicht?¹

 
                                                [But where is it decreed, I ask, that out of all
                                                I should alone be left, my fellow for me fall?
                                                Whoever of you falls, for me that man doth die;
                                                And I - am I alone to live? Why should not I?]

 

   ‘My surprise caught his attention, and in some confusion he read the

line correctly:

 

                                                Und ich soll übrig bleiben? warum denn ich?
 
                                                [And I - am I alone to live then? Why should I?]

 

   ‘I owe to Case X. some analytic insight into the psychical material of

these  "traumatic  war  neuroses",  and  in  spite  of  the  circumstances

prevailing in a war hospital with a large number of patients and only a

few doctors - circumstances so unfavourable to our way of working - it

was  then  possible  for  me  to  see  a  little  way  beyond  the  shell

explosions  which  were  so  highly  esteemed  as  the  "cause"  of  the

illness.

   ‘In this case, too, were to be seen the severe tremors which give

pronounced cases of these neuroses a similarity that is so striking at

the  first  glance,  as  well  as  apprehensiveness,  tearfulness,  and  a

proneness to fits of rage, accompanied by convulsive infantile motor

manifestations, and to vomiting ("at the least excitement").

   ‘The psychogenic nature of this last symptom in particular - above all

in its contribution to the secondary gain from the illness - must have

impressed  everyone.  The  appearance  in  the  ward  of  the  hospital

commandant who from time to time inspected the convalescent cases,

or a remark made by an acquaintance in the street - "You look in really

excellent  form,  you’re  certainly  fit  now"  -  is  enough  to  produce  animmediate attack of vomiting.

   ‘"Fit . . . go back to service . . . why should I?"'

 

   ¹ From  ‘Den  Ausziehenden’  [‘To  Those  who  have  Gone  Forth’]  in Kriegsgedichte und

Feldpostbriefe [War Poems and Letters from the Front] by Walter Heymann.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1201

 

   (11) Dr. Hanns Sachs (1917) has reported some other cases of ‘war’

misreading:

   ‘A close acquaintance of mine had repeatedly declared to me that

when his turn came to be called up he would not make any use of his

specialist qualifications, which were attested by a diploma; he would

waive any claim based on them for being found suitable employment

behind the lines and he would enlist for service at the front. Shortly

before  the  call-up  date  in  fact  arrived,  he  told  me  one  day  in  the

curtest  way,  and  without  giving  any  further  reason,  that  he  had

submitted  the  evidence  of  his  specialist  training  to  the  proper

authorities  and  as  a  result  would  shortly  be  assigned  to  a  post  in

industry.  Next  day  we  happened  to  meet  in  a  post-office.  I  was

standing  up  at  a  desk  and  writing;  he  came  in,  looked  over  my

shoulder for a while and then said: "Oh! the word at the top there’s

‘Druckbogen [printer’s proofs]’ - I’d read it as ‘Drückeberger [shirker]’."'

   (12) ‘I was sitting in a tram and reflecting on the fact that many of the

friends of my youth who had always been taken as frail and weakly

were  now  able  to  endure  the  most  severe  hardships  -  ones  which

would quite certainly be too much for me. While in the middle of this

disagreeable train of thought, I read, only half attentively, a word in

large  black  letters  on  a  shop-sign  that  we  were  passing:  "Iron

Constitution".  A  moment  later  it  struck  me  that  this  word  was  an

inappropriate one to be found on the board of a business-firm; I turned

round  hastily  and  catching  another  glimpse  of  the  sign  saw  that  it

really read: "Iron Construction".’ (Sachs, ibid.)

      (13)  ‘The  evening  papers  carried  a  Reuter  message,  which

subsequently proved to be incorrect, to the effect that Hughes had

been elected President of the United States. This was followed by ashort account of the supposed President’s career, in which I came

across the information that Hughes had completed his studies at Bonn

University.  It  struck  me  as  strange  that  this  fact  had  received  no

mention in the newspaper discussions during all the weeks before the

day of the election. On taking a second look I found that all the text in

fact contained was a reference to Brown University. The explanation

of  this  gross  case,  in  which  the  misreading  had  called  for  a  fairly

violent  twist,  depended  -  apart  from  my  haste  in  reading  the

newspaper  -  chiefly  upon  my  thinking  it  desirable  that  the  new

President’s sympathy for the Central European Powers, as the basis

for good relations in the future, should be based on personal motives

as well as political ones.’ (Sachs, ibid.)

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1202

 

 

                                (B) SLIPS OF THE PEN

 

   (1) On a sheet of paper containing short daily notes mainly of a

business kind I was surprised to find, among some entries correctly

dated ‘September’, the wrongly written date ‘Thursday, October 20'. It

is  not  difficult  to  explain  this  anticipation  -  and  to  explain  it  as  the

expression of a wish. A few days before, I had returned fresh from my

holiday travels, and I felt ready for plenty of professional work; but

there were not yet many patients. On my arrival I had found a letter

from a patient to say she was coming on October 20. When I made an

entry for the same day of the month in September I may well have

thought: ‘X. should have been here already; what a waste of a whole

month!’, and with that thought in mind I brought the date forward a

month. In this case the disturbing thought can scarcely be called an

objectionable one; and for this reason I knew the solution of the slip of

the pen as soon as I had noticed it. - In the autumn of the following

year I made another slip of the pen which was precisely analogous

and had a similar motive. - Ernest Jones has made a study of slips like

these in writing dates; in most cases they could be clearly recognizedas having reasons.

   (2) I had received the proofs of my contribution to the Jahresbericht

für Neurologie und Psychiatrie, and I had naturally to revise the names

of authors with particular care, since they are of various nationalities

and therefore usually cause the compositor very great difficulty. I did

in fact find some foreign sounding names which were still in need of

correction;  but  strangely  enough  there  was  one  name  which  the

compositor had corrected by departing from my manuscript. He was

perfectly right to do so. What I had in fact written was ‘Buckrhard’,

which the compositor guessed should be ‘Burckhard’. I had actually

praised  the  useful  treatise  which  an  obstetrician  of  that  name  had

written on the influence of birth upon the origin of children’s palsies,

and I was not aware of having anything to hold against him; but he

has the same name as a writer in Vienna who had annoyed me by an

unintelligent review of my Interpretation of Dreams. It is just as if in

writing the name Burckhard, meaning the obstetrician, I had had a

hostile thought about the other Burckhard, the writer;¹ for distorting

names  is  very  often  a  form  of  insulting  their  owners,  as  I  have

mentioned above in discussing slips of the tongue.

 

   ¹ Compare the scene in Julius Caesar, III, 3:

   CINNA                     Truly, my name is Cinna.

   A CITIZEN                Tear him to pieces; he’s a conspirator.

   CINNA                      I am Cinna the poet . . .

                                  I am not Cinna the conspirator.

   ANOTHER CITIZEN.   It is no matter, his name’s Cinna; pluck but

                                  his name out of his heart, and turn him going.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1203

 

   (3) This assertion is very neatly confirmed by a self-observation of

Storfer’s  (1914),  in  which  the  author  exposes  with  commendable

frankness the motives that prompted him to recollect the name of a

supposed rival wrongly and then to write it down in a distorted form:

   ‘In December, 1910, I saw a book by Dr. Eduard Hitschmann in the

window of a bookshop in Zurich. Its subject was Freud’s theory of theneuroses and it was new at the time. Just then I was at work on the

manuscript of a lecture on the basic principles of Freud’s psychology,

which  I  was  shortly  to  give  before  a  University  society.  In  the

introductory  part  of  the  lecture  which  I  had  already  written,  I  had

referred to the historical development of Freud’s psychology from his

researches  in  an  applied  field,  to  certain  consequent  difficulties  in

giving a comprehensive account of its basic principles, and also to the

fact that no general account of them had yet appeared. When I saw

the  book  (whose  author  was  till  then  unknown  to  me)  in  the  shop

window, I did not at first think of buying it. Some days later, however, I

decided to do so. The book was no longer in the window. I asked the

bookseller  for  it  and  gave  the  author’s  name  as  "Dr  Eduard

Hartmann".  The  bookseller  corrected  me:  "I  think  you  mean

Hitschmann", and brought me the book.

   ‘The unconscious motive for the parapraxis was obvious. I had so to

speak  given  myself  the  credit  for  having  written  a  comprehensive

account  of  the  basic  principles  of  psycho-analytic  theory,  and

obviously  regarded  Hitschmann’s  book  with  envy  and  annoyance

since it took some of the credit away from me. I told myself, on the

lines of The Psychopathology of Everyday Life, that the changing of

the  name  was  an  act  of  unconscious  hostility.  At  the  time  I  was

satisfied with this explanation.

   ‘Some weeks later I noted down this parapraxis. On this occasion I

raised  the  further  question  of  why  Eduard  Hitschmann  had  been

altered precisely to Eduard Hartmann. Could I have been brought to

the name of the well-known philosopher merely because it was similar

to  the  other  one?  My  first  association  was  the  memory  of  a

pronouncement which I once heard from Professor Hugo von Meltzl,

an enthusiastic admirer of Schopenhauer, and which ran roughly as

follows:  "Eduard  von  Hartmann  is  a  botched  Schopenhauer,  a

Schopenhauer  turned  inside  out."  The  affective  trend  by  which  the

substitutive-formation  for  the  forgotten  name  was  determined  was

therefore: "No, there will probably not be much in this Hitschmann and

his comprehensive account; he probably stands to Freud as Hartmann

does to Schopenhauer."

   ‘I had, as I say, noted down this case of determined forgetting with

the forgotten word replaced by a substitute.   ‘Six months later I came upon the sheet of paper on which I had

made  the  note.  I  then  observed  that  instead  of  Hitschmann  I  had

throughout written Hintschmann.’¹

 

   ¹ [‘Hintsch’ is a dialect word for ‘asthma’ or, more generally, ‘pest’.]

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1204

 

   (4) Here is what seems to be a more serious slip of the pen: I might

perhaps equally well have included it among ‘bungled actions’:

      I  intended  to  draw  the  sum  of  300  kronen  from  the  Post  Office

Savings  Bank,  which  I  wanted  to  send  to  an  absent  relative  for

purposes of medical treatment. At the same time I noticed that my

account stood at 4, 380 kronen and decided to bring it down on this

occasion  to  the  round  sum  of  4,000  kronen  which  was  not  to  be

touched in the near future. After I had duly written out the cheque and

cut off the figures corresponding to the sum, I suddenly noticed that I

had not asked for 380 kronen as I intended, but for exactly 438 kronen

and I took alarm at the unreliability of my conduct. I soon realized that

my alarm was not called for; I was not now any poorer than I had been

before.  But  it  took  me  a  good  deal  of  reflection  to  discover  what

influence had disturbed my first intention, without making itself known

to my consciousness. To begin with I started on the wrong line; I tried

subtracting 380 from 438, but I had no idea afterwards what to do with

the difference. Finally a thought suddenly struck me which showed me

the true connection. Why, 438 was ten per cent of the total account, 4,

380 kronen! Now a ten per cent discount is given by booksellers. I

recalled that a few days earlier I had picked out a number of medical

books in which I was no longer interested in order to offer them to a

bookseller for precisely 300 kronen. He thought the price I was asking

was too high, and promised to give me a definite answer within the

next few days. If he accepted my offer he would replace the exact sum

which I was to spend on the invalid. There is no doubt that I regretted

this expenditure. My affect on perceiving my error can be understood

better as a fear of growing poor as a result of such expenditures. But

both these feelings, my regret at the expenditure and my anxiety overbecoming poor that was connected with it, were entirely foreign to my

consciousness; I did not have a feeling of regret when I promised the

sum of money, and would have found the reason for it laughable. I

should probably not have believed myself in any way capable of such

an  impulse  had  I  not  become  fairly  familiar,  through  my  psycho-

analytic practice with patients, with the part played by the repressed in

mental life, and had I not had a dream a few days before which called

for the same solution.¹

 

   ¹ This is the one which I took as the specimen dream in my short work On Dreams (1901a).

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1205

 

   (5) I quote the following case from Wilhelm Stekel, and can also

vouch for its authenticity:

   ‘A simply incredible example of a slip of the pen and misreading

occurred  in  the  editing  of  a  widely-read  weekly  periodical.  The

proprietors in question had been publicly described as "venil"; and an

article in defence and vindication was clearly called for. One was in

fact prepared: it was written with great warmth and feeling. The editor-

in-chief read the article, while the author naturally read it several times

in  manuscript  and  then  once  more  in  galley-proof;  everyone  was

perfectly  satisfied.  Suddenly  the  printer’s  reader  came  forward  and

pointed  out  a  small  mistake  which  had  escaped  everyone’s  notice.

There it was, plainly enough: "Our readers will bear witness to the fact

that we have always acted in the most self-seeking manner for the

good of the community." It is obvious that it should have read: "in the

most unself-seeking manner". But the true thoughts broke though the

emotional statement with elemental force.’

      (6)  A  reader  of  the Pester Lloyd,  Frau  Kata  Levy  of  Budapest,

recently  came  across  a  similar  unintended  display  of  candour  in  a

telegram from Vienna which appeared in the paper on October 11,

1918:

      ‘In  view  of  the  complete  mutual  confidence  which  has  prevailed

between ourselves and our German allies throughout the war, it may

be taken for certain that the two Powers would reach a unanimousdecision in all circumstances. It is unnecessary to state specifically

that  active  and interrupted  co-operation  between  the  allied

diplomatists is taking place at the present stage as well.’

   Only a few weeks later it was possible to express one’s opinion

more frankly about this ‘mutual confidence’, and there was no longer

any need to take refuge in a slip of the pen (or misprint).

   (7) An American living in Europe who had left his wife on bad terms

felt that he could now effect a reconciliation with her, and asked her to

come across the Atlantic and join him on a certain date. ‘It would be

fine,’ he wrote, ‘if you could come on the Mauretania as I did.’ He did

not however dare to send the sheet of paper which had this sentence

on it. He preferred to write it out again. For he did not want her to

notice how he had had to correct the name of the ship. He had first

written ‘Lusitania’.

      This  slip  of  the  pen  needs  no  explanation:  its  interpretation  is

perfectly  plain.  But  a  happy  chance  enables  a  further  point  to  be

added. Before the war his wife paid her first visit to Europe after the

death of her only sister. If I am not mistaken, the Mauretania is the

surviving sister-ship of the Lusitania, which was sunk in the war.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1206

 

      (8)  A  doctor  had  examined  a  child  and  was  making  out  a

prescription  for  it,  which  included  the  word  ‘alcohol’.  While  he  was

occupied in doing so the child’s mother pestered him with stupid and

unnecessary questions. He privately determined not to let this make

him angry, and actually succeeded in keeping his temper, but made a

slip of the pen in the course of the interruptions. Instead of alcohol the

word achol¹ could be read on the prescription.

   (9) The following example, which Ernest Jones reports about A. A.

Brill,  has  a  similar  subject-matter,  and  I  therefore  insert  it  here.

Although  by  custom  a  total  abstainer,  he  allowed  himself  to  be

persuaded by a friend to drink a little wine. Next morning an acute

headache gave him cause to regret having yielded in this way. He had

occasion to write the name of a patient called Ethel; instead he wroteEthyl.² It was no doubt of some relevance that the lady in question

used to drink more than was good for her.

 

   ¹ Approximately: ‘No choler.’

   ² I.e. ethyl alcohol.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1207

 

   (10) Since a slip of the pen on the part of a doctor who is writing a

prescription  possesses  a  significance  which  goes  far  beyond  the

practical importance of ordinary parapraxes, I take the opportunity of

reporting in full the only analysis published up to now of such a slip

made by a doctor:

   From Dr. Eduard Hitschmann (1913b): ‘A colleague tells me that

several  times  over  a  period  of  years  he  had  made  an  error  in

prescribing a certain drug for women patients of an advanced age. On

two occasions he prescribed ten times the correct dose; only later did

he suddenly realize this and was obliged, in the greatest anxiety in

case he had harmed his patient and put himself in a very unpleasant

position, to take the most hurried steps to recall the prescription. This

singular symptomatic act deserves to be clarified by a more precise

description of the individual instances and by an analysis.

   ‘First instance: In treating a poor woman bordering on extreme old

age who was suffering from spastic constipation the doctor prescribed

belladonna suppositories ten times too strong. He left the out-patients’

department, and his error suddenly sprang to his mind about an hour

later while he was at home reading the paper and having lunch; he

was overcome by anxiety, rushed first to the out-patients’ department

to obtain the patient’s address and hastened from there to her home,

which was a long way off. He was delighted to find that the old woman

had  not  yet  had  the  prescription  made  up,  and  he  returned  home

much relieved. The excuse that he gave himself on this occasion was

the  not  unjustified  one  that  the  talkative  head  of  the  out-patients’

department  had  looked  over  his  shoulder  while  he  was  writing  the

prescription and had distracted him.

   ‘Second instance: The doctor was obliged to tear himself away froma consultation with a flirtatious and provocatively attractive patient in

order to pay a professional visit to an elderly spinster. He took a taxi,

not having much time to spare for the visit; for he was due to keep a

secret rendezvous with a girl he was in love with, at a certain time,

near  her  house.  Here,  too,  belladonna  was  indicated  because  of

troubles analogous to those in the first instance. Once again he made

the mistake of prescribing a quantity ten times too strong. The patient

raised a question that was of some interest but irrelevant to the matter

in hand; the doctor, however, showed impatience, though his words

denied it, and left the patient, so that he appeared at the rendezvous

in very good time. Some twelve hours later, at about seven o’clock in

the morning, the doctor woke up; the thought of his slip of the pen and

a feeling of anxiety came almost simultaneously to his consciousness,

and  he  sent  a  hasty  message  to  the  patient  in  the  hope  that  the

medicine had not yet been collected from the chemist’s, and asked for

the prescription to be sent back in order to be revised. On receiving it

however he found that the prescription had already been made up;

with  a  somewhat  stoical  resignation  and  an  optimism  born  of

experience he went to the chemist, where the dispenser reassured

him by explaining that he had naturally (or perhaps by mistake too?)

made up the drug in a smaller dose.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1208

 

   ‘Third instance: The doctor wanted to prescribe a mixture of Tinct.

belladonnae and Tinct. Opii in a harmless dose for his old aunt, his

mother’s sister. The prescription was immediately taken to the chemist

by  the  maid.  A  very  short  time  later  it  occurred  to  the  doctor  that

instead  of  "tincture"  he  had  written  "extract",  and  immediately

afterwards the chemist telephoned to question him about the error.

The doctor gave as an excuse the untruthful explanation that he had

not completed the prescription - it had been carried off from his table

with unexpected suddenness, so it was not his fault.

   ‘These three errors in making out prescriptions have the following

striking points of resemblance. Up to now it has only happened to thedoctor with this one drug; each time it involved a woman patient of

advanced years, and each time the dose was too strong. From the

brief analysis it emerged that the doctor’s relation to his mother must

have  been  of  decisive  importance.  For  he  recalled  that  on  one

occasion - one, moreover, which most probably occurred before these

symptomatic  acts  -  he  had  made  out  the  same  prescription  for  his

mother, who was also an old woman; he had ordered a dose of 0.03,

although he was more familiar with the usual dose of 0.02. This, as he

told  himself,  was  in  order  to  give  her  radical  help.  His  frail  mother

reacted to the drug with congestion in the head and an unpleasant

dryness of the throat. She complained of this, alluding half-jokingly to

the risks that could come from a consultation with a son. There were

in  fact  other  occasions  when  his  mother,  who  was,  incidentally,  a

doctor’s daughter, raised similar critical and half jocular objections to

drugs recommended at various times by her doctor son, and spoke of

being poisoned.

   ‘So far as the present writer can fathom this son’s relations with his

mother, there is no doubt that he is an instinctively affectionate child,

but his mental estimate of his mother and his personal respect for her

are by no means exaggerated. He shares a household with a brother

a year younger than himself and with his mother, and has felt for years

that this arrangement was inhibiting his erotic freedom. We have, of

course, learnt from psycho-analytic experience that such reasons are

readily misused as an excuse for an internal attachment. The doctor

accepted the analysis, being fairly well satisfied with the explanation,

and  laughingly  suggested  that  the  word  ‘belladonna’  (i.e.,  beautiful

woman) could also have an erotic reference. He had also occasionally

used the drug himself in the past.’

      In  my  judgement  serious  parapraxes  like  the  present  ones  are

brought about in exactly the same way as the innocent ones that we

normally investigate.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1209

 

   (11) The next slip of the pen, reported by Sándor Ferenczi, will bethought quite especially innocent. It can he understood as being an

act of condensation, resulting from impatience (compare the slip of the

tongue, ‘Der Apfe’, above, p. 1152); and this view might have been

maintained  if  a  penetrating  analysis  of  the  occurrence  had  not

revealed a stronger disturbing factor:

   ‘"I am reminded of the Anektode",¹ I once wrote in my note book.

Naturally I meant "Anekdote "; actually it was the one about a gipsy

who had been sentenced to death, and who asked as a favour to be

allowed himself to choose the tree from which he was to be hanged.

(In spite of a keen search he failed to find any suitable tree.)'

   (12) On the other hand there are times when the most insignificant

slip in writing can serve to express a dangerous secret meaning. An

anonymous correspondent reports:

   ‘I ended a letter with the words: "Herzlichste Grüsse an Ihre Frau

Gemahlin und ihren Sohn."² Just before I put the sheet in the envelope

I noticed the error I had made in the first letter of "ihren" and corrected

it. On the way home from my last visit to this married couple the lady

who  was  with  me  had  remarked  that  the  son  bore  a  striking

resemblance to a family friend and was in fact undoubtedly his child.’

 

   ¹ [A non-existent word; but the last part of it, ‘Tode’, means ‘death’.]

   ² [‘Warmest greetings to your wife and her son.’ The German possessive adjective ‘ihr’, as

spelt with a small ‘i’, means ‘her’; when spelt with a capital ‘I’, it means ‘your’.]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1210

 

      (13)  A  lady  sent  her  sister  a  message  of  good  wishes  on  the

occasion of her taking up residence in a new and spacious house. A

friend  who  was  present  noticed  that  the  writer  had  put  the  wrong

address on the letter. She had not even addressed it to the house that

her sister had just left, but to her first house which she had moved into

immediately after her marriage and had given up long before. This

friend  drew  the  lady’s  attention  to  the  slip.  ‘You’re  right’,  she  was

forced to confess; ‘but how did the idea come into my head? Why did I

do it?’ ‘I think’, said her friend, ‘you probably grudge her the fine large

home  which  will  now  be  hers,  while  you  feel  yourself  cramped  forspace; and therefore you put her back in her first home where she

was no better off than you are.’ ‘I certainly grudge her her new home’,

the other frankly admitted, and added: ‘What a pity one’s always so

petty in such things!’

   (14) Ernest Jones reports the following slip of the pen, which was

supplied to him by A. A. Brill:

   ‘A patient wrote to him on the subject of his sufferings, which he

tried to attribute to worry about his financial affairs induced by a cotton

crisis: "My trouble is all due to that d---d frigid wave; there isn’t even

any  seed."  (By  "wave"  he  meant  of  course  a  trend  in  the  money

market.) What he really wrote, however, was not "wave" but "wife". In

the bottom of his heart he cherished half-avowed reproaches against

his wife on account of her sexual anaesthesia and childlessness, and

he dimly realized, with right, that his life of enforced abstinence played

a considerable part in the genesis of his symptoms.’

   (15) Dr. R. Wagner (1911) relates of himself:

   ‘In reading through an old lecture note-book I found that I had made

a small slip in the hurry of taking down the notes. Instead of "Epithel

[epithelium]", I had written "Edithel". If we stress the first syllable we

have the diminutive form of a girl’s name.¹ The retrospective analysis

is  simple  enough.  At  the  time  I  made  the  slip  I  was  only  very

superficially acquainted with the lady of this name; it was not till much

later  that  our  relations  became  intimate.  The  slip  of  the  pen  is

therefore a neat indication of the break-through of the unconscious

attraction I felt to her at a time when I myself actually had no inkling of

it, and my choice of the diminutive form at the same time showed the

nature of the accompanying feelings.’

 

   ¹ [In Austria ‘l’ is the common diminutive termination.]

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1211

 

   (16) From Frau Dr. von Hug-Hellmuth (1912):

   ‘A doctor prescribed "Leviticowasser " for a woman patient instead of

"Levicowasser".  This  error,  which  gave  a  chemist  a  welcome

opportunity for passing adverse comments, may very well be viewedin a milder light if one looks out for the possible motivations arising

from the unconscious and is prepared at any rate to concede them a

certain  plausibility  -  even  though  they  are  merely  the  subjective

conjectures of someone who is not closely acquainted with the doctor.

In spite of his habit of using somewhat harsh language to scold his

patients for their far-from-rational diet - to read them a lecture, so to

speak - the doctor enjoyed great popularity, so that his waiting-room

was crowded before and during his consulting hour; and this provided

a justification for his wish that the patients he had seen should dress

as quickly as possible - "vite, vite". If I remember correctly, his wife

was French by birth: this lends some support to my seemingly rather

bold assumption that he used French in his wish for greater speed

from his patients. It is in any case a habit of many people to draw on

foreign words to express such wishes: my own father hurried us along

as children on our walks by calling out "avanti gioventù" [Italian for

"forward, youth"] or "marchez au pas" [French for "forward march"];

while  a  very  elderly  physician,  with  whom  I  was  in  treatment  for  a

throat complaint as a girl, used to try to inhibit my movements, which

seemed  much  too  hasty  to  him,  by  murmuring  a  soothing  "piano,

piano" [Italian for "gently, gently"]. Thus I can very easily imagine that

the  other  doctor  had  the  same  habit  too,  and  so  made  the  slip  of

writing "Leviticowasser" instead of "Levicowasser".’

   The same paper contains other examples recalled from its author’s

youth  (‘frazösisch’  instead  of  ‘französich’,  and  a  slip  in  writing  the

name ‘Karl’).

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1212

 

   (17) I have to thank Herr J. G., who also contributed an example

mentioned  above  for  the  following  account  of  a  slip  of  the  pen.  In

content it is identical with a notorious bad joke, but in this case the

intention of making a joke could be definitely ruled out:

   ‘While I was a patient in a (lung-) sanatorium I learnt to my regret

that the same illness which had forced me to seek treatment in an

institution had been diagnosed in a close relative of mine. In a letter tomy relative I recommended him to go to a specialist, a well-known

professor,  with  whom  I  was  myself  in  treatment,  and  of  whose

authority in medical matters I was fully satisfied, while having at the

same time every reason to deplore his discourteousness: for, only a

short  time  before,  this  same  professor  had  refused  to  write  me  a

testimonial which it was very important for me to have. In his reply to

my letter my relative drew my attention to a slip of the pen which,

since  I  immediately  recognized  the  cause  of  it,  gave  me  particular

amusement. In my letter I had used the following phrase: "and so I

advise  you  to insult  Professor  X.  without  delay".  I  had  of  course,

intended  to  write  "consult".  I  should  perhaps  point  out  that  my

knowledge of Latin and French rules out the possibility of explaining it

as a mistake due to ignorance.’

   (18) Omissions in writing have naturally a claim to be considered in

the  same  light  as  slips  of  the  pen.  Dattner  (1911)  has  reported  a

curious instance of a ‘historical parapraxis’. In one of the sections of

the law dealing with the financial obligations of Austria and Hungary,

settled in the ‘Compromise’ of 1867 between the two countries, the

word ‘actual’ was left out of the Hungarian translation; and Dattner

makes  it  plausible  to  suppose  that  the  unconscious  desire  of  the

Hungarian parliamentary draftsmen to grant Austria the least possible

advantages played a part in causing the omission.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1213

 

      We  have  every  reason  to  suppose,  too,  that  the  very  frequent

repetitions of the same word in writing and copying - ‘perseverations’ -

are likewise not without significance. If the writer repeats a word he

has already written, this is probably an indication that it was not so

easy for him to get away from it: that he could have said more at that

point but had omitted to do so, or something of the kind. Perseveration

in  copying  seems  to  be  a  substitute  for  saying  ‘I  too’.  I  have  had

lengthy medico-legal ‘opinions’ before me which show perseverations

on  the  copyist’s  part  at  particularly  important  passages.  The

interpretation I should have liked to give them would be that, boredwith his impersonal role, the copyist was introducing his own gloss:

‘Just my case’ or ‘it’s just the same with us.’

   (19) Furthermore, there is nothing to prevent our treating misprints

as ‘writing mistakes’ on the compositor’s part, and our regarding them

as  being  in  a  very  great  measure  motivated.  I  have  not  set  about

making a systematic collection of such parapraxes, which could be

very  amusing  and  instructive.  In  the  work  which  I  have  already

referred to a number of times, Jones has devoted a special section to

misprints.

   The distortions found in the text of telegrams can also at times be

understood  as  writing  mistakes  on  the  telegraphist’s  part.  In  the

summer holidays I received a telegram from my publishers, the text of

which was unintelligible to me. It ran: ‘Vorräte erhalten, Einladung X.

dringend.’  The  solution  of  the  riddle  starts  from  the  name  X.

mentioned in it. X. was the author of a book to which I was to write an

‘Einleitung  '.  This  ‘Einleitung’  was  what  had  been  turned  into  the

‘Einladung '. I was then able to recall that some days earlier I had sent

my  publishers  a  ‘Vorrede  '  to  another  book;  so  this  was  the

acknowledgement of its arrival. The true text had very probably run:

‘Vorrede erhalten, Einleitung X. dringend.’ We may assume that it had

fallen victim to a revision by the telegraphist’s hunger-complex, in the

course of which, moreover the two halves of the sentence became

linked more closely than the sender had intended. It is, incidentally, a

pretty instance of the ‘secondary revision’ that can be seen at work in

most dreams.¹

 

   ¹ Cf. the chapter on the dream-work in my Interpretation of Dreams.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1214

 

      The  possibility  of  ‘tendentious  misprints’  has  been  discussed  by

Herbert Silberer (1922).

      (20)  From  time  to  time  other  writers  have  drawn  attention  to

misprints the tendentiousness of which cannot easily be challenged.

See, for example, Storfer’s paper ‘The Political Demon of Misprints’

(1914) and his short note (1915) which I reprint here:   ‘A political misprint is to be found in the issue of März for April 25 of

this year. A dispatch from Argyrokastron reported some remarks made

by Zographos, the leader of the insurgent Epirotes in Albania (or, if

that is preferred, the President of the Independent Government of the

Epirus). It included the following phrase: "Believe me: a self-governing

Epirus would be in the most fundamental interest of Prince Wied. He

could fall down on it." Even without this fatal misprint the Prince of

Albania  is  no  doubt  well  aware  that  the  acceptance  of  the  support

offered him by the Epirotes would mean his downfall '.

   (21) I myself recently read an article in one of our Vienna daily

papers,  the  title  of  which  -  ‘The  Bukovina  under Rumanian Rule’ -

would have at least to be called premature, since at the time Rumania

had not yet disclosed herself as an enemy. From the content of the

article it was quite clear that the word should have been ‘Russian’, not

‘Rumanian’; yet the censor, too, seems to have found the phrase so

little surprising that even he overlooked this misprint,

   It is hard to avoid suspecting a ‘political’ misprint on coming across

the following ‘literal’ misprint in a circular from the celebrated (formerly

the Imperial and Royal) printing firm of Karl Prochaska in Teschen:

   ‘By a decree of the Entente Powers, fixing the frontier at the River

Olsa, not only Silesia but Teschen as well have been divided into two

parts,  of  which  one zuviel¹  to  Poland  and  the  other  to  Czecho-

Slovakia.’

 

   ¹ [‘Too much.’ The word should have been the similarly pronounced ‘zufiel’, ‘fell to the share

of’.]

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1215

 

   Theodor Fontane was once obliged to take up arms in an amusing

way against a misprint which was only too full of meaning. On March

29, 1860, he wrote to the publisher Julius Springer:

 

   ‘Dear Sir,

    ‘I seem to be fated not to see my modest wishes fulfilled. A glance

at the proof sheets¹ which I enclose will tell you what I mean. What ismore, I have been sent only one set of proofs, although I need two, for

reasons which I have already given. And my request that the first set

should be returned to me for further revision - with special regard to

the English words and phrases - has not been carried out. I set great

store by this. For instance, on page 27 of the present sheets a scene

between John Knox and the Queen contains the words: "worauf Maria

aasrief."² In the face of such a fulminating mistake, it would be a relief

to know that it has really been removed. The unfortunate "aas" for

"aus" is made all the worse by there being no doubt that she (the

queen) must really have called him that to herself.

                                    ‘Yours faithfully,

                                                ‘Theodor Fontane.’

 

   Wundt (1900, 374) gives an explanation which deserves notice for

the fact (which can easily be confirmed) that we make slips of the pen

more  readily  than  slips  of  the  tongue.  ‘In  the  course  of  normal

speaking the inhibitory function of the will is continuously directed to

bringing  the  course  of  ideas  and  the  articulatory  movements  into

harmony with each other. If the expressive movement which follows

the ideas is retarded through mechanical causes, as is the case in

writing . . ., such anticipations make their appearance with particular

ease.’

 

   ¹ The book in question was Beyond the Tweed: Sketches and Letters from Scotland, which

Julius Springer published in 1860.
      ²  [‘On  which  Mary  "aasrief"'‘:  i.  e.,  cried  ‘Aas’  (literally,  ‘carrion’;  colloquially,  ‘filthy
blackguard’). The word should have been ‘Ausrief’ meaning simply ‘cried out’.]

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1216

 

   Observation of the conditions under which misreadings occur gives

rise to a doubt which I should not like to leave unmentioned, because

it  can,  I  think,  become  the  starting-point  for  a  fruitful  investigation.

Everyone knows how frequently the reader finds that in reading aloud

his attention wanders from the text and turns to his own thoughts. As a

result of this digression on the part of his attention he is often unable,if interrupted and questioned, to give any account of what he has read.

He has read, as it were, automatically, but almost always correctly. I

do not think that under such conditions mistakes in reading show a

noticeable increase. There is in fact a whole series of functions which

we are accustomed to assume will be performed most exactly when

done  automatically  -  that  is,  with  scarcely  any  conscious  attention.

From this it seems to follow that the factor of attention in mistakes in

speaking, reading and writing must be determined in a different way

from that described by Wundt (cessation or diminution of attention).

The examples which we have subjected to analysis have not really

justified  us  in  assuming  that  there  was  a  quantitative  lessening  of

attention; we found something which is perhaps not quite the same

thing:  a disturbance  of  attention  by  an  alien  thought  which  claims

consideration.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1217

 

 

   Between ‘slips of the pen’ and ‘forgetting’ may be inserted the case

of someone who forgets to append a signature. An unsigned cheque

comes to the same thing as a forgotten cheque. For the significance of

a forgetting of a similar kind I will cite a passage from a novel, which

Dr. Hanns Sachs came upon:

   ‘A very instructive and transparent example of the sureness with

which  imaginative  writers  know  how  to  employ  the  mechanism  of

parapraxes  and  symptomatic  acts  in  the  psycho-analytic  sense  is

contained in John Galsworthy’s novel The Island Pharisees. The story

centres round the vacillations of a young man of the well-to-do middle-

class  between  his  strong  social  sympathy  and  the  conventional

attitudes  of  his  class.  Chapter  XXVI  portrays  the  way  in  which  he

reacts to a letter from a young ne’er-do-well, to whom - prompted by

his  original  attitude  to  life  -  he  had  supplied  help  on  two  or  three

occasions. The letter contains no direct request for money, but paints

a  picture  of  great  distress  which  can  have  no  other  meaning.  Its

recipient at first rejects the idea of throwing this money away on ahopeless case instead of using it to support charitable causes. "To

give a helping hand, a bit of himself, a nod of fellowship to any fellow-

being  irrespective  of  a  claim,  merely  because  he  happened  to  be

down, was sentimental nonsense! The line must be drawn! But in the

muttering  of  this  conclusion  he  experienced  a  twinge  of  honesty.

‘Humbug! You don’t want to part with your money, that’s all!’"

      ‘Thereupon  he  wrote  a  friendly  letter,  ending  with  the  words:  "I

enclose a cheque. Yours sincerely, Richard Shelton."

   ‘"Before he had written out the cheque, a moth fluttering round the

candle distracted his attention, and by the time he had caught and put

it out he had forgotten that the cheque was not enclosed." The letter

was posted in fact just as it was.

      ‘There  is  however  an  even  subtler  motivation  for  the  lapse  of

memory  than  the  break-through  of  the  selfish  purpose,  which,  had

apparently been surmounted, of avoiding giving away the money.

   ‘At the country seat of his future parents-in-law, surrounded by his

fiancée,  her  family  and  their  guests,  Shelton  felt  isolated;  his

parapraxis indicates that he longed for his protégé who, as a result of

his  past  and  of  his  view  of  life,  forms  a  complete  contrast  to  the

irreproachable company, uniformly moulded by one and the same set

of conventions, that surround him. And in fact this person, who can no

longer  keep  his  place  without  being  supported,  does  in  fact  arrive

some days later to get an explanation of why the promised cheque

was not there.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1218

 

                                    CHAPTER VII

 

      THE FORGETTING OF IMPRESSIONS AND INTENTIONS

 

If anyone should feel inclined to over-estimate the state of our present

knowledge of mental life, a reminder of the function of memory is all

that  would  be  needed  to  force  him  to  be  more  modest.  No

psychological theory has yet succeeded in giving a connected accountof  the  fundamental  phenomenon  of  remembering  and  forgetting;  in

fact, the complete analysis of what can actually be observed has so

far scarcely been begun. To-day forgetting has perhaps become more

of a puzzle than remembering, ever since we have learnt from the

study of dreams and pathological phenomena that even something we

thought  had  been  forgotten  long  ago  may  suddenly  re-emerge  in

consciousness.

   There are, it is true, a few indications already in our possession

which we expect to be accepted generally. We assume that forgetting

is  a  spontaneous  process  which  may  be  regarded  as  requiring  a

certain length of time. We lay stress on the fact that forgetting involves

a  certain  selection  taking  place  from  among  the  impressions

presented  to  us,  and  similarly  from  among  the  details  of  each

impression or experience. We know some of the conditions enabling

what  would  otherwise  have  been  forgotten  to  be  retained  in  the

memory  and  to  be  re-awakened.  Nevertheless,  on  countless

occasions  in  daily  life  we  can  observe  how  imperfect  and

unsatisfactory our understanding of these conditions is. Thus we may

listen  to  two  people  who  were  in  receipt  of  the  same  external

impressions - who took a journey together, for example - exchanging

recollections  at  some  later  date.  What  has  remained  firm  in  the

memory of one of them has often been forgotten by the other, as if it

had  never  happened;  and  this  is  true  even  where  there  is  no

justification  for  assuming  that  the  impression  was  psychically  of

greater importance for the one than for the other. A whole quantity of

factors  determining  the  choice  of  what  is  to  be  remembered  are

obviously still beyond our ken.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1219

 

   With the aim of making a small contribution to our knowledge of the

determinants  of  forgetting  I  make  it  my  practice  to  submit  to  a

psychological analysis those cases in which I myself forget something.

I am as a rule only concerned with a certain group of these cases,

namely those in which the forgetting surprises me because I shouldhave expected to know the thing in question. I may add that I am not

in general inclined to forget things (things I have experienced, that is,

not things I have learned!), and that for a short period of my youth

some unusual feats of memory were not beyond me. When I was a

schoolboy I took it as a matter of course that I could repeat by heart

the  page  I  had  been  reading;  and  shortly  before  I  entered  the

University  I  could  write  down  almost  verbatim  popular  Iectures  on

scientific subjects directly after hearing them. In the period of tension

before my final medical examination I must have made use once more

of  what  remained  of  this  faculty,  for  in  some  subjects  I  gave  the

examiners, as though it were automatically, answers which faithfully

followed the words of the textbook that I had skimmed through only

once in the greatest haste.

   Since then the command that I have over my store of memories has

steadily  deteriorated;  yet  right  up  to  the  most  recent  times  I  have

convinced myself over and over again that with the aid of a certain

device I can remember far more than I would otherwise have believed

possible. When, for instance, a patient in my consulting hour claims

that I have seen him before and I can recall neither the fact nor the

time,  I  help  myself  by  guessing:  that  is  to  say,  I  quickly  think  of  a

number  of  years,  counting  back  from  the  present.  In  cases  where

records  or  more  definite  information  from  the  patient  enable  me  to

check what has come to my mind, they show that I have rarely been

more than half a year out in ten.¹ I have a similar experience when I

meet a distant acquaintance and out of politeness enquire after his

small children. If he describes their progress I try to think at random of

the child’s present age. I afterwards check my estimate by what the

father tells me; and at the most I am wrong by a month, or with older

children by three months, although I am unable to say on what my

estimate  was  based.  I  have  latterly  grown  so  bold  that  I  always

produce  my  estimate  spontaneously  without  running  any  risk  of

offending the father by exposing my ignorance about his offspring. In

this way I extend my conscious memory by invoking my unconscious

memory, which is in any case far more extensive.

 

   ¹ In the course of the subsequent consultation the details of the previous visit usually

emerge into my consciousness.
                     The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1220

 

   I shall accordingly cite some striking examples of forgetting: most of

which I observed in myself. I distinguish the forgetting of impressions

and experiences - ie., of knowledge - from the forgetting of intentions -

i.e., from omission to do things. I can state in advance the invariable

result of the entire series of observations: in every case the forgetting

turned out to be based on a motive of unpleasure.

 

            (A) THE FORGETTING OF IMPRESSIONS AND KNOWLEDGE

 

   (1) One summer holiday my wife made me greatly annoyed though

the  cause  was  innocent  enough.  We  were  sitting  at  table  d’hôte

opposite a gentleman from Vienna whom I knew and who no doubt

remembered  me  too.  However,  I  had  reasons  of  my  own  for  not

renewing the acquaintance. My wife, who had heard no more than his

distinguished name, revealed too plainly that she was listening to his

conversation with his neighbours, for from time to time she turned to

me  with  questions  that  took  up  the  thread  of  their  discussion.  I

became  impatient  and  finally  irritated.  Some  weeks  later  I  was

complaining to a relative about this behaviour on my wife’s part but

was unable to recall a single word of the gentleman’s conversation. As

I  am  normally  rather  apt  to  harbour  grievances  and  can  forget  no

detail of an incident that has annoyed me, my amnesia in the present

case was probably motivated by consideration for my wife. A short

time ago I had a similar experience. I wished to have a good laugh

with an intimate friend over a remark made by my wife only a few

hours before, but was prevented from doing so by the singular fact

that I had utterly forgotten what she had said. I had first to ask my wife

to remind me what it was. It is easy to understand my forgetfulness

here as being analogous to the typical disturbance of judgement to

which we are subject where those nearest to us are concerned.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1221 

   (2) I had undertaken to get a lady who was a stranger to Vienna a

small strong-box for her documents and money. When I offered my

services I had in my mind’s eye an unusually vivid picture of a shop-

window in the Inner Town in which I was sure I had seen boxes of the

kind. I could not, it was true, recall the name of the street, but I felt

sure that I would find the shop if I walked through the town, since my

memory  told  me  I  had  passed  it  on  countless  occasions.  To  my

chagrin I had no success in finding the shop-window with the strong-

boxes, though I walked all over the Inner Town in every direction. I

decided  that  the  only  course  left  was  to  look  up  the  firms  of  safe-

manufacturers in a trades directory, so as to be able to identify the

shop  on  a  second  walk  round  the  town.  Such  extreme  measures,

however, did not prove necessary; among the addresses given in the

directory was one which I immediately recognized as the one I had

forgotten. It was true that I had passed the shop-window innumerable

times - every time, in fact, that I had visited the M. family, who have

lived for many years in the same building. Our intimate friendship later

gave place to a total estrangement; after that, I fell into the habit - the

reasons  for  which  I  never  considered  -  of  also  avoiding  the

neighbourhood and the house. On my walk through the town in search

of the shop-window with the strong-boxes I had passed through every

street in the district but this one, which I had avoided as if it were

forbidden  territory.  The  motive  of  unpleasure  responsible  in  the

present case for my failure to find my way is easy to recognize. The

mechanism  of  forgetting,  however,  is  not  so  simple  here  as  in  the

preceding  example.  My  aversion  naturally  applied  not  to  the  safe-

manufacturer  but  to  another  person,  whom  I  did  not  want  to  think

about;  and  from  this  latter  person  it  was  then  transferred  to  this

occasion  where  it  produced  the  forgetting.  The  case  of

‘Burckhard’ was very similar; my grudge against one person of this

name induced me to make a slip in writing the same name when it

referred to someone else. The part there played by identity of name in

establishing a connection between two essentially different groups of

thoughts was able to be replaced in the example of the shop-window

by  spatial  contiguity,  inseparable  proximity.  This  latter  case  was,

incidentally, more firmly knit; there was a second connection there,one involving its subject-matter, for money played a part among the

reasons for my estrangement from the family living in the building.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1222

 

   (3) I was requested by the firm of B. and R. to pay a professional

visit to one of their staff. On my way there I was possessed by the

thought that I must repeatedly have been in the building where their

firm had its premises. It was as if I had noticed their plate on a lower

storey while I was paying a professional visit on a higher one. I could

however recall neither what house it was nor whom I had visited there.

Although the whole matter was of no importance or consequence, I

nevertheless turned my mind to it and finally discovered in my usual

roundabout  way,  by  collecting  the  thoughts  that  occurred  to  me  in

connection with it, that the premises of the firm of B. and R. were on

the floor below the Pension Fischer, where I have frequently visited

patients. At the same time I also recalled the building that housed the

offices and the pension. It was still a puzzle to me what motive was at

work in this forgetting. I found nothing offensive to my memory in the

firm itself or in the Pension Fischer or the patients who lived there.

Moreover, I suspected that nothing very distressing could be involved;

otherwise  I  would  hardly  have  succeeded  in  recovering  in  a

roundabout  way  what  I  had  forgotten,  without  resorting  to  external

assistance as I had in the previous example. It finally occurred to me

that while I was actually on my way to this new patient, a gentleman

whom I had difficulty in recognizing had greeted me in the street. I had

seen this man some months before in an apparently grave condition

and  had  passed  sentence  on  him  with  a  diagnosis  of  progressive

paralysis; but later I heard he had recovered, so that my judgement

must have been wrong. Unless, that is, there had been a remission of

the type that is also found in dementia paralytica - in which case my

diagnosis  would  be  justified  after  all!  The  influence  that  made  me

forget where the offices of B. and R. were came from my meeting with

this  person,  and  my  interest  in  solving  the  problem  of  what  I  had

forgotten was transferred to it from this case of disputed diagnosis.But  the  associative  link  (for  there  was  only  a  slender  internal

connection - the man who recovered contrary to expectation was also

an official in a large firm which used to recommend patients to me)

was provided by an identity of names. The physician with whom I had

seen the supposed case of paralysis was also called Fischer, like the

pension which was in the building and which I had forgotten.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1223

 

   (4) Mislaying something is really the same as forgetting where it has

been put. Like most people who are occupied with writing and books I

know my way about on my writing-table and can lay my hands straight

away on what I want. What appears to other people as disorder is for

me order with a history behind it. Why, then, did I recently mislay a

book-catalogue, which had been sent to me, so that it was impossible

to find it? I had in fact intended to order a book, Über die Sprache,

which was advertised in it, since it was by an author whose witty and

lively style I like and whose insight in psychology and knowledge of

the history of civilization I have learnt to value. I believe that this is

precisely why I mislaid the catalogue. For it is my habit to lend books

by this author to my acquaintances for their enlightenment, and a few

days previously one of them had remarked as he returned a copy: ‘His

style reminds me very much of your own, and his way of thinking, too,

is  the  same  as  yours.’  The  speaker  did  not  know  what  he  was

touching on by that remark. Years before, when I was younger and in

greater need of outside contacts, an elder colleague to whom I had

praised the writings of a well-known medical author had made almost

the same comment: ‘It’s just your style and your manner.’ Prompted

by  this  remark  I  had  written  a  letter  to  the  author  seeking  closer

relations with him, but had been put in my place by a chilly answer.

Perhaps  still  earlier  discouraging  experiences  as  well  lie  concealed

behind this one, for I never found the mislaid catalogue and was in

fact deterred by this omen from ordering the advertised book, although

the disappearance of the catalogue formed no real hindrance since I

could remember the names of both book and author. 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1224

 

   (5) Another case of mislaying merits our interest on account of the

conditions  under  which  the  mislaid  object  was  rediscovered.  A

youngish man told me the following story: ‘Some years ago there were

misunderstandings between me and my wife. I found her too cold, and

although I willingly recognized her excellent qualities we lived together

without any tender feelings. One day, returning from a walk, she gave

me  a  book  which  she  had  bought  because  she  thought  it  would

interest me. I thanked her for this mark of ‘attention’, promised to read

the book and put it on one side. After that I could never find it again.

Months passed by, in which time I occasionally remembered the lost

book and made vain attempts to find it. About six months later my

dear mother, who was not living with us, fell ill. My wife left home to

nurse her mother-in-law. The patient’s condition became serious and

gave my wife an opportunity of showing the best side of herself. One

evening I returned home full of enthusiasm and gratitude for what my

wife  had  accomplished.  I  walked  up  to  my  desk,  and  without  any

definite intention but with a kind of somnambulistic certainty opened

one of the drawers. On the very top I found the long lost book I had

mislaid.’

   (6)) A case of mislaying which shares the last characteristic of the

above example - namely, the remarkable sureness shown in finding

the object again once the motive for its being mislaid had expired - is

reported by Stärcke (1916):

   ‘A girl had spoilt a piece of material in cutting it out to make a collar;

so the dressmaker had to come and do her best to put it right. When

she had arrived and the girl wanted to fetch the badly-cut collar, she

went to the drawer where she thought she had put it; but she could not

find it. She turned the contents upside down without discovering it.

Sitting down in exasperation she asked herself why it had suddenly

disappeared and whether there was not some reason why she did not

want  to  find  it.  She  came  to  the  conclusion  that  of  course  she  felt

ashamed in front of the dressmaker for having bungled something sosimple as a collar. After this reflection she stood up, went to another

cupboard and was able to lay her hands straight away on the badly-

cut collar.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1225

 

   (7) The following example of ‘mislaying’ is of a type that has become

familiar  to  every  psycho-analyst.  I  may  remark  that  the  patient

responsible for it found the solution himself:

   ‘A patient, whose psycho-analytic treatment was interrupted by the

summer holidays at a time when he was in a state of resistance and

felt unwell, put his bunch of keys in its usual place - or so he thought -

when  he  undressed  for  the  night.  Then  he  remembered  that  there

were a few more things that he needed for his journey next day - the

last day of treatment and the date on which his fee was due - and he

went to get them out of the writing-desk, in which he had also put his

money.  But  the  keys  had  disappeared.  He  began  to  make  a

systematic but increasingly agitated search of his small flat - with no

success.  Since  he  recognized  the  "mislaying"  of  the  keys  as  a

symptomatic act - that is, as something he had done intentionally - he

woke his servant in order to continue the search with the aid of an

"unprejudiced" person. After another hour he gave it up and was afraid

he had lost the keys. Next morning he ordered new keys from the

makers of the desk, and they were hastily made for him. Two friends,

who  had  come  home  with  him  in  the  same  cab,  thought  they

remembered hearing something fall with a clink on the ground as he

stepped out of the cab. He was convinced that his keys had fallen

from his pocket. That evening the servant triumphantly presented him

with the keys. They had been found lying between a thick book and a

thin pamphlet (a work by one of my pupils) which he wanted to take

away to read on his holiday. They were so cleverly placed that no one

would have suspected they were there. He found himself afterwards

unable  to  replace  them  so  that  they  were  equally  invisible.  The

unconscious dexterity with which an object is mislaid on account of

hidden but powerful motives is very reminiscent of "somnambulisticcertainty".  The  motive,  as  one  would  expect,  was  ill-temper  at  the

treatment being interrupted and secret rage at having to pay a high

fee when he was feeling so unwell.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1226

 

   (8) ‘A man’, Brill relates, ‘was urged by his wife to attend a social

function in which he really took no interest . . . Yielding to his wife’s

entreaties, he began to take his dress-suit from the trunk when he

suddenly thought of shaving. After accomplishing this he returned to

the trunk and found it locked. Despite a long, earnest search the key

could  not  be  discovered.  No  locksmith  was  available  on  Sunday

evening, so that the couple had to send their regrets. When he had

the trunk opened the next morning the lost key was found within. The

husband  had  absent-mindedly  dropped  the  key  into  the  trunk  and

sprung the lock. He assured me that this was wholly unintentional and

unconscious, but we know that he did not wish to go to this social

affair. The mislaying of the key therefore lacked no motive.’

      Ernest  Jones  observed  in  himself  that  he  was  in  the  habit  of

mislaying his pipe whenever he had smoked too much and felt unwell

in consequence. The pipe then turned up in all sorts of places where it

did not belong and where it was not normally put away.

      (9)  An  innocent  case,  in  which  the  motivation  was  admitted,  is

reported by Dora Müller (1915):

   ‘Fräulein Erna A. told me two days before Christmas: "Can you

imagine? Yesterday evening I took a piece of my ginger-bread from

the packet and ate it; at the same time I thought I would have to offer

some to Fräulein S." (her mother’s companion) "when she came to

say goodnight to me. I didn’t particularly want to, but I made up my

mind to do so all the same. Later on when she came I reached out to

get the packet from my table; but it was not there. I had a look for it

and  found  it  inside  my  cupboard.  I  had  put  the  packet  away  there

without  realizing."  No  analysis  was  necessary;  the  narrator  herself

understood the sequence of events. The impulse of wanting to keep

the  cake  all  to  herself,  which  had  just  been  repressed,  hadnevertheless achieved its end in the automatic act, though in this case

it was cancelled out once more by the subsequent conscious act.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1227

 

   (10) Sachs describes how, by a similar act of mislaying, he once

avoided the duty of working: ‘Last Sunday afternoon I hesitated for

some time over whether I should work or take a walk and pay a visit at

the end of it; but after a bit of a struggle I decided in favour of the

former. After about an hour I noticed that my supply of paper was

exhausted. I knew that somewhere in a drawer there was a stack of

paper that I had had for years, but I looked in vain for it in my writing

desk and in other places where I thought I might find it, although I

went to a lot of trouble and rummaged round in every possible place -

old books, pamphlets, letters and so on. Thus I finally found myself

compelled to break off my work and go out after all. When I returned

home in the evening, I sat down on the sofa, and, sunk in thought and

half absent-mindedly, gazed at the book-case in front of me. A box

caught my eye and I remembered that I had not examined its contents

for a long time. So I went over and opened it. At the very top was a

leather portfolio containing unused paper. But it was only when I had

taken it out and was on the point of putting it in the drawer of my desk

that it occurred to me that this was the very same paper I had been

unsuccessfully  looking  for  in  the  afternoon.  I  must  add  here  that

although I am not ordinarily thrifty I am very careful with paper and

keep any scraps that can be used. It was obviously this practice of

mine, which is nourished by an instinct, that enabled my forgetfulness

to  be  corrected  as  soon  as  the  immediate  motive  for  it  had

disappeared.’

   If a survey is made of cases of mislaying, it in fact becomes hard to

believe  that  anything  is  ever  mislaid  except  as  a  result  of  an

unconscious intention.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1228 

   (11) One day in the summer of 1901 I remarked to a friend with

whom I used at that time to have a lively exchange of scientific ideas:

‘These problems of the neuroses are only to be solved if we base

ourselves  wholly  and  completely  on  the  assumption  of  the  original

bisexuality of the individual.’ To which he replied: ‘That’s what I told

you two and a half years ago at Br. when we went for that evening

walk. But you wouldn’t hear of it then.’ It is painful to be requested in

this  way  to  surrender  one’s  originality.  I  could  not  recall  any  such

conversation or this pronouncement of my friend’s. One of us must

have been mistaken and on the ‘cui prodest?’ principle¹ it must have

been myself. Indeed, in the course of the next week I remembered the

whole incident, which was just as my friend had tried to recall it to me;

I even recollected the answer I had given him at the time: ‘I’ve not

accepted that yet; I’m not inclined to go into the question.’ But since

then  I  have  grown  a  little  more  tolerant  when,  in  reading  medical

literature, I come across one of the few ideas with which my name can

be associated, and find that my name has not been mentioned.

   Finding fault with one’s wife, a friendship which has turned into its

opposite,  a  doctor’s  error  in  diagnosis,  a  rebuff  by  some  one  with

similar interests, borrowing someone else’s ideas - it can hardly be

accidental  that  a  collection  of  instances  of  forgetting,  gathered  at

random, should require me to enter into such distressing subjects in

explaining  them.  On  the  contrary,  I  suspect  that  everyone  who  is

willing to enquire into the motives behind his lapses of memory will be

able  to  record  a  similar  sample  list  of  objectionable  subjects.  The

tendency to forget what is disagreeable seems to me to be a quite

universal  one;  the  capacity  to  do  so  is  doubtless  developed  with

different  degrees  of  strength  in  different  people.  It  is  probable  that

many instances of disowning which we encounter in our medical work

are to be traced to forgetting.¹ It is true that our view of such forgetting

limits  the  distinction  between  the  two  forms  of  behaviour  to  purely

psychological factors and allows us to see in both modes of reaction

the expression of the same motive. Of all the numerous examples of

the disavowal of unpleasant memories which I have observed on the

part  of  relatives  of  patients,  one  remains  in  my  recollection  as

especially  singular.  A  mother  was  giving  me  information  about  thechildhood of her neurotic son, now in his puberty, in the course of

which she said that, like his brothers and sisters, he had been a bed-

wetter till late on - a fact which is certainly of some significance in the

case history of a neurotic patient. A few weeks later, when she was

wanting to find out about the progress of the treatment, I had occasion

to  draw  her  attention  to  the  signs  of  a  constitutional  disposition  to

illness on the young man’s part, and in doing so I referred to the bed-

wetting  which  she  had  brought  out  in  the  anamnesis.  To  my

astonishment she contested this fact in regard both to him and to the

other children, and asked me how I could know it. Finally I told her that

she herself had informed me a short time before. She must therefore

have forgotten it.²

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1907:] If we ask someone whether he suffered from a luetic infection ten

or fifteen years ago, we are too apt to overlook the fact that, from a psychical point of view, he
will have regarded this illness quite differently from, let us say, an acute attack of rheumatism.
- In the anamneses which parents give about their daughters’ neurotic illnesses, it is hardly
possible to distinguish with certainty between what has been forgotten and what is being
concealed, since everything standing in the way of a girl’s future marriage is systematically set
aside, i.e. repressed, by the parents. - [Added 1910:] A man who had recently lost his dearly-
loved  wife  from  an  affection  of  the  lungs  reported  the  following  instance  to  me  in  which
misleading answers given to the doctor’s enquiries could only be ascribed to forgetting of this
kind. ‘As my poor wife’s pleuritis had still not improved after many weeks, Dr. P. was called
into consultation. In taking the anamnesis he asked the usual questions, including whether
there were any cases of lung illness in my wife’s family. My wife said there were none and I
could  not  recall  any  either.  As  Dr.  P.  was  leaving,  the  conversation  turned,  as  though
accidentally, to the subject of excursions and my wife said: "Yes, it’s a long journey, too, to
Langersdorf, where my poor brother’s buried." This brother died about fifteen years ago after
suffering for years from tuberculosis. My wife was very fond of him and often spoken to me
about him. In fact it now occurred to me that at the time that her pleuritis was diagnosed she
was very worried and remarked gloomily: "My brother died of a lung complaint too." But now,
the memory was so strongly repressed that even after her remark about the excursion to
Langersdorf she was not led to correct the information she had given about illnesses in her
family. I myself became aware of the lapse of memory at the very moment she spoke of
Langersdorf.’ - [Added 1912:] A completely analogous experience is related by Jones in the
work to which I have referred several times already. A physician, whose wife suffered from an
abdominal complaint the diagnosis of which was uncertain, remarked by way of comforting
her: ‘It is fortunate at any rate that there has been no tuberculosis in your family.’ ‘Have you
forgotten’,  answered  his  wife  in  the  greatest  astonishment,  ‘that  my  mother  died  of
tuberculosis  and  that  my  sister  recovered  from  it  only  after  having  been  given  up  by  the
doctors?’

   ² In the days while I was engaged in writing these pages the following almost incredible

instance of forgetting happened to me. On the first of January I was going through my medical
engagement book so that I could send out my accounts. Under the month of June I came
across the name ‘M---l’ but could not recall who it belonged to. My bewilderment grew when Iturned the pages and discovered that I treated the case in a sanatorium and made daily visits
over a period of weeks. A patient treated under such conditions cannot be forgotten by a
doctor after scarcely six months. Could it have been a man, I asked myself, a case of general
paralysis, an uninteresting case? Finally the record of the fees I had received brought back to
me all the facts that had striven to escape my memory. M---l was a fourteen-year-old girl, the
most remarkable case I had had in recent years, one which taught me a lesson I am not likely
ever to forget and whose outcome cost me moments of the greatest distress. The child fell ill
of an unmistakable hysteria, which did in fact clear up quickly and radically under my care.
After this improvement the child was taken away from me by her parents. She still complained
of abdominal pains which had played the chief part in the clinical picture of her hysteria. Two
months later she died of sarcoma of the abdominal glands. The hysteria, to which she was at
the same time predisposed, used the tumour as a provoking cause, and I, with my attention
held by the noisy but harmless manifestations of the hysteria, had perhaps overlooked the first
signs of the insidious and incurable disease.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1229

 

   There are thus abundant signs to be found in healthy, non-neurotic

people  that  the  recollection  of  distressing  impressions  and  the

occurrence of distressing thoughts are opposed by a resistance.¹ But

the  full  significance  of  this  fact  can  be  estimated  only  when  the

psychology of neurotic people is investigated. We are forced to regard

as  one  of  the  main  pillars  of  the  mechanism  supporting  hysterical

symptoms an elementary endeavour of this kind to fend off ideas that

can arouse feelings of unpleasure - an endeavour which can only be

compared with the flight-reflex in the presence of painful stimuli. The

assumption  that  a  defensive  trend  of  this  kind  exists  cannot  be

objected to on the ground that one often enough finds it impossible, on

the contrary, to get rid of distressing memories that pursue one, and to

banish distressing affective impulses like remorse and the pangs of

conscience. For we are not asserting that this defensive trend is able

to put itself into effect in every case, that in the interplay of psychical

forces it may not come up against factors which, for other purposes,

aim at the opposite effect and bring it about in spite of the defensive

trend. It may be surmised that the architectonic principle of the mental

apparatus  lies  in  a  stratification  -  a  building  up  of  superimposed

agencies;  and  it  is  quite  possible  that  this  defensive  endeavour

belongs  to  a  lower  psychical  agency  and  is  inhibited  by  higher

agencies. At all events, if we can trace back processes such as thosefound in our examples of forgetting to this defensive trend, that fact

speaks  in  favour  of  its  existence  and  power.(As  we  have  seen,  a

number of things are forgotten on their own account; where this is not

possible, the defensive trend shifts its target and causes something

else  related  to  the  target  at  least  to  be  forgotten,  something  less

important which has come into associative connection with the thing

that is really objectionable.

 

    ¹ [Footnote added  1910:]  A.  Pick  (1905)  has  recently  brought  together  a  number  of

quotations from authors who appreciate the influence of affective factors on the memory and
who  -  more  or  less  clearly  -  recognize  the  contribution  towards  forgetting  made  by  the
endeavour to fend off unpleasure. But none of us has been able to portray the phenomenon
and  its  psychological  basis  so  exhaustively  and  at  the  same  time  so  impressively  as
Nietzsche in one of his aphorisms (Jenseits von Gut und Böse, IV, 68): ‘"I did this", says my
Memory.  "I  cannot  have  done  this",  says  my  Pride  and  remains  inexorable.  In  the  end  -
Memory yields.’
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1230

 

      The  view  developed  here,  that  distressing  memories  succumb

especially easily to motivated forgetting, deserves to find application in

many spheres where no attention, or too little, has so far been paid to

it. Thus it seems to me that it has still not yet been sufficiently strongly

emphasized  in  assessing  testimony  in  courts  of  law,¹  where  the

process of putting a witness on oath is clearly expected to have much

too great a purifying influence on the play of his psychical forces. It is

universally acknowledged that where the origin of a people’s traditions

and legendary history are concerned, a motive of this kind, whose aim

is  to  wipe  from  memory  whatever  is  distressing  to  national  feeling,

must be taken into consideration. Closer investigation would perhaps

reveal a complete analogy between the ways in which the traditions of

a people and the childhood memories of the individual come to be

formed. - The great Darwin laid down a ‘golden rule’ for the scientific

worker based on his insight into the part played by unpleasure as a

motive for forgetting.²

   In a very similar way to the forgetting of names, the forgetting of

impressions  can  be  accompanied  by  faulty  recollection;  and  this,where it finds credence, is described as paramnesia. Paramnesia in

pathological  cases  -  in  paranoia  it  actually  plays  the  part  of  a

constituent factor in the formation of the delusion - has brought forth

an extensive literature in which I have entirely failed to find any hint

whatever as to its motivation. As this is also a subject which belongs

to the psychology of the neuroses it is inappropriate to consider it in

the present context. Instead, I shall describe a singular paramnesia of

my own, in which the motivation provided by unconscious, repressed

material  and  the  manner  and  nature  of  the  connection  with  this

material can be recognized clearly enough.

 

   ¹ Cf. Gross (1898).

   ² [Footnote added 1912] Ernest Jones has drawn attention to the following passage in

Darwin’s  autobiography,  which  convincingly  reflects  his  scientific  honesty  and  his
psychological acumen:
   ‘I had, during many years, followed a golden rule, namely, that whenever a published fact, a
new observation or thought came across me, which was opposed to my general results, to
make a memorandum of it without fail and at once; for I had found by experience that such
facts and thoughts were far more apt to escape from the memory than favourable ones.’
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1231

 

      While  I  was  writing  the  later  chapters  of  my  book  on  dream-

interpretation, I happened to be at a summer resort without access to

libraries and works of reference, and I was forced to incorporate in my

manuscript  from  memory  all  sorts  of  references  and  quotations,

subject  to  later  correction.  In  writing  the  passage  on  day-dreams  I

thought of the excellent example of the poor book-keeper in Alphonse

Daudet’s Le  Nabab,  in  whose  person  the  writer  was  probably

portraying his own reveries. I imagined I had a distinct memory of one

of the phantasies which this man - I called him Monsieur Jocelyn -

hatched out on his walks through the streets of Paris; and I began to

reproduce it from memory. It was a phantasy of how Monsieur Jocelyn

boldly threw himself at the head of a runaway horse in the street, and

brought  it  to  a  stop;  how  the  carriage  door  opened  and  a  great

personage stepped out, pressed Monsieur Jocelyn’s hand and said:

‘You are my saviour. I owe my life to you. What can I do for you?’      Any  inaccuracies  in  my  own  account  of  this  phantasy  could,  I

assured myself, easily be corrected at home when I had the book in

front of me. But when I finally looked through Le Nabab to check this

passage in my manuscript, which was ready to go to press, I found, to

my  very  great  shame  and  consternation,  no  mention  of  any  such

reverie on the part of Monsieur Jocelyn; in fact the poor book-keeper

did not have this name at all but was called Monsieur Joyeuse. This

second error quickly gave me the key to the solution of the first one -

the paramnesia. ‘Joyeux’, of which ‘Joyeuse’ is the feminine form, is

the only possible way in which I could translate my own name, Freud,

into French. Where then could the phantasy, which I had remembered

wrongly and ascribed to Daudet, have come from? It could only be a

product of my own, a day-dream which I had formed myself and which

had not become conscious or which had once been conscious and

had since been totally forgotten. Perhaps I invented it myself in Paris

where I frequently walked about the streets, lonely and full of longings,

greatly in need of a helper and protector, until the great Charcot took

me into his circle. Later I more than once met the author of Le Nabab

in Charcot’s house.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] Some time ago one of my readers sent me a small volume from

Franz Hoffmann’s Jugendbibliothek in which a rescue scene like the one in my phantasy in
Paris is recounted in detail. The agreement between the two extends even to certain not quite
ordinary expressions that occur in both. It is not easy to avoid suspecting that I had in fact
read  this  children’s  book  while  I  was  myself  a  boy.  The  library  at  my  secondary  school
contained Hoffmann’s series and was always ready to offer these books to pupils in place of
any other mental pabulum. The phantasy which, at the age of 43, I thought I remembered as
having been produced by someone else, and which I was subsequently forced to recognize
as  a  creation  of  my  own  at  the  age  of  28,  may  therefore  easily  have  been  an  exact
reproduction of an impression which I had received somewhere between the ages of 11 and
13. After all, the rescue phantasy which I attributed to the unemployed book-keeper in Le
Nabab was merely meant to prepare the way for the phantasy of my own rescue, to make my
longing for a patron and protector tolerable to my pride. This being so, it will not surprise
anyone with an understanding of the mind to hear that in my conscious life I myself was highly
resistant to the idea of being dependent on a protector’s favour, and that I found it hard to
tolerate the few real situations in which something of that nature occurred. Abraham (1922b)
has brought to light the deeper meaning of phantasies with such a content and has provided
an almost exhaustive explanation of their special features.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1232 

   Another paramnesia, which it was possible to explain satisfactorily,

is reminiscent fausse reconnaissance, a subject that will be discussed

later. I had told one of my patients, an ambitious and capable man,

that a young student had recently gained admittance to the circle of

my  followers  on  the  strength  of  an  interesting  work,  ‘Der  Künstler,

Versuch einer Sexualpsychologie’. When this work appeared in print a

year  and  a  quarter  later,  my  patient  maintained  that  he  could

remember with certainty having read an announcement of this book

somewhere  (perhaps  in  a  bookseller’s  prospectus)  even  before  -  a

month  or  six  months  before  -  I  had  first  mentioned  it  to  him.  This

announcement, he said, had come into his mind at the time; and he

further remarked that the author had changed the title: it no longer

read  ‘Versuch’  but  ‘Ansätze  zu  einer  Sexualpsychologie.  Careful

enquiry of the author and a comparison of all the dates nevertheless

showed that my patient was claiming to recall something impossible.

No  announcement  of  this  work  had  appeared  anywhere  before

publication, and certainly none a year and a quarter before it went to

press.  When  I  omitted  to  interpret  this  paramnesia,  my  patient

produced  a  repetition  of  it  of  the  same  kind.  He  believed  he  had

recently seen a work on agoraphobia in a bookshop window and was

now looking through all the publishers’ catalogues in order to get a

copy. I was then able to explain to him why his efforts were bound to

be fruitless. The work on agoraphobia existed only in his phantasy, as

an unconscious intention: he meant to write it himself. His ambition to

emulate  the  young  man  and  become  one  of  my  followers  on  the

strength  of  a  similar  scientific  work  was  responsible  for  the  first

paramnesia and then for its repetition. Whereupon he recalled that the

bookseller’s  announcement  which  had  led  him  to  make  this  false

recognition  dealt  with  a  work  entitled  ‘Genesis,  das  Gesetz  der

Zeugung’. However, it was I who was responsible for the change in

the title mentioned by him, for I could remember having myself been

guilty of that inaccuracy - ‘Versuch’ instead of ‘Ansätze’ - in repeating

the title.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life                                                                                      1233

 

                        (B) THE FORGETTING OF INTENTIONS

 

   No group of phenomena is better qualified than the forgetting of

intentions for demonstrating the thesis that, in itself, lack of attention

does not suffice to explain parapraxes. An intention is an impulse to

perform an action: an impulse which has already found approval but

whose  execution  is  postponed  to  a  suitable  occasion.  Now  it  can

happen that during the interval thus created a change of such a kind

occurs in the motives involved that the intention is not carried out; but

in that case it is not forgotten: it is re-examined and cancelled. The

forgetting of intentions, to which we are subject every day and in every

possible situation, is not a thing that we are in the habit of explaining

in terms of such a revision in the balance of motives. In general we

leave it unexplained; or we try to find a psychological explanation by

supposing that at the time when the intention was due to be carried

out the attention necessary for the action was no longer at hand -

attention which was, after all, an indispensable precondition for the

coming into being of the intention and had therefore been available for

the action at that time. Observation of our normal behaviour in regard

to intentions leads us to reject this attempt at an explanation as being

arbitrary. If I form an intention in the morning which is to be carried out

in the evening, I may be reminded of it two or three times in the course

of the day. It need not however become conscious at all throughout

the  day.  When  the  time  for  its  execution  draws  near,  it  suddenly

springs  to  my  mind  and  causes  me  to  make  the  necessary

preparations for the proposed action. If I am going for a walk and take

a letter with me which has to be posted, it is certainly not necessary

for me, as a normal individual, free from neurosis, to walk all the way

with it in my hand and to be continually on the look-out for a letter-box

in which to post it; on the contrary I am in the habit of putting it in my

pocket, of walking along and letting my thoughts range freely, and I

confidently  expect  that  one  of  the  first  letter-boxes  will  catch  my

attention and cause me to put my hand in my pocket and take out the

letter. Normal behaviour after an intention has been formed coincides

fully with the experimentally-produced behaviour of people to whomwhat is described as a ‘post-hypnotic suggestion at long range’ has

been given under hypnosis.¹ This phenomenon is usually described in

the following way. The suggested intention slumbers on in the person

concerned until the time for its execution approaches. Then it awakes

and impels him to perform the action.

 

   ¹ Cf. Bernheim (1891).

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1234

 

   There are two situations in life in which even the layman is aware

that forgetting - as far as intentions are concerned - cannot in any way

claim  to  be  considered  as  an  elementary  phenomenon  not  further

reducible, but entitles him to conclude that there are such things as

unavowed motives. What I have in mind are love-relationships and

military discipline. A lover who has failed to keep a rendezvous will

find  it  useless  to  make  excuses  for  himself  by  telling  the  lady  that

unfortunately he completely forgot about it. She will not fail to reply: ‘A

year ago you wouldn’t have forgotten. You evidently don’t care for me

any longer.’ Even if he should seize on the psychological explanation

mentioned  above  and  try  to  excuse  his  forgetfulness  by  pleading

pressure of business, the only outcome would be that the lady, who

will have become as sharp-sighted as a doctor is in psycho-analysis,

would reply: ‘How curious that business distractions like these never

turned up in the past!’ The lady is not of course wanting to deny the

possibility of forgetting; it is only that she believes, not without reason,

that practically the same inference - of there being some reluctance

present  -  can  be  drawn  from  unintentional  forgetting  as  from

conscious evasion.

   Similarly, under conditions of military service, the difference between

a failure to carry out orders which is due to forgetting and one which is

deliberate is neglected on principle - and justifiably so. A soldier must

not forget what military service orders him to do. If he does forget in

spite of knowing the order, that is because the motives that drive him

to carry out the military order are opposed by other, counter-motives.

A one year volunteer who at inspection tries to offer the excuse thathe has forgotten to polish his buttons is sure to be punished. But this

punishment  is  trifling  in  comparison  to  the  one  to  which  he  would

expose himself if he admitted to himself and his superiors that the

motive for his failure to carry out orders was that ‘I’m heartily sick of

this  wretched  spit-and-polish’.  For  the  sake  of  this  saving  of

punishment - for reasons of economy, so to speak - he makes use of

forgetting as an excuse, or it comes about as a compromise.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1235

 

      Both  the  service  of  women  and  military  service  demand  that

everything connected with them should be immune to forgetting. In

this way they suggest the notion that, whereas in unimportant matters

forgetting  is  permissible,  in  important  matters  it  is  a  sign  that  one

wishes to treat them as unimportant, i.e. to deny their importance.¹

This view, which takes psychical considerations into account, cannot

in fact be rejected here. No one forgets to carry out actions that seem

to  himself  important,  without  incurring  suspicion  of  being  mentally

disordered.  Our  investigation  can  therefore  only  extend  to  the

forgetting of intentions of a more or less minor character; we cannot

consider  any  intention  as  being wholly  indifferent,  for  otherwise  it

would certainly never have been formed.

   As with the functional disturbances described on earlier pages, I

have made a collection of the cases of omitting to do something as a

result  of  forgetting  which  I  have  observed  in  myself,  and  I  have

endeavoured to explain them. I have invariably found that they could

be traced to interference by unknown and unavowed motives - or, as

one may say, to a counter-will. In a number of these cases I found

myself in a position which was similar to being under conditions of

service;  I  was  under  a  constraint,  against  which  I  had  not  entirely

given  up  struggling,  so  that  I  made  a  demonstration  against  it  by

forgetting.  This  accounts  for  the  fact  that  I  am  especially  prone  to

forget  to  send  congratulations  on  occasions  such  as  birthdays,

anniversaries,  wedding  celebrations  and  promotions.  I  keep  on

making new resolutions on the subject and become more and moreconvinced that I shall not succeed. I am now on the point of giving the

effort  up  and  of  yielding  consciously  to  the  motives  that  oppose  it.

While  I  was  in  a  transitional  stage,  a  friend  asked  me  to  send  a

congratulatory telegram on a certain day on his behalf along with my

own,  but  I  warned  him  that  I  should  forget  both;  and  it  was  not

surprising that the prophecy came true. It is due to painful experiences

in  the  course  of  my  life  that  I  am  unable  to  manifest  sympathy  on

occasions  where  the  expression  of  sympathy  must  necessarily  he

exaggerated, as an expression corresponding to the slight amount of

my feeling would not be allowable. Since I have come to recognize

that I have often mistaken other people’s ostensible sympathy for their

real  feelings,  I  have  been  in  revolt  against  these  conventional

expressions of sympathy, though on the other hand I recognize their

social  usefulness.  Condolences  in  the  case  of  death  are  excepted

from this divided treatment: once I have decided to send them I do not

fail to do so. Where my emotional activity no longer has anything to do

with social duty, its expression is never inhibited by forgetting.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1912:] In Bernard Shaw’s play Caesar and Cleopatra, Caesar, as he is

leaving Egypt, is worried for a time by the idea that there is something he has meant to do but
has forgotten. Finally he remembers: he has forgotten to say goodbye to Cleopatra! This small
detail is meant to illustrate - incidentally in complete contrast to the historical truth - how little
Caesar cared for the young Egyptian princess. (From Jones, 1911b, 488 n.)
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1236

 

      Writing  from  a  prisoner-of-war  camp,  Lieutenant  T.  reports  an

instance of a forgetting of this kind, in which an intention that had in

the first place been suppressed broke through in the form of ‘counter-

will’ and led to an unpleasant situation:

   ‘The most senior officer in a prisoner-of-war camp for officers was

insulted by one of his fellow prisoners. To avoid further complications

he wished to use the only authoritative measure at his disposal and

have the officer removed and transferred to another camp. It was only

on the advice of several friends that he decided - contrary to his secret

wish - to abandon his plan and seek to satisfy his honour immediately,

although this was bound to have a variety of disagreeable results. Thesame morning, as senior officer, he had to call the roll of the officers,

under the supervision of the camp-guard. He had known his fellow

officers for quite a long time and had never before made any mistakes

over this. This time he passed over the name of the man who had

insulted  him,  with  the  result  that  when  all  the  others  had  been

dismissed this man alone was obliged to remain behind till the error

was cleared up. The name that had been overlooked was perfectly

plainly written in the middle of a sheet. The incident was regarded by

one party as a deliberate insult, and by the other as an unfortunate

accident that was likely to be misinterpreted. Later on, however, after

making  the  acquaintance  of  Freud’s Psychopathology  of  Everyday

Life, the chief actor in the episode was able to form a correct picture of

what had occurred.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1237

 

   The conflict between a conventional duty and the unavowed view

which we privately take of it similarly provides an explanation for those

cases in which we forget to carry out actions that we promised to do

as a favour to someone. Here the regular result is that it is only the

would-be benefactor who believes that forgetting has the power to act

as  an  excuse;  the  person  who  asked  the  favour  gives  what  is

unquestionably the right answer: ‘He is not interested in the matter,

otherwise he would not have forgotten.’ There are some people who

are known as being forgetful in general, and who are for that reason

excused their lapses in the same kind of way as short-sighted people

who fail to greet us in the street.¹ These people forget all their small

promises,  and  they  fail  to  carry  out  any  of  the  commissions  they

receive. In this way they show themselves unreliable in little things,

and they demand that we should not take these minor offences amiss

- that is, that we should not attribute them to their character but refer

them to an organic idiosyncracy.² I am not one of these people myself,

and have had no opportunity of analysing the actions of a person of

this kind, so that, by examining the choice of occasions for forgetting, I

might discover its motivation. I cannot however help suspecting on thebasis of analogy that in these cases the motive is an unusually large

amount  of  unavowed  contempt  for  other  people  which  exploits  the

constitutional factor for its own ends.³

 

   ¹ Women, with their subtler understanding of unconscious mental processes, are as a rule

more apt to take offence when someone does not recognize them in the street and therefore
fails to greet them, than to think of the most obvious explanations - namely that the offender is
short-sighted, or was so engrossed in his thoughts that he did not notice them. They conclude
that he would have seen them if he had ‘set any store by them’.

   ² [Footnote added 1910:] Ferenczi reports that he himself was once an ‘absent-minded

person’ [ein ‘Zerstreuter’]  and  that  he  was  noted  by  acquaintances  for  the  frequency  and
strangeness of his parapraxes. But, he says, the signs of this absent-mindedness have almost
completely  disappeared  since  he  began  treating  patients  by  psycho-analysis  and  found
himself obliged to turn his attention to the analysis of his own self as well. He thinks that one
gives up these parapraxes in proportion as one learns to enlarge one’s own responsibility. He
therefore  justly  maintains  that  absent-mindedness  is  a  condition  which  is  dependent  on
unconscious complexes and which can be cured by psycho-analysis. One day, however, he
was blaming himself for having committed a technical error in a patient’s psycho-analysis.
That day all his former absent-minded habits reappeared. He stumbled several times as he
walked  along  the  street  (a  representation  of  his faux  pas  [false  step  -  blunder]  in  the
treatment), left his pocket book at home, tried to pay a kreutzer too little for his tram-fare,
found his clothes were not properly buttoned, and so on.

   ³ [Footnote added 1912:] In this connection Ernest Jones observes: ‘Often the resistance is

of a general order. Thus a busy man forgets to post letters entrusted to him - to his slight
annoyance - by his wife, just as he may "forget" to carry out her shopping orders.’
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1238

 

   In other cases the motives for forgetting are less easy to discover,

and when found arouse greater surprise. Thus, for instance, in former

years I noticed that, out of a fairly large number of visits to patients, I

only forgot those to non-paying patients or to colleagues. My shame at

this discovery led me to adopt the habit of making a note beforehand

in the morning of the visits I intended to make during the day. I do not

know if other doctors have arrived at the same practice by the same

road. But in this way we get some idea of what causes the so called

neurasthenic patient to jot down, in his notorious ‘notes’, the various

things he wants to tell the doctor. The ostensible reason is that he has

no  confidence  in  the  reproductive  capacity  of  his  memory.  That  is

perfectly  correct,  but  the  scene  usually  proceeds  as  follows.  Thepatient has recounted his various complaints and enquiries in a very

long-winded manner. After he has finished he pauses for a moment,

then pulls out the jottings and adds apologetically: ‘I’ve made some

notes, as I can’t remember things.’ As a rule he finds that they contain

nothing new. He repeats each point and answers it himself: ‘Yes, I’ve

asked  about  that  already.’  With  the  notes  he  is  probably  only

demonstrating  one  of  his  symptoms:  the  frequency  with  which  his

intentions are disturbed through the interference of obscure motives.

   I pass on to ailments that afflict the greater number of my healthy

acquaintances as well as myself. I confess that - especially in former

years - I was very apt to forget to return borrowed books, which I kept

for long periods, and that it came about especially easily that I put off

paying bills by forgetting them. One morning not long ago I left the

tobacconist’s where I had made my daily purchase of cigars without

having paid for them. It was a most harmless omission, as I am well

known there and could therefore expect to be reminded of my debt

next day. But my trivial act of negligence, my attempt to contract a

debt, was certainly not unconnected with budgetary thoughts which

had occupied my mind during the preceding day. Among the majority

even  of  what  are  called  ‘respectable’  people  traces  of  divided

behaviour  can  easily  be  observed  where  money  and  property  are

concerned. It may perhaps be generally true that the primitive greed of

the suckling, who wants to take possession of every object (in order to

put  it  into  his  mouth),  has  only  been  incompletely  overcome  by

civilization and upbringing.¹

 

   ¹ For the sake of preserving the unity of the subject I may perhaps interrupt the general

arrangement  I  have  adopted,  and,  in  addition  to  what  I  have  said  above,  point  out  that
people’s  memories  show  a  particular  partiality  in  money  matters.  Paramnesias  of  having
already paid for something can often be very obstinate, as I know from my own experience.
When free play is given to avaricious aims apart from the serious interests of life - for fun, in
fact -, as in card-playing, the most honourable men show an inclination to make errors and
mistakes in memory and counting, and, without quite knowing how, they even find themselves
involved in petty cheating. The psychically refreshing nature of these games is partly due to
liberties of this kind. We must admit the truth of the saying that in play we can get to know a
person’s character - that is, if we are not thinking of his manifest character. - If waiters still
make unintentional mistakes in the bill, the same explanation obviously applies to them. - In
commercial circles a certain delay can frequently be observed in paying out sums of money
(for settling accounts and so on) which in point of fact brings the owner no profit and can only
be understood in psychological terms - as an expression of a counter-will against paying out
money. - [The next sentence was added in 1912:] Brill puts the matter with epigrammaticbrevity:  ‘We  are  more  apt  to  mislay  letters  containing  bills  than  cheques.’  -  The  fact  that
women in particular evince a special amount of unpleasure at paying their doctor is connected
with the most intimate impulses, which are very far from having been elucidated. Women
patients have usually forgotten their purse and so cannot pay at the time of consultation; they
then regularly forget to send the fee after they reach home, and thus arrange things so that
one has treated them for nothing - ‘for the sake of their beaux yeux’. They pay one, as it were,
by the sight of their countenance.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1239

 

   I am afraid all the examples I have given up to now will seem merely

commonplace.  But  after  all  it  can  only  suit  my  aim  if  I  come  upon

things that are familiar to everyone and that everyone understands in

the same way, for my whole purpose is to collect everyday material

and turn it to scientific use. I fail to see why the wisdom which is the

precipitate  of  men’s  common  experience  of  life  should  be  refused

inclusion among the acquisitions of science. The essential character

of scientific work derives not from the special nature of its objects of

study  but  from  its  stricter  method  of  establishing  the  facts  and  its

search for far-reaching correlations.

   Where intentions of some importance are concerned, we have found

in general that they are forgotten when obscure motives rise against

them. In the case of rather less important intentions we can recognize

a second mechanism of forgetting: a counter-will is transferred to the

intention from some other topic, after an external association has been

formed between the other topic and the content of the intention. Here

is an example. I set store by high-quality blotting paper and I decided

one day to buy a fresh supply that afternoon in the course of my walk

to the Inner Town. But I forgot for four days running, till I asked myself

what reason I had for the omission. It was easy to find after I had

recalled  that  though  I  normally write  ‘Löschpapier’  I  usually say

‘Fliesspapier’. ‘Fliess’ is the name of a friend in Berlin who had on the

days  in  question  given  me  occasion  for  a  worrying  and  anxious

thought.  I  could  not  rid  myself  of  this  thought,  but  the  defensive

tendency (cf. above, p. 1230) manifested itself by transferring itself, by

means  of  the  verbal  similarity,  to  the  indifferent  intention  which  on

account of its indifference offered little resistance. 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1240

 

   Direct counter-will and more remote motivation are found together in

the following example of dilatoriness. I had written a short pamphlet

On  Dreams  (1901a),  summarizing  the  subject-matter  of  my

Interpretation of Dreams, for the series Grenzfragen des Nerven- und

Seelenlebens. Bergmann of Wiesbaden had sent me the proofs, and

had asked for them back by return of post, as the book was to be

issued before Christmas. I corrected the proofs the same night and

placed them on my desk so as to take them with me next morning. In

the morning I forgot about them, and only remembered them in the

afternoon when I saw the wrapper on my desk. In the same way I

forgot  the  proofs  that  afternoon,  that  evening  and  the  following

morning, till I pulled myself together and took them to a letter-box on

the afternoon of the second day, wondering what could be the reason

for my procrastination. It was obvious that I did not want to send them

off, but I could not discover why. However, in the course of the same

walk  I  called  in  at  my  publisher’s  in  Vienna  -  the  firm  that  had

published  my Interpretation  of  Dreams,  I  placed  an  order  for

something  and  then  said,  as  if  impelled  by  a  sudden  thought:  ‘I

suppose you know I’ve written the dream-book over again?’ - ‘Oh, you

can’t mean that!’ he said. ‘Don’t be alarmed’, I replied; ‘it’s only a short

essay for the Löwenfeld-Kurella series.’ But he was still not satisfied;

he was worried that the essay would interfere with the sales of the

book. I disagreed with him and finally asked: ‘If I’d come to you before,

would you have forbidden my publishing it?’ - ‘No, I certainly wouldn’t.’

Personally  I  believe  I  acted  quite  within  my  rights  and  did  nothing

contrary  to  common  practice;  nevertheless  it  seems  certain  that  a

misgiving similar to that expressed by the publisher was the motive for

my delay in sending back the proofs. This misgiving goes back to an

earlier occasion, on which a different publisher raised difficulties when

it seemed unavoidable for me to introduce unaltered a few pages from

are earlier work of mine on children’s palsies published by another

firm,  into  my  monograph  on  the  same  subject  in  Nothnagel’sHandbuch. But in this case, as well, the reproach was not justified; this

time, too, I had loyally informed my first publisher (the same one who

published The Interpretation of Dreams) of my intention. However, if

this chain of memories is followed back still further, it brings to light an

even earlier occasion involving a translation from the French, in which

I really did infringe the rights of property that apply to publications. I

added notes to the text which I translated, without asking the author’s

permission,  and  some  years  later  had  reason  to  suspect  that  the

author was displeased with my arbitrary action.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1241

 

   There is a proverb which reveals the popular knowledge that the

forgetting of intentions is not accidental: ‘If one forgets to do a thing

once, one will forget to do it many times more.’

   Indeed, sometimes we cannot avoid an impression that everything

that  can  be  said  about  forgetting  and  about  parapraxes  is  already

familiar and self-evident to everyone. It is sufficiently surprising that it

is nevertheless necessary to present to consciousness things that are

so well-known. How often have I heard people say: ‘Don’t ask me to

do that, I’m certain to forget it!’ There is surely nothing mystical, then,

if this prophecy is subsequently fulfilled. A person who talks in this

way senses an intention not to carry out the request, and is merely

refusing to admit it to himself.

   Much light is thrown, moreover, on the forgetting of intentions by

what  may  be  called  ‘the  forming  of  spurious  intentions’.  I  once

promised a young author that I would write a review of his short work;

but because of internal resistances, which I knew about, I put off doing

so, till one day I yielded to pressure from him and promised it would

be done that same evening. I really had seriously meant to do it then,

but I had forgotten that I had set the evening aside for preparing a

specialist report that could not be deferred. After this had shown me

that my intention had been spurious, I gave up the struggle against my

resistances and refused the author’s request.

                     The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1242

 

                                    CHAPTER VIII

 

                                BUNGLED ACTIONS

 

I will quote another passage from the work by Meringer and Mayer

(1895, 98) which I have already mentioned:

   ‘Slips of the tongue are not without their parallels. They correspond

to the slips which often occur in other human activities and which are

known by the somewhat foolish name of "oversights".’

   Thus I am by no means the first to surmise that there is sense and

purpose behind the minor functional disturbances in the daily life of

healthy people.¹

      If  slips  in  speaking  -  which  is  clearly  a  motor  function  -  can  be

thought of in this way, it is a short step to extend the same expectation

to  mistakes  in  our  other  motor  activities.  I  have  here  formed  two

groups  of  cases.  I  use  the  term  ‘bungled  actions’  [‘Vergreifen’]  to

describe all the cases in which a wrong result - i.e. a deviation from

what was intended - seems to be the essential element. The others, in

which it is rather the whole action which seems to be inappropriate, I

call ‘symptomatic and chance actions’. But no sharp line can be drawn

between  them,  and  we  are  indeed  forced  to  conclude  that  all  the

divisions  made  in  this  study  have  no  significance  other  than  a

descriptive  one  and  run  counter  to  the  inner  unity  in  this  field  of

phenomena.  It  is  clear  that  the  psychological  understanding  of

‘bungled actions’ will not be conspicuously helped if we class them

under the heading of ‘ataxia’ or, in particular, of ‘cortical ataxia’. Let us

rather  try  to  trace  the  individual  examples  back  to  their  particular

determinants. For this purpose I shall once more make use of self-

observations,  though  in  my  case  the  occasions  for  these  are  not

particularly frequent.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1910:] A second publication by Meringer has later shown me how great

an injustice I did to that author when I credited him with any such understanding.
                     The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1243

 

 

   (a) In former years I visited patients in their homes more frequently

than I do at present; and on numerous occasions when I was at the

front door, instead of knocking or ringing the bell, I pulled my own

latch  key  out  of  my  pocket,  only  to  thrust  it  back  again  in  some

confusion.  When  I  consider  the  patients  at  whose  houses  this

happened, I am forced to think that the parapraxis - taking out my key

instead of ringing the bell - was in the nature of a tribute to the house

where I made the mistake. It was equivalent to the thought ‘Here I feel

I am at home’, for it only occurred at places where I had taken a liking

to the patient. (Of course I never ring my own door bell.)

   Thus the parapraxis was a symbolic representation of a thought

which was not after all really intended to be accepted seriously and

consciously; for a nerve specialist is in fact well aware that his patients

remain attached to him only so long as they expect to be benefited by

him, and that he in turn allows himself to feel an excessively warm

interest in them only with a view to giving them psychical help.

      Numerous  self-observations  made  by  other  people  show  that

handling  a  key  in  this  significantly  incorrect  way  is  certainly  not  a

peculiarity of mine.

   Maeder (1906) describes what is an almost identical repetition of my

experiences: ‘II est arrivé à chacun de sortir son trousseau, en arrivant

à la porte d’un ami particulièrement cher, de se surprendre pour ainsi

dire, en train d’ouvrir avec sa clé comme chez soi. C’est un retard,

puisqu’il faut sonner malgré tout, mais c’est une preuve qu’on se sent

- ou qu’on voudrait se sentir - comme chez soi, auprès de cet ami.’¹

 

    ¹ [‘Everyone has had the experience of taking out his bunch of keys on reaching the door

of a particularly dear friend, of catching himself, as it were, in the act of opening it with his key
just as if he was at home. This causes a delay, as he has to ring the bell in the long run, but it
is a sign that he feels - or would like to feel - at home with this friend.’]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1244

       Jones  (1911b,  509):  ‘The  use  of  keys  is  a  fertile  source  of

occurrences of this kind, of which two examples may be given. If I am

disturbed in the midst of some engrossing work at home by having to

go to the hospital to carry out some routine work, I am very apt to find

myself trying to open the door of my laboratory there with the key of

my desk at home, although the two keys are quite unlike each other.

The mistake unconsciously demonstrates where I would rather be at

the moment.

   ‘Some years ago I was acting in a subordinate position at a certain

institution,  the  front  door  of  which  was  kept  locked,  so  that  it  was

necessary to ring for admission. On several occasions I found myself

making serious attempts to open the door with my house key. Each

one of the permanent visiting staff, to which I aspired to be a member,

was provided with a key, to avoid the trouble of having to wait at the

door.  My  mistakes  thus  expressed  my  desire  to  be  on  a  similar

footing, and to be quite "at home" there.’

   Dr. Hanns Sachs reports a similar experience: ‘I always have two

keys on me, one for the door of my office and one for my flat. They are

not at all easily confused with each other, for the office key is at least

three times as big as the flat key. Moreover, I carry the former in my

trouser pocket and the latter in my waistcoat pocket. Nevertheless it

often happened that I noticed as I stood at the door that I had got out

the  wrong  key  on  the  stairs.  I  determined  to  make  a  statistical

experiment. Since I stood in front of both the doors every day in more

or less the same emotional state, the confusion between the two keys

was bound to show a regular tendency, if, indeed, it was true that it

had  some  psychical  determinant.  My  observation  of  later  instances

then showed that I quite regularly took out my flat key at the door of

the office, whereas the opposite happened only once. I came home

tired,  knowing  that  a  guest  would  be  waiting  for  me  there.  When  I

reached the door I made an attempt to unlock it with the office key -

which was of course much too large.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1245

  

   (b) There is a house where twice every day for six years, at regular

hours, I used to wait to be let in outside a door on the second floor.

During this long period it has happened to me on two occasions, with

a short interval between them, that I have gone a floor too high - i.e. I

have  ‘climbed  too  high’.¹  On  the  first  occasion  I  was  enjoying  an

ambitious day-dream in which I was ‘climbing ever higher and higher’.

On this occasion I even failed to hear that the door in question had

opened as I put my foot on the first step of the third flight. On the other

occasion, I again went too far while I was deep in thought; when I

realized it, I turned back and tried to catch hold of the phantasy in

which  I  had  been  absorbed.  I  found  that  I  was  irritated  by  a

(phantasied) criticism of my writings in which I was reproached with

always  ‘going  too  far’.  This  I  had  now  replaced  by  the  not  very

respectful expression ‘climbing too high’.

 

   (c) For many years a reflex hammer and a tuning fork have been

lying side by side on my writing table. One day I left in a hurry at the

end of my consulting hour as I wanted to catch a particular suburban

train; and in broad daylight I put the tuning fork in my coat pocket

instead  of  the  hammer.  The  weight  of  the  object  pulling  down  my

pocket drew my attention to my mistake. Anyone who is not in the

habit of giving consideration to such minor occurrences will doubtless

explain  and  excuse  the  mistake  by  pointing  to  the  haste  of  the

moment. Nevertheless I preferred to ask myself the question why it

actually was that I took the tuning fork instead of the hammer. My

haste could just as well have been a motive for picking up the right

object so as not to have to waste time in correcting my mistake.

   ‘Who was the last person to take hold of the tuning fork?’ was the

question that sprang to my mind at that point. It was an imbecile child,

whom I had been testing some days before for his attention to sensory

impressions; and he had been so fascinated by the tuning fork that I

had had some difficulty in tearing it away from him. Could the meaning

be, then, that I was an imbecile? It certainly seemed so, for my first

association to ‘hammer’ was ‘Chamer’ (Hebrew for ‘ass’).

 

   ¹ [The German ‘versteigen’ would, on the analogy of ‘verlesen’, ‘verschreiben’, etc., mean‘to  mis-climb’;  but  its  normal  meaning  is  ‘to  climb  too  high’  or,  figuratively,  ‘to  over-reach
oneself’.]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1246

 

   But why this abusive language? At this point we must look into the

situation. I was hurrying to a consultation at a place on the Western

railway line, to visit a patient who, according to the anamnesis I had

received by letter, had fallen from a balcony some months earlier and

had  since  then  been  unable  to  walk.  The  doctor  who  called  me  in

wrote that he was nevertheless uncertain whether it was a case of

spinal injury or of a traumatic neurosis - hysteria. That was what I was

now to decide. It would therefore be advisable for me to be particularly

wary in the delicate task of making a differential diagnosis. As it is, my

colleagues are of the opinion that I make a diagnosis of hysteria far

too carelessly where graver things are in question. But so far this did

not justify the abusive language. Why, of course! it now occurred to

me that the little railway station was at the same place at which some

years before I had seen a young man who had not been able to walk

properly after an emotional experience. At the time I made a diagnosis

of  hysteria  and  I  subsequently  took  the  patient  on  for  psychical

treatment. It then turned out that though my diagnosis had not, it is

true, been incorrect, it had not been correct either. A whole number of

the  patient’s  symptoms  had  been  hysterical,  and  they  rapidly

disappeared in the course of treatment. But behind these a remnant

now  became  visible  which  was  inaccessible  to  my  therapy;  this

remnant could only be accounted for by multiple sclerosis. It was easy

for  those  who  saw  the  patient  after  me  to  recognize  the  organic

affection. I could hardly have behaved otherwise or formed a different

judgement, yet the impression left was that a grave error had been

made; the promise of a cure which I had given him could naturally not

be kept.

   The error of picking up the tuning fork instead of the hammer could

thus  be  translated  into  words  as  follows;  ‘You  idiot!  you  ass!  Pull

yourself together this time, and see that you don’t diagnose hysteria

again where there’s an incurable illness, as you did years ago with thepoor man from that same place!’ And fortunately for this little analysis,

if not fortunately for my mood, the same man, suffering from severe

spastic paralysis, had visited me during my consulting hour a few days

before, and a day after the imbecile child.

   It will be observed that this time it was the voice of self-criticism

which was making itself heard in the bungled action. A bungled action

is quite specially suitable for use in this way as a self-reproach: the

present  mistake  seeks  to  represent  the  mistake  that  has  been

committed elsewhere.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1247

 

 

   (d) Bungled actions can, of course, also serve a whole number of

other obscure purposes. Here is a first example. It is very rare for me

to break anything. I am not particularly dextrous but a result of the

anatomical integrity of my nerve-muscle apparatus is that there are

clearly no grounds for my making clumsy movements of this kind, with

their unwelcome consequences. I cannot therefore recall any object in

my house that I have ever broken. Shortage of space in my study has

often forced me to handle a number of pottery and stone antiquities (of

which I have a small collection) in the most uncomfortable positions,

so  that  onlookers  have  expressed  anxiety  that  I  should  knock

something  down  and  break  it.  That  however  has  never  happened.

Why then did I once dash the marble cover of my plain inkpot to the

ground so that it broke?

   My inkstand is made out of a flat piece of Untersberg marble which

is hollowed out to receive the glass inkpot; and the inkpot has a cover

with a knob made of the same stone. Behind this inkstand there is a

ring of bronze statuettes and terra cotta figures. I sat down at the desk

to write, and then moved the hand that was holding the pen-holder

forward  in  a  remarkably  clumsy  way,  sweeping  on  to  the  floor  the

inkpot cover which was lying on the desk at the time.

   The explanation was not hard to find. Some hours before, my sister

had been in the room to inspect some new acquisitions. She admiredthem very much, and then remarked: ‘Your writing table looks really

attractive now; only the inkstand doesn’t match. You must get a nicer

one.’ I went out with my sister and did not return for some hours. But

when I did I carried out, so it seems, the execution of the condemned

inkstand.  Did  I  perhaps  conclude  from  my  sister’s  remark  that  she

intended to make me a present of a nicer inkstand on the next festive

occasion, and did I smash the unlovely old one so as to force her to

carry out the intention she had hinted at? If that is so, my sweeping

movement was only apparently clumsy; in reality it was exceedingly

adroit and well-directed, and understood how to avoid damaging any

of the more precious objects that stood around.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1248

 

   It is in fact my belief that we must accept this judgement for a whole

series of seemingly accidental clumsy movements. It is true that they

make a show of something violent and sweeping, like a spastic-atactic

movement, but they prove to be governed by an intention and achieve

their aim with a certainty which cannot in general be credited to our

conscious voluntary movements. Moreover they have both features -

their  violence  and  their  unerring  aim  -  in  common  with  the  motor

manifestations  of  the  hysterical  neurosis,  and  partly,  too,  with  the

motor performances of somnambulism. This fact indicates that both in

these  cases  and  in  the  movements  under  consideration  the  same

unknown modification of the innervatory process is present.

   Another self-observation, reported by Frau Lou Andreas-Salomé,

may give a convincing demonstration of how obstinate persistence in

an act of ‘clumsiness’ serves unavowed purposes in a far from clumsy

way:

   ‘Just at the time when milk had become scarce and expensive I

found that I let it boil over time and time again, to my constant horror

and vexation. My efforts to get the better of this were unsuccessful,

though I cannot by any means say that on other occasions I have

proved absent minded or inattentive. I should have had more reason

to be so after the death of my dear white terrier (who deserved hisname of "Druzhok" - the Russian for "Friend" - as much as any human

being ever did). But - lo and behold! - never since his death has even

a  drop  of  milk  boiled  over.  My  first  thought  about  this  ran:  "That’s

lucky, for the milk spilt over on to the hearth or floor wouldn’t even be

of any use!" And in the same moment I saw my "Friend" before my

eyes, sitting eagerly watching the cooking, his head cocked a little to

one side, his tail wagging expectantly, waiting in trustful confidence for

the splendid mishap that was about to occur. And now everything was

clear to me, and I realized too that I had been even more fond of him

than I myself was aware.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1249

 

      In  the  last  few  years,  during  which  I  have  been  collecting  such

observations,  I  have  had  a  few  more  experiences  of  smashing  or

breaking objects of some value, but the investigation of these cases

has  convinced  me  that  they  were  never  the  result  of  chance  or  of

unintentional clumsiness on my part. One morning, for example, when

I was passing through a room in my dressing-gown with straw slippers

on  my  feet,  I  yielded  to  a  sudden  impulse  and  hurled  one  of  my

slippers  from  my  foot  at  the  wall,  causing  a  beautiful  little  marble

Venus to fall down from its bracket. As it broke into pieces, I quoted

quite unmoved these lines from Busch:

 

                                                                ‘Ach! die Venus ist perdü -

                                                                Klickeradoms! - von Medici!’¹

 

   This wild conduct and my calm acceptance of the damage are to be

explained in terms of the situation at the time. One of my family was

gravely ill, and secretly I had already given up hope of her recovery.

That morning I had learned that there had been a great improvement,

and I know I had said to myself: ‘So she’s going to live after all!’ My

attack  of  destructive  fury  served  therefore  to  express  a  feeling  of

gratitude to fate and allowed me to perform a ‘sacrificial act’ - rather as

if I had made a vow to sacrifice something or other as a thank-offering

if she recovered her health! The choice of the Venus of Medici for thissacrifice  was  clearly  only  a  gallant  act  of  homage  towards  the

convalescent; but even now it is a mystery to me how I made up my

mind so quickly, aimed so accurately and avoided hitting anything else

among the objects so close to it.

   Another case of breaking something, for which I once again made

use  of  a  pen-holder  that  slipped  from  my  hand,  likewise  had  the

significance of a sacrifice; but on this occasion it took the form of a

propitiatory sacrifice to avert evil. I had once seen fit to reproach a

loyal and deserving friend on no other grounds than the interpretation I

placed on certain indications coming from his unconscious. He was

offended  and  wrote  me  a  letter  asking  me  not  to  treat  my  friends

psycho-analytically. I had to admit he was in the right, and wrote him a

reply to pacify him. While I was writing this letter I had in front of me

my latest acquisition, a handsome glazed Egyptian figure. I broke it in

the way I have described, and then immediately realized that I had

caused this mischief in order to avert a greater one. Luckily it was

possible to cement both of them together - the friendship as well as

the figure - so that the break would not be noticed.

 

   ¹ [‘Oh! the Venus! Lost is she!

       Klickeradoms! of Medici!’]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1250

 

   A third breakage was connected with less serious matters; it was

only the disguised ‘execution’ - to borrow an expression from Vischer’s

Auch Einer  -  of  an  object  which  no  longer  enjoyed  my  favour.  For

some time I used to carry a stick with a silver handle. On one occasion

the thin metal got damaged, through no fault of mine, and was badly

repaired.  Soon  after  the  stick  came  back,  I  used  the  handle  in  a

mischievous attempt to catch one of my children by the leg - with the

natural result that it broke, and I was thus rid of it.

   The equanimity with which we accept the resulting damage in all

these  cases  can  no  doubt  be  taken  as  evidence  that  there  is  an

unconscious  purpose  behind  the  performance  of  these  particular

actions.   In investigating the reasons for the occurrence of even so trivial a

parapraxis as the breaking of an object, one is liable to come across

connections which, besides relating to a person’s present situation,

lead deep into his prehistory. The following analysis by Jekels (1913)

may serve as an example:

   ‘A doctor had in his possession an earthenware flower vase which,

though  not  valuable,  was  of  great  beauty.  It  was  among  the  many

presents - including objects of value - which had been sent to him in

the past by a (married) woman patient. When a psychosis became

manifest in her, he restored all the presents to her relatives - except

for this far less expensive vase, with which he could not bear to part,

ostensibly because it was so beautiful. But this embezzlement cost a

man of his scrupulousness a considerable internal struggle. He was

fully  aware  of  the  impropriety  of  his  action,  and  only  managed  to

overcome his pangs of conscience by telling himself that the vase was

not in fact of any real value, that it was too awkward to pack, etc. -

Some months later he was on the point of getting a lawyer to claim

and recover the arrears (which were in dispute) of the fees for the

treatment of this same patient. Once again the self-reproaches made

their appearance; and he suffered some momentary anxiety in case

the relatives discovered what could be called his embezzlement and

brought it against him during the legal proceedings. For a while indeed

the  first  factor  (his  self-reproaches)  was  so  strong  that  he  actually

thought of renouncing all claims on a sum of perhaps a hundred times

the value of the vase - a compensation, as it were, for the object he

had appropriated. However, he at once got the better of the notion and

set it aside as absurd.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1251

 

   ‘While he was still in this mood he happened to be putting some

fresh  water  in  the  vase;  and  despite  the  extreme  infrequency  with

which he broke anything and the good control that he had over his

muscular apparatus, he made an extraordinarily "clumsy" movement -

one that was not in the least organically related to the action he wascarrying out - which knocked the vase off the table, so that it broke

into some five or six largish pieces. What is more, this was after he

had made up his mind on the previous evening, though not without

considerable hesitation, to put precisely this vase, filled with flowers,

on the dining-room table before his guests. He had remembered it

only just before it got broken, had noticed with anxiety that it was not

in his living-room and had himself brought it in from the other room.

After  his  first  moments  of  dismay  he  picked  up  the  pieces  and  by

putting them together was just deciding that it would still be possible to

make an almost complete repair of the vase, when the two or three

larger fragments slipped from his hand; they broke into a thousand

splinters, and with that vanished all hope for the vase.

   ‘There is no doubt that this parapraxis had the current purpose of

assisting the doctor in his law-suit, by getting rid of something which

he had kept back and which to some extent prevented his claiming

what had been kept back from him.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1252

 

   ‘But apart from this direct determinant, every psycho-analyst will see

in  the  parapraxis  a  further  and  much  deeper  and  more  important

symbolic  determinant;  for  a  vase  is  an  unmistakable  symbol  of  a

woman.

   ‘The hero of this little story had lost his young, beautiful and dearly-

loved wife in a tragic manner. He fell ill of a neurosis whose main

theme was that he was to blame for the misfortune ("he had broken a

lovely vase"). Moreover, he had no further relations with women and

took  a  dislike  to  marriage  and  lasting  love-relationships,  which

unconsciously he thought of as being unfaithful to his dead wife but

which  he  consciously  rationalized  in  the  idea  that  he  brought

misfortune to women, that a woman might kill herself on his account,

etc. (Hence his natural reluctance to keep the vase permanently!)

   ‘In view of the strength of his libido it is therefore not surprising that

the  most  adequate  relationships  appeared  to  him  to  be  those  -

transient  from  their  very  nature  -  with  married  women  (hence  hiskeeping back of another person’s vase).

   ‘This symbolism is neatly confirmed by the two following factors.

Because of his neurosis he entered psycho-analytic treatment. In the

course of the session in which he gave an account of breaking the

"earthenware" vase, he happened much later to be talking once more

about  his  relations  with  women  and  said  he  thought  he  was  quite

unreasonably hard to please; thus for example he required women to

have "unearthly beauty". This is surely a very clear indication that he

was still dependent on his (dead, i. e., unearthly) wife and wanted to

have nothing to do with "earthly beauty"; hence the breaking of the

earthenware ("earthly") vase.

      ‘And  at  the  exact  time  when  in  the  transference  he  formed  a

phantasy of marrying his physician’s daughter, he made him a present

of a vase, as though to drop a hint of the sort of return present he

would like to have.

      ‘Probably  the  symbolic  meaning  of  the  parapraxis  admits  of  a

number of further variations - for example, his not wanting to fill the

vase,  etc.  What  strikes  me,  however,  as  more  interesting  is  the

consideration that the presence of several, at the least of two, motives

(which probably operated separately out of the preconscious and the

unconscious)  is  reflected  in  the  doubling  of  the  parapraxis  -  his

knocking over the vase and then letting it fall from his hands.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1253

 

 

   (e) Dropping, knocking over and breaking objects are acts which

seem to be used very often to express unconscious trains of thought,

as analysis can occasionally demonstrate, but as may more frequently

be  guessed  from  the  superstitious  or  facetious  interpretations

popularly  connected  with  them.  The  interpretations  attached  to  salt

being spilt, a wine-glass being knocked over, a dropped knife sticking

in the ground, etc., are well known. I shall not discuss till later the

question  of  what  claims  such  superstitious  interpretations  have  to

being taken seriously. Here I need only remark that individual clumsyactions  do  not  by  any  means  always  have  the  same  meaning,  but

serve as a method of representing one purpose or another according

to circumstances.

   Recently we passed through a period in my house during which an

unusually  large  amount  of  glass  and  china  crockery  was  broken;  I

myself  was  responsible  for  some  of  the  damage.  But  the  little

psychical  epidemic  could  easily  be  explained:  these  were  the  days

before  my  eldest  daughter’s  wedding.  On  such  festive  occasions  it

used to be the custom deliberately to break some utensil and at the

same time utter a phrase to bring good luck. This custom may have

the  significance  of  a  sacrifice  and  it  may  have  another  symbolic

meaning as well.

   When servants drop fragile articles and so destroy them, our first

thought  is  certainly  not  of  a  psychological  explanation,  yet  it  is  not

unlikely  that  here,  too,  obscure  motives  play  their  part.  Nothing  is

more foreign to uneducated people than an appreciation of art and

works of art. Our servants are dominated by a mute hostility towards

the manifestations of art, especially when the objects (whose value

they do not understand) become a source of work for them. On the

other hand people of the same education and origin often show great

dexterity  and  reliability  in  handling  delicate  objects  in  scientific

institutions,  once  they  have  begun  to  identify  themselves  with  their

chief and to consider themselves an essential part of the staff.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1254

 

   I insert here a communication from a young technician which gives

us some insight into the mechanism of a case of material damage:

      ‘Some  time  ago  I  worked  with  several  fellow-students  in  the

laboratory  of  the  technical  college  on  a  series  of  complicated

experiments in elasticity, a piece of work which we had undertaken

voluntarily but which was beginning to take up more time than we had

expected. One day as I returned to the laboratory with my friend F., he

remarked how annoying it was to him to lose so much time on that

particular day as he had so much else to do at home. I could not helpagreeing with him and added half jokingly, referring to an incident the

week before: "Let us hope that the machine will go wrong again so

that we can stop work and go home early." - In arranging the work it

happened that F. was given the regulation of the valve of the press;

that is to say, he was, by cautiously opening the valve, to let the fluid

under pressure flow slowly out of the accumulator into the cylinder of

the hydraulic press. The man conducting the experiment stood by the

manometer  and  when  the  right  pressure  was  reached  called  out  a

loud "stop!". At the word of command F. seized the valve and turned it

with all his might - to the left! (All valves without exception are closed

by  being  turned  to  the  right.)  This  caused  the  full  pressure  of  the

accumulator to come suddenly on to the press, a strain for which the

connecting-pipes are not designed, so that one of them immediately

burst - quite a harmless accident to the machine, but enough to oblige

us to suspend work for the day and go home. - It is characteristic, by

the way, that when we were discussing the affair some time later my

friend F. had no recollection whatever of my remark, which I recalled

with certainty.’

      Similarly,  falling,  stumbling  and  slipping  need  not  always  be

interpreted  as  purely  accidental  miscarriages  of  motor  actions.  The

double  meanings  that  language  attaches  to  these  expressions  are

enough  to  indicate  the  kind  of  phantasies  involved,  which  can  be

represented by such losses of bodily equilibrium. I can recall a number

of fairly mild nervous illnesses in women and girls which set in after a

fall  not  accompanied  by  any  injury,  and  which  were  taken  to  be

traumatic hysterias resulting from the shock of the fall. Even at that

time I had an impression that these events were differently connected

and that the fall was already a product of the neurosis and expressed

the same unconscious phantasies with a sexual content, which could

be assumed to be the forces operating behind the symptoms. Is not

the same thing meant by a proverb which runs: ‘When a girl falls she

falls on her back’?

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1255

    We can also count as bungled actions cases of giving a beggar a

gold piece instead of a copper or small silver coin. The explanation of

such mistakes is easy. They are sacrificial acts designed to appease

fate, to avert harm, and so on. If a devoted mother or aunt, directly

before going for a walk in the course of which she displays unwilling

generosity  of  this  kind,  is  heard  to  express  concern  over  a  child’s

health,  we  can  have  no  more  doubts  about  the  meaning  of  the

apparently disagreeable accident. In this way our parapraxes make it

possible for us to practise all those pious and superstitious customs

that must shun the light of consciousness owing to opposition from our

reason, which has now grown sceptical.

 

   (f) There is no sphere in which the view that accidental actions are

really intentional will command a more ready belief than that of sexual

activity,  where  the  border  line  between  the  two  possibilities  seems

really to be a faint one. A good example from my own experience of a

few years ago shows how an apparently clumsy movement can be

most  cunningly  used  for  sexual  purposes.  In  the  house  of  some

friends I met a young girl who was staying there as a guest and who

aroused a feeling of pleasure in me which I had long thought was

extinct. As a result I was in a jovial, talkative and obliging mood. At the

time  I  also  endeavoured  to  discover  how  this  came  about;  a  year

before, the same girl had made no impression on me. As the girl’s

uncle, a very old gentleman, entered the room, we both jumped to our

feet to bring him a chair that was standing in the corner. She was

nimbler than I was and, I think, nearer to the object; so she took hold

of the chair first and carried it in front of her with its back towards her,

gripping the sides of the seat with both hands. As I got there later, but

still stuck to my intention of carrying the chair, I suddenly found myself

standing directly behind her, and throwing my arms round her from

behind;  and  for  a  moment  my  hands  met  in  front  of  her  waist.  I

naturally got out of the situation as rapidly as it had arisen. Nor does it

seem to have struck anyone how dextrously I had taken advantage of

this clumsy movement.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life                                                                                      1256

 

   Occasionally, too, I have had to tell myself that the irritating and

clumsy process of dodging someone in the street, when for several

seconds one steps first to one side and then to the other, but always

to  the  same  side  as  the  other  person,  till  finally  one  comes  to  a

standstill face to face with him (or her) - this ‘getting in someone’s

way’,  I  have  had  to  tell  myself,  is  once  more  a  repetition  of  an

improper and provocative piece of behaviour from earlier times and,

behind a mask of clumsiness, pursues sexual aims. I know from my

psycho-analyses of neurotics that what is described as the naïveté of

young  people  and  children  is  frequently  only  a  mask  of  this  sort,

employed so that they may be able to say or do something improper

without feeling embarrassed.

      Wilhelm  Stekel  has  reported  very  similar  self-observations.  ‘I

entered a house and offered my right hand to my hostess. In a most

curious way I contrived in doing so to undo the bow that held her loose

morning-gown  together.  I  was  conscious  of  no  dishonourable

intention; yet I carried out this clumsy movement with the dexterity of a

conjurer.’

   I have already been able again and again to produce evidence that

creative  writers  think  of  parapraxes  as  having  a  meaning  and  a

motive, just as I am arguing here. We shall not be surprised, therefore,

to see from a fresh example how a writer invests a clumsy movement

with significance, too, and makes it foreshadow later events.

   Here is a passage from Theodor Fontane’s novel L’Adultera ‘      

Melanie jumped up and threw one of the large balls to her husband as

though in greeting. But her aim was not straight, the ball flew to one

side and Rubehn caught it.’ On the return from the outing that led to

this little episode a conversation between Melanie and Rubehn takes

place  which  reveals  the  first  signs  of  a  budding  affection.  This

affection  blossoms  into  passion,  so  that  Melanie  finally  leaves  her

husband  and  gives  herself  entirely  to  the  man  she  loves.

(Communicated by H. Sachs.)

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1257 

 

   (g) The effects produced by the parapraxes of normal people are as

a  rule  of  the  most  harmless  kind.  Precisely  for  this  reason  it  is  an

especially  interesting  question  whether  mistakes  of  considerable

importance  which  may  be  followed  by  serious  consequences  -  for

example, mistakes made by a doctor or a chemist -(are in any way

open to the approach presented here.

   As I very rarely find myself undertaking medical treatment, I can

report only one example from my personal experience of a bungled

action of a medical kind. There is a very old lady whom I have been

visiting twice a day for some years. On my morning visit my medical

services are limited to two actions. I put a few drops of eye-lotion into

her eye and give her a morphine injection. Two bottles are always

prepared for me: a blue one with the collyrium and a white one with

the morphine solution. During the two operations my thoughts are no

doubt  usually  busy  with  something  else;  by  now  I  have  performed

them so often that my attention behaves as if it were at liberty. One

morning I noticed that the automaton had worked wrong. I had put the

dropper  into  the  white  bottle  instead  of  the  blue  one  and  had  put

morphine into the eye instead of collyrium. I was greatly frightened

and then reassured myself by reflecting that a few drops of a two per

cent  solution  of  morphine  could  not  do  any  harm  even  in  the

conjunctival sac. The feeling of fright must obviously have come from

another source.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1258

 

   In attempting to analyse this small mistake I first thought of the

phrase ‘sich an der Alten vergreifen’,¹ which provided a short cut to

the solution. I was under the influence of a dream which had been told

me by a young man the previous evening and the content of which

could  only  point  to  sexual  intercourse  with  his  own  mother.²  The

strange  fact  that  the  legend  finds  nothing  objectionable  in  Queen

Jocasta’s age seemed to me to fit in well with the conclusion that inbeing in love with one’s own mother one is never concerned with her

as she is in the present but with her youthful mnemic image carried

over from one’s childhood. Such incongruities always appear when a

phantasy that fluctuates between two periods is made conscious and

so  becomes  definitely  attached  to  one  of  the  two  periods.  While

absorbed in thoughts of this kind I came to my patient, who is over

ninety, and I must have been on the way to grasping the universal

human application of the Oedipus myth as correlated with the Fate

which is revealed in the oracles; for at that point I did violence to or

committed  a  blunder  on  ‘the  old  woman’.  Here  again  the  bungled

action  was  a  harmless  one;  of  the  two  possible  errors,  using  the

morphine solution for the eye or the eye lotion for the injection, I had

chosen by far the more harmless one. This still leaves the question

open  of  whether  we  may  admit  the  possibility  of  an  unconscious

intention in mistakes that can cause serious harm, in the same way as

in the cases which I have discussed.

   Here then my material leaves me in the lurch, as might be expected,

and I have to fall back on conjectures and inferences. It is well known

that in the severer cases of psychoneurosis instances of self-injury are

occasionally found as symptoms and that in such cases suicide can

never be ruled out as a possible outcome of the psychical conflict. I

have now learnt and can prove from convincing examples that many

apparently accidental injuries that happen to such patients are really

instances  of  self-injury.  What  happens  is  that  an  impulse  to  self-

punishment,  which  is  constantly  on  the  watch  and  which  normally

finds expression in self-reproach or contributes to the formation of a

symptom,  takes  ingenious  advantage  of  an  external  situation  that

chance happens to offer, or lends assistance to that situation until the

desired injurious effect is brought about. Such occurrences are by no

means  uncommon  in  cases  even  of  moderate  severity,  and  they

betray the part which the unconscious intention plays by a number of

special  features  -  e.  g  by  the  striking  composure  that  the  patients

retain in what is supposed to be an accident.³

 

   ¹ [‘To do violence to the old woman.’ The German word ‘vergreifen’ means both ‘to make a

blunder’ and ‘to commit an assault’.]

   ² The ‘Oedipus dream’, as I am in the habit of calling it, because it contains the key to the

understanding of the legend of King Oedipus. In the text of Sophocles a reference to such adream is put into Jocasta’s mouth. Cf. The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a), p. 739 ff..

   ³ In the present state of our civilization self-injury which does not have total self-destruction

as its aim has no other choice whatever than to hide itself behind something accidental or to
manifest  itself  by  imitating  the  onset  of  a  spontaneous  illness.  Formerly  self-injury  was  a
customary  sign  of  mourning;  at  other  periods  it  could  express  trends  towards  piety  and
renunciation of the world.
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1259

 

   Instead of a number of cases I will give a detailed report of only a

single example from my medical experience. A young married woman

broke her leg below the knee in a carriage accident, so that she was

bed-ridden  for  weeks;  what  was  striking  was  the  absence  of  any

expressions  of  pain  and  the  calmness  with  which  she  bore  her

misfortune. This accident introduced a long and severe neurotic illness

of which she was finally cured by psycho-analysis. In treating her I

learnt of the circumstances surrounding the accident and of certain

events that had preceded it. The young woman was staying with her

very jealous husband on the estate of a married sister, in company

with her numerous other sisters and brothers with their husbands and

wives. One evening in this intimate circle she showed off one of her

accomplishments: she gave an accurate performance of the can-can,

which  was  received  with  hearty  applause  by  her  relatives  but  with

scanty satisfaction by her husband, who afterwards whispered to her:

‘Carrying on like a tart again!’ The remark struck home - we will not

enquire whether it was only on account of the dancing display. She

spent a restless night. Next morning she felt a desire to go for a drive.

She  selected  the  horses  herself,  refusing  one  pair  and  asking  for

another. Her youngest sister wanted her baby and its nurse to go in

the carriage with her; my patient vigorously opposed this. During the

drive she showed signs of nerves; she warned the coachman that the

horses  were  growing  skittish,  and  when  the  restless  animals  were

really  causing  a  moment’s  difficulty  she  jumped  out  in  a  fright  and

broke  her  leg,  while  the  others  who  stayed  in  the  carriage  were

unharmed. Although after learning these details we can hardly remain

in  doubt  that  this  accident  was  really  contrived,  we  cannot  fail  to

admire the skill which forced chance to mete out a punishment thatfitted the crime so well. For it had now been made impossible for her

to dance the can-can for quite a long time.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1260

 

   As regards self-injuries of my own, there is little that I can report in

uneventful times; but in extraordinary circumstances I find that I am

not incapable of them. When a member of my family complains to me

of having bitten his tongue, pinched a finger, or the like, he does not

get the sympathy he hopes for, but instead the question: ‘Why did you

do that?’ I myself once gave my thumb a most painful pinch when a

youthful patient told me during the hour of treatment of his intention

(not of course to be taken seriously) of marrying my eldest daughter. I

knew that at the time she was lying critically ill in a sanatorium.

   One of my boys, whose lively temperament used to make it difficult

to nurse him when he was ill, had a fit of anger one day because he

was  ordered  to  spend  the  morning  in  bed,  and  threatened  to  kill

himself, a possibility that was familiar to him from the newspapers. In

the evening he showed me a swelling on one side of his chest which

he had got by bumping against a door-handle. To my ironical question

as to why he had done it and what he meant by it, the eleven-year-old

child answered as though it had suddenly dawned on him: ‘That was

my attempt at suicide that I threatened this morning.’ I do not think, by

the way, that my views on self-injury were accessible to my children at

the time.

   Anyone who believes in the occurrence of half-intentional self-injury

- if I may use a clumsy expression - will be prepared also to assume

that in addition to consciously intentional suicide there is such a thing

as  half-intentional  self-destruction  (self-destruction  with  an

unconscious intention), capable of making skilful use of a threat to life

and of disguising it as a chance mishap. There is no need to think

such self-destruction rare. For the trend to self-destruction is present

to a certain degree in very many more human beings than those in

whom  it  is  carried  out;  self-injuries  are  as  a  rule  a  compromise

between this instinct and the forces that are still working against it,and even where suicide actually results, the inclination to suicide will

have been present for a long time before in lesser strength or in the

form of an unconscious and suppressed trend.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1261

 

   Even a conscious intention of committing suicide chooses its time,

means  and  opportunity;  and  it  is  quite  in  keeping  with  this  that  an

unconscious intention should wait for a precipitating occasion which

can take over a part of the causation and, by engaging the subject’s

defensive forces, can liberate the intention from their pressure.¹ The

views I am putting forward here are far from being idle ones. I have

learned of more than one apparently chance mishap (on horseback or

in a carriage) the details of which justify a suspicion that suicide was

unconsciously allowed to come about. For example, an officer, riding

in a race with some fellow-officers, fell from his horse and was so

severely  injured  that  he  died  some  days  later.  His  behaviour  on

regaining consciousness was striking in some ways; and his previous

behaviour  had  been  even  more  remarkable.  He  had  been  deeply

depressed by the death of his beloved mother, had had fits of sobbing

in the company of his fellow officers, and to his trusted friends had

spoken of being weary of life. He had wanted to leave the service to

take part in a war in Africa which had not interested him previously;²

formerly a dashing rider, he now avoided riding whenever possible.

Finally,  before  the  race,  from  which  he  could  not  withdraw,  he

expressed gloomy forebodings; with the view that we hold in these

matters,  it  will  not  remain  a  surprise  to  us  that  these  forebodings

turned out to be justified. I shall be told that it is not to be wondered at

if a person in such a state of nervous depression cannot manage a

horse as well as on normal days. I quite agree; but the mechanism of

the motor inhibition produced by this state of ‘nerves’ should, I think,

be looked for in the intention of self-destruction that I am insisting on.

 

   ¹ After all, the case is no different from that of a sexual assault upon a woman, where the

man’s  attack  cannot  be  repelled  by  her  full  muscular  strength  because  a  portion  of  her
unconscious impulses meets the attack with encouragement. It is said, as we know, that asituation of this kind paralyses a woman’s strength; all we need do is to add the reasons for
this paralysis. To that extent the ingenious judgement delivered by Sancho Panza as governor
of his island is psychologically unjust (Don Quixote, Part 2, Chapter 45). A woman dragged a
man before the judge alleging he had robbed her of her honour by violence. In compensation
Sancho gave her a full purse of money which he took from the accused; but after the woman’s
departure he gave him permission to pursue her and snatch his purse back again from her.
The two returned struggling, the woman priding herself on the fact that the villain had not been
able  to  take  the  purse  from  her.  Thereupon  Sancho  declared:  ‘If  you  had  defended  your
honour with half the determination with which you have defended this purse, the man could
not have robbed you of it.’

   ² It is evident that conditions on a field of battle are such as to come to the help of a

conscious intention to commit suicide which nevertheless shuns the direct way. Compare the
words of the Swedish captain concerning the death of Max Piccolomini in Wallensteins Tod:
‘They say he wanted to die.’
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1262

 

   S. Ferenczi of Budapest has handed over to me for publication the

analysis  of  an  ostensibly  accidental  injury  by  shooting,  which  he

explains as an unconscious attempt at suicide. I can only declare my

agreement with his view of the matter:

   ‘J. Ad., twenty-two years old, a journeyman carpenter, consulted me

on  January  18,  1908.  He  wanted  to  find  out  from  me  whether  the

bullet  that  penetrated  his  left  temple  on  March  20,  1907  could  or

should  be  removed  by  operation.  Apart  from  occasional,  not  too

severe,  headaches  he  felt  perfectly  well,  and  the  objective

examination  revealed  nothing  at  all  apart  from  the  characteristic

powder-blackened bullet scar on the left temple, so I advised against

an operation. When asked about the circumstances of the case he

explained that he had injured himself accidentally. He was playing with

his brother’s revolver, thought it was not loaded, pressed it with his left

hand against his left temple (he is not left-handed,) put his finger on

the trigger and the shot went off. There were three bullets in the six-

shooter. I asked him how the idea of taking up the revolver came to

him. He replied that it was the time of his medical examination for

military service; the evening before, he took the weapon with him to

the inn because he was afraid of brawls. At the examination he was

found unfit because of varicose veins; he was very ashamed of this.

He went home and played with the revolver, but had no intention ofhurting him self - and then the accident happened. When questioned

further  whether  he  was  otherwise  satisfied  with  life,  he  sighed  in

answer and told the story of his love for a girl who also loved him but

left him all the same. She emigrated to America simply out of desire

for money. He wanted to follow her, but his parents prevented him. His

sweetheart left on January 20, 1907; two months, that is, before the

accident. In spite of all these suspicious factors the patient stuck to his

point  that  the  shooting  was  an  "accident".  I  was  however  firmly

convinced that his negligence in failing to make sure the weapon was

not loaded before playing with it, as well as his self-inflicted injury,

were  psychically  determined.  He  was  still  labouring  under  the

depressing effects of his unhappy love affair and obviously wanted to

"forget it all" in the army. When he was deprived of this hope as well,

he took to playing with the revolver - i. e. to an unconscious attempt at

suicide. His holding the revolver in his left and not his right hand is

strong evidence that he was really only "playing" - that is, that he did

not consciously wish to commit suicide.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1263

 

      Another  analysis  of  an  apparently  accidental  self-inflicted  injury,

which its observer (Van Emden, 1911) has passed on to me, recalls

the proverb: ‘He who digs a pit for others falls in it himself.’

   ‘Frau X., who comes of a good middle-class family, is married with

three children. She suffers from her nerves, it is true, but has never

needed any energetic treatment as she is sufficiently able to cope with

life. One day she incurred a facial disfigurement which was somewhat

striking  at  the  time  though  it  was  only  temporary.  It  happened  as

follows. She stumbled on a heap of stones in a street under repair and

struck her face against the wall of a house. The whole of her face was

scratched; her eyelids became blue and oedematous and as she was

afraid that something might happen to her eyes she had the doctor

called in. After she had been reassured on that score, I asked her:

‘But why did you in fact fall in that way?’ She replied that, directly

before this, she had warned her husband, who had been suffering forsome  months  from  a  joint  affection  and  therefore  had  difficulty  in

walking,  to  take  great  care  in  that  street,  and  it  had  been  a  fairly

frequent experience of hers to find in cases of the kind that in some

remarkable way the very thing happened to her that she had warned

someone else against.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1264

 

   ‘I was not satisfied that this was what had determined her accident

and asked if perhaps she had something more to tell me. Yes, just

before the accident she had seen an attractive picture in a shop on the

other  side  of  the  street;  she  had  quite  suddenly  desired  it  as  an

ornament for the nursery and therefore wanted to buy it immediately.

She walked straight towards the shop, without looking at the ground,

stumbled over the heap of stones and in falling struck her face against

the  wall  of  the  house  without  making  even  the  slightest  attempt  to

shield herself with her hands. The intention of buying the picture was

immediately forgotten and she returned home as fast as possible. -

"But  why  didn’t  you  keep  a  better  look-out?"  I  asked.  "Well,"  she

answered, "perhaps it was a punishment - on account of that episode I

told you about in confidence." - "Has it gone on worrying you so much

then?" - "Yes - I regretted it very much afterwards; I considered myself

wicked, criminal and immoral, but at the time I was almost crazy with

my nerves."

   ‘The reference was to an abortion which she had had carried out

with her husband’s consent, as, owing to their financial circumstances,

the couple did not wish to be blessed with any further children. This

abortion  had  been  started  by  a  woman  quack  but  had  had  to  be

completed by a specialist.

   ‘"I often reproach myself by thinking ‘You really had your child killed’

and I was afraid such a thing couldn’t go unpunished. Now that you’ve

assured me there’s nothing wrong with my eyes, my mind’s quite at

rest: I’ve been sufficiently punished now in any case."

   ‘This accident was therefore a self-punishment, firstly to atone for

her crime, but secondly also to escape from an unknown punishmentof perhaps much greater severity of which she had been in continual

dread for months. In the moment that she dashed towards the shop to

buy the picture, the memory of the whole episode with all its fears,

which had already been fairly strongly active in her unconscious when

she  had  warned  her  husband,  became  overwhelming  and  might

perhaps have been expressed in some words like these: "Why do you

need an ornament for the nursery? - you had your child destroyed!

You’re a murderess. The great punishment’s just coming down on you

for certain!"

   ‘This thought did not become conscious; but instead of it she used

the  situation,  at  what  I  might  call  this  psychological  moment,  for

punishing herself unobtrusively with the help of the heap of stones

which seemed suitable for the purpose. This is the reason why she did

not even put out her hands as she fell and also why she was not

seriously  frightened.  The  second  and  probably  less  important

determinant  of  her  accident  was  no  doubt  self-punishment  for  her

unconscious  wish  to  be  rid  of  her  husband,  who,  incidentally,  had

been  an  accomplice  in  the  crime.  This  wish  was  betrayed  by  her

entirely superfluous warning to him to keep an eye open for the heap

of  stones  in  the  street,  since  her  husband  walked  with  great  care

precisely because he was bad on his legs.’¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1920:] A correspondent writes to me as follows on the subject of ‘self-

punishment by means of parapraxes’: ‘If one studies the way people behave in the street one
has a chance of seeing how often men who turn round to look back at passing women - not
an unusual habit - meet with a minor accident. Sometimes they will sprain an ankle - on a
level pavement; sometimes they will bump into a lamp post or hurt themselves in some other
way.’
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1265

 

   When the details of the case are considered one will also be likely to

feel that Stärcke (1916) is right in regarding an apparently accidental

self-injury by burning as a ‘sacrificial act’:

      ‘A  lady  whose  son-in-law  had  to  leave  for  Germany  for  military

service scalded her foot in the following circumstances. Her daughter

was expecting her confinement soon and reflections on the perils ofwar naturally did not put the family into a very cheerful mood. The day

before his departure she had asked her son-in-law and daughter in for

a meal. She herself prepared the meal in the kitchen after having first -

strangely enough - changed her high, laced boots with arch-supports,

which  were  comfortable  for  walking  and  which  she  usually  wore

indoors as well, for a pair of her husband’s slippers that were too large

and were open at the top. While taking a large pan of boiling soup off

the fire she dropped it and in this way scalded one foot fairly badly -

especially the instep, which was not protected by the open slipper. -

Everyone  naturally  put  this  accident  down  to  her  understandable

"nerves".  For  the  first  few  days  after  this  burnt  offering  she  was

particularly careful with anything hot, but this did not prevent her some

days later from scalding her wrist with hot gravy.’¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] In a very large number of cases like these of injury or death in

accidents the explanation remains a matter of doubt. The outsider will find no occasion to see
in  the  accident  anything  other  than  a  chance  occurrence,  while  someone  who  is  closely
connected  with  the  victim  and  is  familiar  with  intimate  details  has  reason  to  suspect  the
unconscious intention behind the chance occurrence. The following account by a young man
whose  fiancée  was  run  over  in  the  street  gives  a  good  example  of  the  kind  of  intimate
knowledge that I mean and of the type of accessory details in question:
   ‘Last September I made the acquaintance of a Fräulein Z., aged 34. She was in well-to-do
circumstances, and had been engaged before the war, but her fiancé had fallen in action in
1916 while serving as an officer. We came to know and become fond of each other, not at first
with any thought of marrying, as the circumstances on both sides, in particular the difference
in our ages (I myself was 27), seemed to rule that out. As we lived opposite each other in the
same street and met every day, our relationship took an intimate turn in course of time. Thus
the idea of marriage came more into view and I finally agreed to it myself. The betrothal was
planned for this Easter; Fräulein Z., however, intended first to make a journey to her relatives
at M., but this was suddenly prevented by a railway strike that had been called as a result of
the  Kapp  Putsch.  The  gloomy  prospects  that  the  workers’  victory  and  its  consequences
appeared to hold out for the future had their effect for a brief time on our mood, too, but
especially on Fräulein Z., always a person of very changeable moods, since she thought she
saw new obstacles in the way of our future. On Saturday, March 20, however, she was in an
exceptionally cheerful frame of mind - a state of affairs that took me quite by surprise and
carried me along with her, so that we seemed to see everything in the rosiest colours. A few
days before, we had talked of going to church together some time, without however having
fixed a definite date. At 9. 15 the next morning, Sunday, March 21, she telephoned to ask me
to fetch her to church straight away; but I refused, as I could not have got ready in time, and
had, besides, work I wanted to finish. Fräulein Z. was noticeably disappointed; she then set
out alone, met an acquaintance on the stairs at her house and walked with him for the short
distance along the Tauentzienstrasse to the Rankestrasse, in the best of humour and without
referring at all to our conversation. The gentleman bade her good-bye with a joking remark.
Fräulein Z. had only to cross the Kurfürstendamm where it widened out and one could have a
clear view along it; but, close to the pavement, she was run over by a horse-drawn cab.(Contusion of the liver, which led to her death a few hours later.) - We had crossed at that
point hundreds of times before; Fräulein Z. was exceedingly careful, and very often prevented
me  from  being  rash;  on  this  morning  there  was  almost  no  traffic  whatever,  the  trams,
omnibuses, etc. were on strike. Just about that time there was almost absolute quiet; even if
she did not see the cab she must at all events have heard it! Everybody supposed it was an
"accident". My first thought was: "That’s impossible - but on the other hand there can be no
question of its having been intentional." I tried to find a psychological explanation. After some
considerable  time  I  thought  I  had  found  it  in  your Psychopathology  of  Everyday  Life.  In
particular, Fräulein Z. showed at various times a certain leaning in the direction of suicide and
even tried to induce me to think the same way - thoughts from which I have often enough
dissuaded her; for example, only two days before, after returning from a walk, she began,
without any external reason at all, to talk about her death and the provisions for dealing with
her estate. (She had not, by the way, done anything about this! - an indication that these
remarks definitely did not have any intention behind them.) If I may venture on an opinion, I
should  regard  this  calamity  not  as  an  accident,  nor  as  an  effect  of  a  clouding  of
consciousness, but as an intentional self-destruction performed with an unconscious purpose,
and disguised as a chance mishap. This view of mine is confirmed by remarks which Fräulein
Z. made to her relatives, both earlier, before she knew me, and also more recently, as well as
by remarks to me up to within the last few days; so that I am tempted to regard the whole
thing as an effect of the loss of her former fiancé, whom in her eyes nothing could replace.’
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1266

 

   If a furious raging against one’s own integrity and one’s own life can

be hidden in this way behind apparently accidental clumsiness and

motor  inefficiency,  it  is  not  a  very  large  step  to  find  it  possible  to

transfer the same view to mistakes that seriously endanger the lives

and health of other people. What evidence I have to show that this

view is a valid one is drawn from my experience with neurotics, and

thus does not wholly meet the demands of the situation. I will give an

account of a case in which something that was not strictly a faulty

action but that rather deserves the name of a symptomatic or chance

action  gave  me  the  clue  which  subsequently  made  it  possible  to

resolve the patient’s conflict. I once undertook the task of bringing an

improvement  to  the  marriage  of  a  very  intelligent  man,  whose

disagreements with his fondly attached young wife could undoubtedly

be shown to have a real basis, but could not, as he himself admitted,

be completely accounted for in that way. He was continually occupied

with  the  thought  of  a  divorce,  which  he  then  dismissed  once  more

because of his warm love for his two small children. In spite of this he

constantly returned to his intention and made no attempt to find a wayof making the situation tolerable to himself. Such inability to deal with

a conflict is taken by me as proof that unconscious and repressed

motives have lent a hand in strengthening the conscious ones which

are struggling against each other, and I undertake in such cases to

end the conflict by psychical analysis. One day the man told me of a

small incident which had frightened him extremely. He was romping

with his elder child, who was by far his favourite; he was swinging him

high in the air and down again, and once he swung him so high while

he was standing at a particular spot that the top of the child’s head

almost  struck  the  heavy  gas  chandelier  that  was  hanging  there.

Almost, but not quite - or perhaps just! No harm came to the child, but

it was made giddy with fright. The father stood horrified with the child

in  his  arms,  and  the  mother  had  a  hysterical  attack.  The  peculiar

adroitness  of  this  imprudent  movement  and  the  violence  of  the

parents’ reaction prompted me to look for a symptomatic act in this

accident - one which aimed at expressing an evil intention directed

against  the  beloved  child.  I  was  able  to  remove  the  contradiction

between this and the father’s contemporary affection for his child by

shifting the impulse to injure it back to the time when this child had

been the only one and had been so small that its father had not yet

had any reason to take an affectionate interest in it. It was then easy

for me to suppose that, as he was getting little satisfaction from his

wife, he may at that time have had a thought or formed a decision of

this kind: ‘If this little creature that means nothing at all to me dies, I

shall be free and able to get a divorce.’ A wish for the death of the

creature that he now loved so dearly must therefore have persisted

unconsciously. From this point it was easy to find the path by which

this wish had become unconsciously fixated. A powerful determinant

was in fact provided by a memory from the patient’s childhood: namely

that  the  death  of  a  small  brother,  for  which  his  mother  blamed  his

father’s negligence, had led to violent quarrels between the parents

and  threats  of  a  divorce.  The  subsequent  course  of  my  patient’s

marriage,  as  well  as  my  therapeutic  success,  confirmed  my

conjecture.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life                                                                                      1267

 

   Stärcke (1916) has given an example of the way in which creative

writers  do  not  hesitate  to  put  a  bungled  action  in  the  place  of  an

intentional action and to make it in this way the source of the gravest

consequences:

   ‘In one of Heijermans’ (1914) sketches there occurs an example of a

bungled action, or, more precisely, of a faulty action which the author

uses as a dramatic motif.

   ‘The sketch is called "Tom and Teddie". They are a pair of divers

who appear in a variety theatre; their act is given in an iron tank with

glass walls, in which they stay under water for a considerable time and

perform  tricks.  Recently  the  wife  has  started  an  affair  with  another

man, an animal-trainer. Her diver-husband has caught them together

in  the  dressing-room  just  before  the  performance.  Dead  silence,

menacing looks, with the diver saying: "Afterwards!" - The act begins.

The diver is about to perform his hardest trick: he will remain "two and

a half minutes under water in a hermetically sealed trunk". - This is a

trick  they  had  performed  often  enough;  the  trunk  was  locked  and

"Teddie used to show the key to the audience, who checked the time

by their watches". She also used purposely to drop the key once or

twice into the tank and then dive hurriedly after it, so as not to be too

late when the time came for the trunk to be opened.

   ‘"This particular evening, January 31st, saw Tom locked up as usual

by the neat fingers of his brisk and nimble wife. He smiled behind the

peep-hole - she played with the key and waited for his warning sign.

The trainer stood in the wings, in his impeccable evening dress, with

his white tie and his horse-whip. Here was the ‘other man’. To catch

her attention he gave a very short whistle. She looked at him, laughed,

and with the clumsy gesture of someone whose attention is distracted

she threw the key so wildly in the air that at exactly two minutes and

twenty seconds, by an accurate reckoning, it fell by the side of the

tank in the middle of the bunting covering the pedestal. No one had

seen it. No one could see it. Viewed from the house the optical illusion

was such that everyone saw the key fall into the water - and none of

the stage hands heard it since the bunting muffled the sound.

                     The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1268

 

   ‘"Laughing, Teddie clambered without delay, over the edge of the

tank.  Laughing  -  Tom  was  holding  out  well  -  she  came  down  the

ladder. Laughing, she disappeared under the pedestal to look there

and, when she did not find the key at once, she bowed in front of the

bunting with a priceless gesture, and an expression on her face as if

to say ‘Gracious me! what a nuisance this is!’.

   ‘"Meanwhile Tom was grimacing in his droll way behind the peep-

hole, as if he too was becoming agitated. The audience saw the white

of his false teeth, the champing of his lips under the flaxen moustache,

the comical bubble-blowing that they had seen earlier, when he was

eating  the  apple.  They  saw  his  pale  knuckles  as  he  grappled  and

clawed, and they laughed as they had laughed so often already that

evening.

   ‘"Two minutes and fifty-eight seconds . . .

   ‘"Three minutes and seven seconds . . . twelve seconds . . .

   ‘"Bravo! Bravo! Bravo!

      ‘"Then  consternation  broke  out  in  the  house  and  there  was  a

shuffling  of  feet,  when  the  stage  hands  and  the  trainer  began  to

search too and the curtain came down before the lid had been raised.

   ‘"Six English dancing-girls came on - then the man with the ponies,

dogs and monkeys. And so on.

   ‘"It was not till the next morning that the public knew there had been

an accident, that Teddie had been left a widow. . . ."

   ‘It is clear from this quotation what an excellent understanding the

author  must  himself  have  had  of  the  nature  of  a  symptomatic  act,

seeing that he demonstrates to us so strikingly the deeper cause of

the fatal clumsiness.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1269

 

                                    CHAPTER IX

 

                  SYMPTOMATIC AND CHANCE ACTIONS 

The actions described so far, in which we recognized the carrying out

of  an  unconscious  intention,  made  their  appearance  in  the  form  of

disturbances  of  other  intended  actions  and  concealed  themselves

behind the pretext of clumsiness. The ‘chance’ actions which are now

to be discussed differ from ‘bungled’ actions merely in the fact that

they scorn the support of a conscious intention and are therefore in no

need  of  a  pretext.  They  appear  on  their  own  account,  and  are

permitted  because  they  are  not  suspected  of  having  any  aim  or

intention. We perform them ‘without thinking there is anything in them’,

‘quite  accidentally’,  ‘just  to  have  something  to  do’;  and  such

information,  it  is  expected,  will  put  an  end  to  any  enquiry  into  the

significance of the action. In order to be able to enjoy this privileged

position,  these  actions,  which  no  longer  put  forward  the  excuse  of

clumsiness, have to fulfil certain conditions: they must be unobtrusive

and their effects must be slight.

   I have collected a large number of such chance actions from myself

and from others, and after closely examining the different examples I

have come to the conclusion that the name of symptomatic acts is a

better  one  for  them.  They  give  expression  to  something  which  the

agent himself does not suspect in them, and which he does not as a

rule  intend  to  impart  to  other  people  but  to  keep  to  himself.  Thus,

exactly like all the other phenomena which we have so far considered,

they play the part of symptoms.

   The richest supply of such chance or symptomatic acts is in fact to

be obtained during the psycho-analytic treatment of neurotics. I cannot

resist  quoting  two  examples  from  this  source  which  show  how

extensively  and  in  what  detail  these  insignificant  occurrences  are

determined  by  unconscious  thoughts.  The  borderline  between

symptomatic  acts  and  bungled  actions  is  so  ill-defined  that  I  might

equally well have included these examples in the last chapter.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1270

 

   (1) During a session a young married woman mentioned by way ofassociation that she had been cutting her nails the day before and

‘had cut into the flesh while she was trying to remove the soft cuticle at

the bottom of the nail’. This is of so little interest that we ask ourselves

in surprise why it was recalled and mentioned at all, and we begin to

suspect that what we are dealing with is a symptomatic act. And in

fact it turned out that the finger which was the victim of her small act of

clumsiness was the ring-finger, the one on which a wedding ring is

worn. What is more, it was her wedding anniversary; and in the light of

this  the  injury  to  the  soft  cuticle  takes  on  a  very  definite  meaning,

which can easily be guessed. At the same time, too, she related a

dream  which  alluded  to  her  husband’s  clumsiness  and  her

anaesthesia as a wife. But why was it the ring-finger on her left hand

which she injured, whereas a wedding ring is worn on the right hand?

Her husband is a lawyer, a ‘doctor of law’, and as a girl her affections

belonged in secret to a physician (jokingly called ‘Doktor der Linke’ ).

A ‘left-handed marriage’, too, has a definite meaning.

      (2)  A  young  unmarried  lady  said  to  me:  ‘Yesterday  I  quite

unintentionally tore a hundred florin note in two and gave half to a lady

who was visiting me. Am I to take this as a symptomatic act as well?’

Closer investigation disclosed the following particulars. The hundred

florin note: - She devoted part of her time and means to charitable

work. Together with another lady she was providing for the bringing up

of an orphan. The hundred florins were the contribution sent to her by

the other lady. She had put them in an envelope and placed it on her

writing table for the time being.

   The visitor was a lady of good standing whom she was assisting in

another  charitable  cause.  This  lady  wished  to  make  a  note  of  the

names of a number of people whose support could be enlisted. There

was no paper at hand, so my patient reached for the envelope on her

desk, and without thinking of what it contained tore it in two; one piece

she kept herself, so as to have a duplicate set of names, and the other

she handed to her visitor. It should be observed that her act, though

certainly inappropriate, was perfectly harmless. If a hundred florin note

is torn up, it does not, as is well known, lose any of its value so long

as it can be put together again completely from the fragments. The

importance of the names on the piece of paper was a guarantee that

the lady would not throw it away, and it was equally certain that shewould restore the valuable contents as soon as she noticed them.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1271

 

   But what was the unconscious thought to which this chance action,

made possible by forgetfulness, was meant to give expression? The

visitor stood in a very definite relation to my patient’s treatment. It was

this lady who had formerly recommended me to her as a doctor, and,

if I am not mistaken, my patient felt herself under an obligation to her

for this advice. Was the half of the hundred florin note perhaps meant

to represent a fee for her services as an intermediary?  That would still

be very strange.

   Further material was however forthcoming. A little time before, a

woman who was an intermediary of a very different kind had enquired

of a relative of the patient’s whether the young lady would perhaps like

to make a certain gentleman’s acquaintance; and that morning, a few

hours before the lady’s visit, the suitor’s letter of proposal had arrived

and  had  caused  much  amusement.  So  when  the  lady  opened  the

conversation by enquiring after my patient’s health, the latter might

well have thought: ‘You certainly found me the right doctor, but if you

could help me to get the right husband’ (with the further thought: ‘and

to get a child’) ‘I should be more grateful.’ This thought, which was

kept  repressed,  formed  the  starting-point  from  which  the  two

intermediaries became fused into one, and she handed her visitor the

fee  which  her  phantasy  was  ready  to  give  the  other  woman.  This

solution  becomes  entirely  convincing  when  I  add  that  I  had  been

telling the patient about such chance or symptomatic acts only the

evening before. She thereupon took the first opportunity of producing

something analogous.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1272

 

   These extremely frequent chance and symptomatic acts might be

arranged in three groups, according to whether they occur habitually,regularly under certain conditions, or sporadically. Actions of the first

group (such as playing with one’s watch-chain, fingering one’s beard

and so on), which can almost be taken as characteristics of the person

concerned,  trench  upon  the  multifarious  movements  known  as tics

and no doubt deserve to be dealt with in connection with them. In the

second group I include playing with a stick or scribbling with a pencil

that  one  happens  to  be  holding,  jingling  coins  in  one’s  pocket,

kneading bread-crumbs and other plastic materials, fiddling with one’s

clothing in all kinds of ways and so forth. During psychical treatment

idle play of this sort regularly conceals a sense and meaning which

are  denied  any  other  form  of  expression.  Generally  the  person

concerned is quite unaware that he is doing anything of the kind or

that he has modified his usual play in certain ways; and he fails to see

and hear the effects of these actions. He does not, for example, hear

the noise made by the jingling of coins, and, if his attention is drawn to

it, he behaves as though he were astonished and incredulous. All the

things that a person does with his clothing, often without realizing it,

are  no  less  important  and  deserve  the  doctor’s  attention.  Every

change in the clothing usually worn, every small sign of carelessness -

such as an unfastened button - every trace of exposure, is intended to

express something which the wearer of the clothes does not want to

say straight out and which for the most part he is unaware of. The

interpretations  of  these  small  chance  actions,  and  the  evidence  for

these interpretations, emerge each time with sufficient certainty from

the  material  which  accompanies  them  during  the  session,  from  the

topic that is under discussion and from the associations that occur

when attention is drawn to the apparently chance action. Because of

this  I  shall  not  proceed  to  support  my  assertions  with  examples

accompanied  by  analyses;  but  I  mention  these  actions  because  I

believe that they have the same meaning in the case of normal people

as they have in my patients.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1273

 

    I cannot refrain from showing by at least one example how close the

connection can be between a symbolic action performed through force

of  habit  and  the  most  intimate  and  important  aspects  of  a  healthy

person’s life:¹

   ‘As Professor Freud has taught us, symbolism plays a greater role in

the  childhood  of  normal  people  than  earlier  psycho-analytical

experiences had led one to expect. In this connection the following

short  analysis  may  be  of  some  interest,  especially  in  view  of  its

medical subject-matter.

   ‘A doctor on rearranging his furniture in a new house came across

an old-fashioned, straight wooden stethoscope, and, after pausing to

decide where he should put it, was impelled to place it on the side of

his writing-desk in such a position that it stood exactly between his

chair  and  the  one  reserved  for  his  patients.  The  act  in  itself  was

somewhat odd, for two reasons. In the first place he does not use a

stethoscope at all often (he is in fact a neurologist) and if he needs

one  he  uses  a  binaural  one.  In  the  second  place  all  his  medical

apparatus  and  instruments  were  kept  in  drawers,  with  the  sole

exception  of  this  one.  However,  he  gave  no  further  thought  to  the

matter  until  one  day  a  patient,  who  had  never  seen  a  straight

stethoscope, asked him what it was. On being told, she asked why he

kept it just there; he answered in an off-hand way that that place was

as  good  as  any  other.  This  started  him  thinking,  however,  and  he

wondered  whether  there  had  been  any  unconscious  motive  in  his

action,  and  being  familiar  with  the  psycho-analytical  method  he

decided to investigate the matter.

   ‘The first memory that occurred to him was the fact that when a

medical student he had been struck by the habit his hospital interne

had of always carrying in his hand a straight stethoscope on his ward

visits, although he never used it. He greatly admired this interne, and

was  much  attached  to  him.  Later  on,  when  he  himself  became  an

interne,  he  contracted  the  same  habit,  and  would  feel  very

uncomfortable  if  by  mistake  he  left  his  room  without  having  the

instrument to swing in his hand. The aimlessness of the habit was

however shown, not only by the fact that the only stethoscope he ever

used was a binaural one, which he carried in his pocket, but also in

that  it  was  continued  when  he  was  a  surgical  interne  and  neverneeded any stethoscope at all. The significance of these observations

immediately  becomes  clear  if  we  refer  to  the  phallic  nature  of  this

symbolic action.

 

   ¹ Ernest Jones (1910a).

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1274

 

   ‘He next recalled the fact that in his early childhood he had been

struck by the family doctor’s habit of carrying a straight stethoscope

inside his hat; he found it interesting that the doctor should always

have his chief instrument handy when he went to see patients and

only had to take off his hat (i. e. a part of his clothing) and "pull it out".

As a small child he had been strongly attached to this doctor; and a

brief self-analysis enabled him to discover that at the age of three and

a half he had had a double phantasy concerning the birth of a younger

sister  -  namely  that  she  was  the  child,  firstly,  of  himself  and  his

mother, and secondly, of the doctor and himself. Thus in this phantasy

he played both a masculine and a feminine part. He further recalled

having  been  examined  by  the  same  doctor  when  he  was  six,  and

distinctly recollected the voluptuous sensation of feeling the doctor’s

head  near  him  pressing  the  stethoscope  into  his  chest,  and  the

rhythmic to-and-fro respiratory movement. At the age of three he had

had  a  chronic  chest  affection  which  necessitated  repeated

examination, although he could not in fact still remember it.

   ‘At the age of eight he was impressed by being told by an older boy

that  it  was  the  doctor’s  custom  to  get  into  bed  with  his  women

patients. There certainly was some real basis for this rumour; at all

events the women of the neighbourhood, including the subject’s own

mother, were very attached to the young and handsome doctor. The

subject  had  himself  on  several  occasions  experienced  sexual

temptations in regard to his women patients; he had twice fallen in

love with one and finally had married one. It can hardly be doubted

that his unconscious identification with the doctor was the chief motive

for his adoption of the medical profession. Other analyses lead us to

suppose that this is undoubtedly the commonest motive (though it ishard  to  determine  just  how  common).  In  the  present  case  it  was

doubly determined: firstly by the superiority of the doctor on several

occasions  over  the  father,  of  whom  the  son  was  very  jealous,  and

secondly  by  the  doctor’s  knowledge  of  forbidden  topics  and  his

opportunities for sexual satisfaction.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1275

 

   ‘Then came a dream which I have already published elsewhere

(Jones 1910b); it was plainly of a homosexual-masochistic nature. In

this dream a man who was a substitutive figure for the doctor attacked

the subject with a "sword". The sword reminded him of a passage in

the Völsung Nibelungen Saga, where Sigurd places a naked sword

between  himself  and  the  sleeping  Brünhilde.  The  same  episode

occurs in the Arthurian legend which our subject also knows well.

      ‘The  meaning  of  the  symptomatic  act  now  becomes  clear.  Our

doctor  placed  his  straight  stethoscope  between  himself  and  his

women patients exactly as Sigurd placed his sword between himself

and  the  woman  he  was  not  to  touch.  The  act  was  a  compromise-

formation:  it  satisfied  two  impulses.  It  served  to  satisfy  in  his

imagination  the  suppressed  wish  to  enter  into  sexual  relations  with

any attractive woman patient, but at the same time it served to remind

him that this wish could not become a reality. It was, so to speak, a

charm against yielding to temptation.

   ‘I might add that the following lines from Lord Lytton’s Richeleau

made a great impression on the boy:

 

                                                Beneath the rule of men entirely great

                                                The pen is mightier than the sword. . . .¹

 

and that he has become a prolific writer and uses an exceptionally

large fountain pen. When I asked him why he needed it he gave the

characteristic response: "I have so much to express."

   ‘This analysis again reminds us what profound insight is afforded

into mental life by "innocent" and "meaningless" acts, and how early in

life the tendency to symbolization develops.’ 

   ¹ Compare Oldham’s: ‘I wear my pen as others do their sword.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1276

 

 

      I  can  quote  a  further  instance  from  my  psychotherapeutic

experience in which eloquent testimony was borne by a hand playing

with a lump of bread-crumb. My patient was a boy of not yet thirteen;

for almost two years he had been severely hysterical and I finally took

him for psycho-analytic treatment after a lengthy stay in a hydropathic

institution had brought no success. I was going on the assumption that

he must have had sexual experiences and be tormented by sexual

questions, which was likely enough at his age; but I refrained from

helping him with explanations as I wished to put my hypotheses once

again to the test. I was therefore naturally curious as to the way in

which he would bring out what I was looking for. One day it struck me

that he was rolling something between the fingers of his right hand; he

would thrust it in his pocket and continue playing with it there, and

then take it out again, and so on. I did not ask what he had in his

hand; but he suddenly opened his hand and showed me. It was bread-

crumb  kneaded  into  a  lump.  At  the  next  session  he  again  brought

along a similar lump and this time, while we were talking, he modelled

figures out of it which excited my interest; he did this with incredible

rapidity, with his eyes closed. They were undoubtedly little men, with a

head, two arms and two legs, like the crudest prehistoric idols, and

with an appendage between the legs which he drew out into a long

point.  He  had  hardly  completed  this  when  he  kneaded  the  figure

together again; later he allowed it to remain, but drew out a similar

appendage from the surface of the back and other parts of the body in

order to disguise the meaning of the first one. I wanted to show him I

had understood him, but at the same time I wanted to prevent him

from  pretending  that  he  had  not  thought  of  anything  while  he  was

engaged in making these figures. With this in mind I suddenly asked

him if he remembered the story of the Roman king who gave his son’s

envoy an answer in dumb-show in his garden. The boy failed to recallit, although he must have learnt it so much more recently than I. He

asked whether it was the story of the slave and the answer that was

written on his shaven head. No, I answered, that is from Greek history,

and I told him the story. King Tarquinius Superbus had made his son

Sextus find his way secretly into a hostile Latin city. The son, who had

meanwhile collected a following in the city, sent a messenger to the

king asking what steps he should take next. The king did not answer,

but went into his garden, had the question repeated to him there, and

then silently struck off the heads of the tallest and finest poppies. All

that  the  messenger  could  do  was  to  report  this  to  Sextus,  who

understood his father and arranged for the most distinguished citizens

in the city to be removed by assassination.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1277

 

   While I was speaking, the boy stopped kneading and, as I was on

the  point  of  describing  what  the  king  did  in  his  garden  and  had

reached the words ‘silently struck’, he made a lightning movement and

tore the head off his little man. He had therefore understood me and

had seen that he had been understood by me. I could now question

him directly, I gave him the information he needed, and in a short time

we had brought the neurosis to an end.

   The symptomatic acts that can be observed in almost inexhaustible

abundance in healthy people no less than in sick ones have more than

one claim to our interest. To the doctor they often serve as valuable

clues  which  enable  him  to  get  his  bearings  in  new  or  unfamiliar

situations;  to  the  observer  of  human  nature  they  often  betray

everything - and at times even more than he cares to know. A person

who  is  familiar  with  their  significance  may  at  times  feel  like  King

Solomon who, according to oriental legend, understood the language

of animals. One day I was to examine a young man, whom I did not

know, at his mother’s house. As he came towards me I was struck by

a large stain on his trousers - made by albumen, as I could tell from its

peculiar stiff edges. After a moment’s embarrassment the young man

apologized and said that he had felt hoarse and so had swallowed araw egg; some of the slippery white of egg had probably fallen on his

clothes. He was able to confirm this by pointing to the egg-shell, which

was still visible in the room on a small plate. In this way the suspicious

stain was given an innocent explanation; but when his mother had left

us alone I thanked him for making my diagnosis so very much easier,

and  without  more  ado  took  as  the  basis  of  our  discussion  his

confession  that  he  was  suffering  from  the  troubles  arising  from

masturbation. Another time I was paying a visit to a lady who was as

rich as she was miserly and foolish, and who was in the habit of giving

the doctor the task of working through a host of complaints before the

simple cause of her condition could he reached. When I entered she

was sitting at a small table and was busy arranging silver florins in

little piles. On rising she knocked some of the coins on to the floor. I

helped her to pick them up, and soon cut short her account of her

sufferings  by  asking:  ‘Has  your  noble  son-in-law  robbed  you  of  so

much money then?’ She denied this angrily, only to go on very soon

afterwards to tell the sad story of the agitation which her son-in-law’s

extravagance  had  caused  her.  She  has  not  however  sent  for  me

since. I cannot claim that one always makes friends of those to whom

one shows the meaning of their symptomatic acts.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1278

 

      Dr.  J.  E.  G.  van  Emden  (The  Hague)  reports  another  case  of

‘confession through a parapraxis’. ‘In making out my bill, the waiter in

a small restaurant in Berlin announced that the price of a particular

dish had been increased by ten pfennigs, owing to the war. When I

asked why this was not shown on the menu he replied that that must

just be an oversight - the price had certainly gone up. He pocketed the

money clumsily and dropped a ten pfennig coin on the table right in

front of me.

   ‘"Now I know for certain that you’ve charged me too much. Would

you like me to enquire at the cash desk?"

   ‘"Excuse me . . . one moment, please," and he had gone.

      ‘Needless  to  say,  I  allowed  him  his  retreat,  and,  after  he  hadapologized  a  couple  of  minutes  later  for  having  for  some  unknown

reason  confused  my  dish  with  another  one,  I  let  him  keep  the  ten

pfennigs as a reward for his contribution to the psychopathology of

everyday life.’

   Anyone who cares to observe his fellow men while they are at table

will be able to observe the neatest and most instructive symptomatic

acts.

   Thus Dr. Hanns Sachs relates: ‘I happened to be present when an

elderly couple, relatives of mine, took their evening meal. The lady

suffered from a gastric complaint and had to observe a very strict diet.

A piece of roast meat had just been set before the husband, and he

asked his wife, who was not allowed to join in this course, to pass him

the mustard. His wife opened the cupboard, reached inside, and put

her little bottle of stomach drops on the table in front of her husband.

There  was  of  course  no  resemblance  between  the  barrel-shaped

mustard pot and the little bottle of drops which might have accounted

for  her  picking  up  the  wrong  one;  yet  the  wife  did  not  notice  her

confusion of the two until her husband laughingly called her attention

to it. The meaning of the symptomatic act needs no explanation.’

   I owe to Dr. B. Dattner, of Vienna, an excellent example of this kind

which the observer made very skilful use of:

   ‘I was lunching in a restaurant with my colleague H., a doctor of

philosophy. He spoke of the hardships of probationary students, and

mentioned incidentally that before he had finished his studies he was

given the post of secretary to the ambassador, or, more precisely, the

minister  plenipotentiary  and  extraordinary,  of  Chile.  "But  then  the

minister  was  transferred  and  I  did  not  present  myself  to  his

successor." While he was uttering the last sentence he raised a piece

of  cake  to  his  mouth,  but  let  it  drop  from  the  knife  in  apparent

clumsiness.  I  immediately  grasped  the  hidden  meaning  of  this

symptomatic act, and, as it were casually, interjected to my colleague,

who  was  unfamiliar  with  psycho-analysis:  "You  certainly  allowed  a

tasty morsel to slip from you there." He did not, however, notice that

my  words  could  apply  equally  well  to  his  symptomatic  act,  and

repeated my exact words with a peculiarly charming and surprising

liveliness just as if my remark had taken the words out of his mouth:

"Yes, that was certainly a tasty morsel that I allowed to slip from me",and went on to unburden himself by means of a detailed description of

the clumsiness which had lost him this well-paid position.

   ‘The meaning of the symbolic symptomatic act becomes clearer if it

is realized that my colleague had scruples about telling a fairly remote

acquaintance like myself of his precarious material situation, and that

the obtrusive thought thereupon disguised itself as a symptomatic act

which expressed symbolically what was meant to be hidden and in

this  way  afforded  the  speaker  relief  which  arose  from  unconscious

sources.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1279

 

   The following examples will show how much meaning may turn out

to lie in an apparently unintentional act of carrying something off or

taking something away with one.

   Dr. B. Dattner relates: ‘A colleague paid a visit to a friend, a lady he

had much admired in the days of his youth; it was the first visit after

her marriage. He told me of this visit and expressed his surprise at the

fact that he had not succeeded in keeping his resolution to stay only a

very  short  time  with  her.  He  then  went  on  to  recount  a  singular

parapraxis which had happened to him there. His friend’s husband,

who had joined in the conversation, had looked for a box of matches

which  had  quite  definitely  been  on  the  top  of  the  table  when  he

arrived.  My  colleague,  too,  had  looked  through  his  pockets  to  see

whether he had not accidentally "snapped it up",¹ but without avail.

Some time later he had in fact found "it" in his pocket, and was struck

by the fact that there was only a single match in the box. - A dream a

few days later which prominently displayed the match-box symbolism

and was concerned with this same friend of his youth confirmed my

explanation  that  my  colleague’s  symptomatic  act  was  intended  to

announce  that  he  had  prior  rights  and  to  demonstrate  his  claim  to

exclusive possession (only one match in the box).’

   Dr. Hanns Sachs relates: ‘Our maid is particularly fond of a certain

kind of cake. There is no possible doubt of this, as it is the only thing

that she always makes well. One Sunday she brought in this particularcake, put it down on the sideboard, removed the plates and cutlery of

the previous course and stacked them on the tray on which she had

brought in the cake; she then put the cake back on the top of this pile

instead of on the table, and disappeared with it into the kitchen. Our

first idea was that she had noticed something that ought to be put right

about the cake, but when she failed to appear again my wife rang and

asked: "Betty, what has happened to the cake?" "How do you mean?"

replied the maid, not understanding. We had first to point out to her

that she had taken the cake away with her again. She had put it on the

pile of dishes, carried it out and put it away "without noticing". - Next

day, as we were about to eat what remained of this cake, my wife

noticed that there was just as much as we had left the day before - in

other words, that the maid had rejected her own share of her favourite

dish. When asked why she had not eaten any of the cake she replied

in some embarrassment that she had not wanted any. - The infantile

attitude is very clear on both occasions: first the childish insatiability

which did not want to share the object of her wishes with anyone,

followed by the equally childish defiant reaction: "If you grudge it me,

keep it for yourselves; I don’t want anything at all now.”'

 

   ¹ [In German the word for ‘box’ (‘Schatel’) is feminine; so that this might equally mean

‘snapped her up’.]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1280

 

      Chance  actions  and  symptomatic  acts  occurring  in  matrimonial

matters  often  have  the  most  serious  significance  and  might  induce

people who disregard the psychology of the unconscious to believe in

omens.  It  is  not  a  happy  beginning  when  a  young  bride  loses  her

wedding-ring on the honeymoon; but after all it is usually only mislaid

and  is  soon  found  again.  -  I  know  a  lady,  now  divorced  from  her

husband,  who  in  managing  her  money  affairs  frequently  signed

documents  in  her  maiden  name,  many  years  before  she  in  fact

resumed it. - I was once the guest of a young married couple and

heard  the  young  woman  laughingly  describe  her  latest  experience.

The day after her return from the honeymoon she had called for herunmarried sister to go shopping with her as she used to do, while her

husband went to his business. Suddenly she noticed a gentleman on

the other side of the street, and nudging her sister had cried: ‘Look,

there goes Herr L.’ She had forgotten that this gentleman had been

her husband for some weeks. I felt a cold chill as I heard the story, but

I did not dare to draw the inference. The little incident only occurred to

my mind some years later when the marriage had come to a most

unhappy end.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1281

 

   The following observation is quoted from one of Alphonse Maeder’s

valuable studies, published in French (Maeder, 1906). It might equally

well have been included among the examples of forgetting:

   ‘Une dame nous racontait récemment qu’elle avait oublié d’essayer

sa robe de noce et s’en souvint la veille du mariage à huit heures du

soir;  la  couturière  désespérait  de  voir  sa  cliente.  Ce  détail  suffit  a

montrer que la fiancée ne se sentait pas très heureuse de porter une

robe d’épouse, elle cherchait à oublier cette représentation pénible.

Elle est aujourd’hui . . . divorcée.’¹

   A friend who has learnt to read signs has told me that the great

actress Eleonora Duse introduces into one of her parts a symptomatic

act which clearly shows the depths from which she draws her artistry.

It  is  a  drama  of  adultery;  she  has  just  had  an  altercation  with  her

husband and now stands apart deep in thought, before the seducer

approaches. During the short interval she plays with her wedding ring,

takes it off her finger, puts it on again, and then once more takes it off.

She is now ready for the other man.

      I  add  here  an  account  by  Theodor  Reik  (1915)  of  some  other

symptomatic acts involving rings.

   ‘We are familiar with the symptomatic acts of married people which

consist  in  their  taking  off  and  replacing  their  wedding  rings.  My

colleague M. produced a series of similar symptomatic acts. He had

received a ring as a present from a girl he was in love with, with a note

saying that he must not lose it or she would know that he did not loveher  any  more.  Subsequently  he  grew  increasingly  worried  that  he

might lose the ring. If he had temporarily taken it off (for example while

he was washing) it would regularly be mislaid, so that often it could

only be found again after a long search. When he was posting a letter

he could not suppress a slight fear that the ring might be pulled off by

the edges of the letter-box. On one occasion he managed things so

clumsily that the ring did fall into the box. The letter he was sending off

on that occasion was a parting note to an earlier lady-love of his, and

he fell guilty towards her. Simultaneously he was filled with a longing

for  this  other  lady  which  conflicted  with  his  feelings  towards  his

present love-object.’

 

   ¹ [‘A lady was telling us recently how she had forgotten to try on her wedding dress and

remembered it at eight o’clock on the eve of her wedding. The dressmaker had given up hope
of seeing her customer. This detail was enough to show that the bride did not feel very happy
about wearing a wedding-dress; she was trying to forget the painful performance. To-day . . .
she is divorced.’]
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1282

 

   The theme of the ring leaves one once again with the impression of

how hard it is for a psycho-analyst to discover anything new that has

not been known before by some creative writer. In Fontane’s novel

Vor dem Sturm Justizrat Turgany declares during a game of forfeits:

‘You  may  be  sure,  ladies,  that  the  deepest  secrets  of  nature  are

revealed in the pledging of forfeits.’ Among the examples he uses to

support his claim there is one that deserves our special interest: ‘I

recall a professor’s wife - she had reached the age of embonpoint -

who again and again pulled off her wedding ring to offer it as a forfeit.

Do not ask me to describe the happiness of her marriage.’ He then

went on: ‘In the same company there was a gentleman who never

tired  of  depositing  his  English  pocket-knife,  with  its  ten  blades,

corkscrew  and  flint  and  steel,  in  the  ladies’  laps,  until  the  bladed

monster, after tearing several silk dresses, finally disappeared amid

general cries of indignation.’

   We shall not be surprised if an object of such rich symbolic meaning

as  a  ring  should  be  made  to  play  a  part  in  some  significantparapraxes, even where it does not, in the form of a wedding ring or

an engagement ring, mark an erotic tie. The following example of an

occurrence of this sort has been put at my disposal by Dr. M. Kardos:

   ‘Several years ago a man who is much my junior attached himself to

me;  he  shares  my  intellectual  endeavours  and  stands  to  me

somewhat in the relation of a pupil to his teacher. On one particular

occasion I presented him with a ring; and this ring has several times

given rise to symptomatic acts or parapraxes, whenever anything in

our relationship has met with his disapproval. A short time ago he was

able  to  report  the  following  case,  which  is  particularly  neat  and

transparent. We used to meet once a week, when he regularly came

to see me and talk with me; but on one occasion he made an excuse

to  stay  away,  as  a rendezvous  with  a  young  lady  seemed  more

attractive  to  him.  The  following  morning  he  noticed  -  not,  however,

until long after he had left the house - that the ring was not on his

finger. He did not worry any more about it, since he assumed he had

left it behind on his bedside table, where he put it every evening, and

would find it there when he got home. As soon as he reached home

he looked for it, without success, and then began a systematic search

of the room, which was equally fruitless. At last it crossed his mind

that the ring had been lying on the bedside table - just as had been

the case, in fact, for more than a year - beside a small pocket-knife

that he normally carried in his waistcoat pocket; the suspicion thus

occurred to him that he might have "absent-mindedly" pocketed the

ring with the knife. So he felt in his pocket and found that the missing

ring was in fact there. "His wedding-ring in his waistcoat pocket" is a

proverbial way of referring to the place where the ring is kept by a

husband who intends to betray the wife who gave it to him. My friend’s

feeling of guilt had therefore caused him first to punish himself ("you

no  longer  deserve  to  wear  this  ring")  and  secondly  to  confess  his

unfaithfulness, though only in the form of an unwitnessed parapraxis.

It  was  only  in  a  roundabout  way,  while  he  was  describing  this

parapraxis  -  an  eventuality  which  could,  incidentally,  have  been

foreseen - that he came to confess his little "unfaithfulness".’

   I also know of an elderly man who married a very young girl and

who decided to spend the wedding night in a hotel in town instead of

on the honeymoon journey. Hardly had they reached the hotel whenhe noticed in alarm that he was without his wallet, which contained all

the money for the honeymoon; he had either mislaid it or lost it. He

was still able to reach his servant by telephone; the latter found the

missing wallet in the discarded wedding suit and brought it to the hotel

to  the  waiting  bridegroom  who  had  accordingly  entered  upon  his

marriage without means. He was thus able to start his journey with his

young bride next morning. In the night, however, he had, as he had

apprehensively foreseen, proved ‘incapable '.¹

 

   ¹ [‘Unvermögend’, ‘without means’, ‘without power’, and so ‘impotent’.]

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1283

 

   It is consoling to reflect that there is an unsuspected extension of the

human habit of ‘losing things’ - namely, symptomatic acts, and that

this habit is consequently welcome, at least to a secret intention of the

loser’s. It is often only an expression of the low estimation in which the

lost object is held, or of a secret antipathy towards it or towards the

person that it came from; or else the inclination to lose the object has

been transferred to it from other more important objects by a symbolic

association of thoughts. Losing objects of value serves to express a

variety  of  impulses;  it  may  either  be  acting  as  a  symbolic

representation of a repressed thought - that is, it may be repeating a

warning  that  one  would  be  glad  enough  to  ignore  -,  or  (most

commonly of all) it may be offering a sacrifice to the obscure powers

of destiny to whom homage is still paid among us to-day.

   Here are a few examples to illustrate these remarks about losing

things.

   Dr. B. Dattner: ‘A colleague told me he had unexpectedly lost his

"Penkala" pencil which he had had for over two years and which he

valued highly because of its superior quality. Analysis revealed the

following  facts.  The  day  before,  my  colleague  had  received  a

thoroughly  disagreeable  letter  from  his  brother-in-law,  which

concluded with the sentence: "I have neither the inclination nor the

time at present to encourage you in your frivolity and laziness." The

affect  connected  with  this  letter  was  so  powerful  that  next  day  mycolleague promptly sacrificed the pencil, which was a present from this

brother-in-law, so as not to feel under too great an obligation to him.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1284

 

   A lady of my acquaintance understandably refrained from visiting the

theatre while in mourning for her old mother. There were only a few

days still to elapse before the end of her year of mourning, and she

allowed herself to be persuaded by her friends to buy a ticket for a

particularly  interesting  performance.  On  reaching  the  theatre  she

made  the  discovery  that  she  had  lost  the  ticket.  She  thought

afterwards that she had thrown it away with her tram ticket on leaving

the  tram.  This  lady  used  to  pride  herself  on  never  losing  anything

through carelessness.

   It is therefore fair to assume that another experience she had of

losing something was not without a good reason either. On her arrival

at a health resort she decided to pay a visit to a pension where she

had stayed on an earlier occasion. She was welcomed there as an old

friend and entertained, and when she wanted to pay she was told she

was to look on herself as a guest; but this she did not feel was quite

proper. It was agreed that she might leave something for the maid

who had waited on her, so she opened her purse to put a one mark

note on the table. In the evening the pension’s manservant brought

her a five mark note which had been found under the table and which

the proprietress thought must belong to the lady. She must therefore

have dropped it from her purse in getting out the tip for the maid. She

had probably wanted to pay her bill in spite of everything.

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1285

 

   An article of some length by Otto Rank (1911) makes use of dream-

analysis to expose the sacrificial mood that forms the basis of this act,

and to reveal its deeper motives.¹ It is of interest when he writes later

that often not only losing objects but also, finding them appears to bedetermined. In what sense this is to be understood may be gathered

from his story, which I include here (Rank, 1915a). It is obvious that in

cases of losing, the object is already provided; in cases of finding, it

has first to be looked for.

   ‘A girl who was materially dependent on her parents wished to buy a

piece of cheap jewellery. She enquired in the shop about the price of

the article she fancied, but was disappointed to find that it cost more

than the sum she had saved. All the same, it was only a matter of two

kronen that stood between her and this small pleasure. In a depressed

mood  she  began  to  stroll  home  through  the  streets,  which  were

thronged with the evening crowds. Though she describes herself as

having  been  deep  in  thought,  she  suddenly  noticed  lying  on  the

ground, in one of the busiest squares, a small piece of paper which

she  had  just  passed  by  without  attending  to  it.  She  turned  round,

picked it up and was astonished to find it was a folded two kronen

note. She thought: "This has been sent me by fate so that I can buy

the jewellery", and started happily back with the idea of taking the hint.

But at the same moment she told herself that she ought not to do so,

since money that one finds is lucky money and should not be spent.

   ‘The bit of analysis which would make this "chance action" intelligible

may  probably  be  inferred  from  the  situation  described,  even  in  the

absence  of  personal  information  from  the  girl  herself.  Among  the

reflections  that  occupied  her  mind  as  she  was  walking  home,  the

thought  of  her  poverty  and  her  restricted  material  position  must  no

doubt have bulked large; moreover we may guess that that thought

took the form of a wishful removal of her straitened circumstances.

The idea of how the required sum could most easily be obtained will

surely have arisen from her interest in satisfying her modest wish; and

it will have suggested the simplest solution - namely, that of finding the

money.  In  this  way  her  unconscious  (or  preconscious)  was

predisposed towards "finding", even though - owing to claims on her

attention from other quarters ("deep in thought") - the actual thought

did not become fully conscious to her. We may go further and, on the

strength of similar cases which have been analysed, actually assert

that unconscious "readiness to look for something" is much more likely

to lead to success than consciously directed attention. Otherwise it

would be almost impossible to explain how it was that precisely thisone person out of the many hundreds of passers-by - and with all the

difficulties caused by the poor street-lighting and the dense crowds -

was  able  to  make  the  find  that  came  as  a  surprise  to  her  herself.

Some  indication  of  the  actual  strength  of  this  unconscious  or

preconscious  readiness  may  be  obtained  from  the  remarkable  fact

that after making this find - that is, at a time when the attitude had

become superfluous and had certainly been removed from conscious

attention - the girl found a handkerchief at a later point on her way

home, in a dark and lonely part of a suburban street.’

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1917:] Other articles on the same topic will be found in the Zentralblatt

für Psychoanalyse, 2, and in the Internationale Zetschrift für Psychoanalyse, 1 (1913).
 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1286

 

   It must be said that it is precisely such symptomatic acts that often

offer  the  best  approach  to  an  understanding  of  people’s  intimate

mental life.

   Turning now to the chance actions that occur sporadically, I will

report  an  example  which  suggested  a  comparatively  deep

interpretation even without analysis. It gives a clear illustration of the

conditions  under  which  such  symptoms  can  be  produced  entirely

unobtrusively,  and  it  enables  me  to  subjoin  a  remark  of  practical

importance. In the course of a summer holiday it happened that I had

to wait a few days at a particular place for the arrival of my travelling

companion. In the meantime I made the acquaintance of a young man

who also seemed to be lonely and was willing enough to join me. As

we were staying at the same hotel it was natural for us to take all our

meals  and  walks  together.  On  the  afternoon  of  the  third  day  he

suddenly told me that he was expecting his wife to arrive by train that

evening. My psychological interest was now aroused, for I had already

been struck that morning by my companion’s rejecting my proposal for

a longish expedition and objecting during our short walk to taking a

certain  path  which  he  said  was  too  steep  and  dangerous.  On  our

afternoon walk he suddenly remarked that I must no doubt be hungry;

I must certainly not delay my evening meal on his account - he wasgoing to wait for his wife to arrive and have supper with her. I took the

hint and sat down to dinner while he went to the station. Next morning

we met in the hall of the hotel. He introduced me to his wife and then

said: ‘You’ll have breakfast with us, won’t you?’ I had first to go on a

small errand in the next street, but promised to be back soon. When I

entered the breakfast room, I saw that the couple were both sitting on

the same side of a small table by the window. On the opposite side

there was only one chair; the husband’s big, heavy waterproof cape

had been hung over the back of it, covering the seat. I understood

very well the meaning of the coat’s being arranged in that way; it had

certainly not been done deliberately and was therefore all the more

expressive.  It  meant:  ‘There’s  no  room  for  you  here,  you’re

superfluous now.’ The husband failed to notice that I was standing in

front of the table without sitting down; but his wife did, and quickly

nudged  her  husband  and  whispered:  ‘Look,  you’ve  taken  up  the

gentleman’s seat.’

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1287

 

   This and other similar experiences have led me to conclude that

actions carried out unintentionally must inevitably become the source

of  misunderstandings  in  human  relations.  The  agent,  who  knows

nothing of there being an intention connected with these actions, does

not feel that they are chargeable to him and does not hold himself

responsible for them. The second party, on the other hand, since he

regularly  bases  his  conclusions  as  to  the  agent’s  intentions  and

sentiments on such actions among others, knows more of the other’s

psychical  processes  than  that  person  himself  is  ready  to  admit  or

believes he has communicated. The agent, indeed, grows indignant if

these conclusions drawn from his symptomatic acts are brought up

against  him;  he  declares  them  to  be  baseless,  since  he  is  not

conscious of having had the intention at the time they were carried

out,  and  complains  of  being  misunderstood  by  the  second  party.

Strictly considered, misunderstandings of his kind are based on too

intimate and too extensive understanding. The more two people sufferfrom  ‘nerves’,  the  more  readily  will  they  give  each  other  cause  for

disputes, the responsibility for which each disclaims just as decidedly

in regard to himself as he considers it certain in regard to the other

person.  And  this  is  no  doubt  the  punishment  for  people’s  internal

dishonesty in only giving expression under the pretext of forgetting,

bungling and doing things unintentionally to impulses that would better

be  admitted  to  themselves  and  to  others  if  they  can  no  longer  be

controlled.  It  can  in  fact  be  said  quite  generally  that  everyone  is

continually  practising  psychical  analysis  on  his  neighbours  and

consequently learns to know them better than they know themselves.

The road whose goal it is to observe the precept γυώθι σεαντόυ¹ runs

viâ  the  study  of  one’s  own  apparently  accidental  actions  and

omissions.

 

   ¹ [‘Know thyself’]

 


                    The Psychopathology Of Everyday Life

                                                                                      1288

 

   Of all the writers who have from time to time passed comment on

our minor symptomatic acts and parapraxes, or who have made use

of  them,  none  has  understood  their  secret  nature  so  clearly  or

exhibited them in so uncannily lifelike a manner as Strindberg - a man

whose genius in recognizing such things was, it is true, assisted by

grave mental abnormality. Dr. Karl Weiss of Vienna (1913) has drawn

attention to the following passage in one of his works:

   ‘After a while the Count did in fact come, and he approached Esther

quietly, as though he had a rendezvous with her.

   ‘"Have you been waiting long?" he asked in his low voice.

   ‘"Six months, as you know," answered Esther; "but did you see me

to-day?"

   ‘"Yes, just now, in the tram: and I looked into your eyes feeling that I

was talking to you."

   ‘"A great deal has ‘happened’ since the last time."

   ‘"Yes, and I believed it was all over between us."

   ‘"How so?"

   ‘"All the little gifts that I had from you broke in pieces - in an occult