our oracle produced another series of words, which, though we were

not able to interpret all of them, made it possible to continue this story

and lead on from it to another one. Soon, moreover, the meaning of

this reminiscence became clear. Her sister’s illness had made such a

deep impression on her because the two of them shared a secret;

they slept in one room and on a particular night they had both been

subjected to sexual assaults by a certain man. The mention of this

sexual trauma in the patient’s childhood revealed not only the origin of

her first obsessions but also the trauma which subsequently produced

the pathogenic effects.

   The peculiarity of this case lay only in the emergence of isolated

key-words which we had to work into sentences; for the appearance of

disconnectedness  and  irrelevance  which  characterized  the  words

emitted in this oracular fashion applies equally to the complete ideas

and scenes which are normally produced under my pressure. When

these  are  followed  up,  it  invariably  turns  out  that  the  apparently

disconnected  reminiscences  are  closely  linked  in  thought  and  that

they lead quite straight to the pathogenic factor we are looking for. For

this  reason  I  am  glad  to  recall  a  case  of  analysis  in  which  my

confidence in the products of pressure were first put to a hard test but

afterwards brilliantly justified.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        245

 

   A very intelligent and apparently happy young married woman had

consulted  me  about  an  obstinate  pain  in  her  abdomen  which  was

resistant to treatment. I recognized that the pain was situated in the

abdominal wall and must be referred to palpable muscular indurations,

and I ordered local treatment. Some months later I saw the patient

again and she said to me: ‘The pain I had then passed off after the

treatment you recommended, and it stayed away for a long time; but

now it has come back in a nervous form. I know that is so, because I

no longer have it, as I used to, when I make certain movements, but

only at particular times - for instance, when I wake up in the morning

and when I am agitated in certain ways.’ The lady’s diagnosis wasquite correct. It was now a question of finding out the cause of the

pain,  and  she  could  not  help  me  about  this  while  she  was  in  an

uninfluenced state. When I asked her, in concentration and under the

pressure of my hand, whether anything occurred to her or whether she

saw anything, she decided in favour of seeing and began to describe

her visual pictures. She saw something like a sun with rays, which I

naturally took to be a phosphene, produced by pressure on the eyes. I

expected that something more serviceable would follow. But she went

on: ‘Stars of a curious pale blue light, like moon light’ and so on, all of

which I took to be no more than flickering, flashes and bright specks

before her eyes. I was already prepared to regard this experiment as a

failure  and  I  was  wondering  how  I  could  make  an  inconspicuous

retreat from the affair, when my attention was attracted by one of the

phenomena  which  she  described.  She  saw  a  large  black  cross,

leaning over, which had round its edges the same shimmer of light

with which all her other pictures had shone, and on whose cross-beam

a small flame flickered. Clearly there could no longer be any question

of a phosphene here. I now listened carefully. Quantities of pictures

appeared bathed in the same light, curious signs looking rather like

Sanskrit; figures like triangles, among them a large triangle; the cross

once  more.  .  .  .  This  time  I  suspected  an  allegorical  meaning  and

asked what the cross could be. ‘It probably means pain,’ she replied. I

objected that by ‘cross’ one usually meant a moral burden. What lay

concealed behind the pain? She could not say, and went on with her

visions:  a  sun  with  golden  rays.  And  this  she  was  also  able  to

interpret. ‘It’s God, the primaeval force.’ Then came a gigantic lizard

which  regarded  her  enquiringly  but  not  alarmingly.  Then  a  heap  of

snakes. Then once more a sun, but with mild, silver rays; and in front

of her, between her and this source of light, a grating which hid the

centre of the sun from her. I had known for some time that what I had

to deal with were allegories and at once asked the meaning of this last

picture. She answered without hesitation: ‘The sun is perfection, the

ideal,  and  the  grating  represents  my  weaknesses  and  faults  which

stand between me and the ideal.’ ‘Are you reproaching yourself, then?

Are you dissatisfied with yourself: ‘Yes indeed.’ ‘Since when?’ ‘Since I

have  been  a  member  of  the  Theosophical  Society  and  have  been

reading its publications. I always had a low opinion of myself.’ ‘Whathas made the strongest impression on you recently?’ ‘A translation

from  the  Sanskrit  which  is  just  now  coming  out  in  instalments.’  A

minute later I was being initiated into her mental struggles and her

self-reproaches, and was hearing about a small episode which gave

rise to a self-reproach - an occasion on which what had previously

been  an  organic  pain  now  for  the  first  time  appeared  as  the

consequence of the conversion of an excitation. The pictures which I

had  first  taken  for  phosphenes  were  symbols  of  trains  of  thought

influenced by the occult and were perhaps actually emblems from the

title-pages of occult books.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        246

 

 

   Hitherto I have been so warm in my praises of the achievements of

pressure  as  an  auxiliary  procedure,  and  I  have  the  whole  time  so

greatly neglected the aspect of defence or resistance, that I may no

doubt have created an impression that this little device has put us in a

position to master the psychical obstacles to a cathartic treatment. But

to believe this would be to make a serious mistake. Gains of this kind,

so far as I can see, are not to be looked for in treatment. Here, as

elsewhere,  a  large  change  requires  a  large  amount  of  work.  The

procedure by pressure is no more than a trick for temporarily taking

unawares an ego which is eager for defence. In all fairly serious cases

the ego recalls its aims once more and proceeds with its resistance.

   I must mention the different forms in which this resistance appears.

One  is  that,  as  a  rule,  the  pressure  procedure  fails  on  the  first  or

second  occasion.  The  patient  then  declares,  very  disappointedly:  ‘I

expected  something  would  occur  to  me,  but  all  I  thought  was  how

tensely  I  was  expecting  it.  Nothing  came.’  The  fact  of  the  patient

putting  himself  on  his  guard  like  this  does  not  yet  amount  to  an

obstacle. We can say in reply: ‘It’s precisely because you were too

curious; it will work next time.’ And in fact it does work. It is remarkable

how  often  patients,  even  the  most  docile  and  intelligent,  can

completely  forget  their  undertaking,  though  they  had  agreed  to  itbeforehand. They promised to say whatever occurred to them under

the pressure of my hand, irrespectively of whether it seemed to them

relevant or not, and of whether it was agreeable to them to say it or

not - to say it, that is, without selecting and without being influenced by

criticism or affect. But they do not keep this promise; it is evidently

beyond their strength to do so. The work keeps on coming to a stop

and they keep on maintaining that this time nothing has occurred to

them. We must not believe what they say, we must always assume,

and tell them, too, that they have kept something back because they

thought it unimportant or found it distressing. We must insist on this,

we must repeat the pressure and represent ourselves as infallible, till

at last we are really told something. The patient then adds: ‘I could

have told you that the first time.’ ‘Why didn’t you say it?’ ‘I couldn’t

believe it could be that. It was only when it came back every time that I

made up my mind to say it.’ Or else: ‘I hoped it wouldn’t be that of all

things. I could well do without saying that. It was only when it refused

to be repressed that I saw I shouldn’t be let off.’ Thus after the event

the patient betrays the motives for a resistance which he refused to

admit to begin with. He is evidently quite unable to do anything but put

up resistance.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        247

 

      This  resistance  often  conceals  itself  behind  some  remarkable

excuses. ‘My mind is distracted to-day; the clock (or the piano in the

next room) is disturbing me.’ I have learned to answer such remarks:

‘Not at all. You have at this moment come up against something that

you had rather not say. It won’t do any good. Go on thinking about it.’

The longer the pause between my hand-pressure and the patient’s

beginning to speak, the more suspicious I become and the more it is

to be feared that the patient is re-arranging what has occurred to him

and is mutilating it in his reproduction of it. A most important piece of

information is often announced as being a redundant accessory, like

an opera prince disguised as a beggar. ‘Something has occurred to

me now, but it has nothing to do with the subject. I’m only saying itbecause you want to know every thing.’ Accompanying words such as

these usually introduce the long-sought solution. I always prick up my

ears when I hear a patient speak so disparagingly of something that

has  occurred  to  him.  For  it  is  an  indication  that  defence  has  been

successful  if  the  pathogenic  ideas  seem,  when  they  re-emerge,  to

have so little importance. From this we can infer in what the process of

defence consisted: it consisted in turning a strong idea into a weak

one, in robbing it of its affect.

   A pathogenic recollection is thus recognizable, among other things,

by  the  fact  that  the  patient  describes  it  as  unimportant  and

nevertheless only utters it under resistance. There are cases, too, in

which the patient tries to disown it even after its return. ‘Something

has occurred to me now, but you obviously put it into my head.’ Or, ‘I

know  what  you  expect  me  to  answer.  Of  course  you  believe  I’ve

thought this or that.’ A particularly clever method of disavowal lies in

saying: ‘Something has occurred to me now, it’s true, but it seems to

me as if I’d put it in deliberately. It doesn’t seem to be a reproduced

thought at all.’ In all such cases, I remain unshakeably firm. I avoid

entering into any of these distinctions but explain to the patient that

they are only forms of his resistance and pretexts raised by it against

reproducing this particular memory, which we must recognize in spite

of all this.

   When memories return in the form of pictures our task is in general

easier than when they return as thoughts. Hysterical patients, who are

as a rule of a ‘visual’ type, do not make such difficulties for the analyst

as those with obsessions.

   Once a picture has emerged from the patient’s memory, we may

hear him say that it becomes fragmentary and obscure in proportion

as he proceeds with his description of it. The patient is, as it were,

getting  rid  of  it  by  turning  it  into  words.  We  go  on  to  examine  the

memory picture itself in order to discover the direction in which our

work  is  to  proceed.    ‘Look  at  the  picture  once  more.  Has  it

disappeared?’  ‘Most  of  it,  yes,  but  I  still  see  this  detail.’  ‘Then  this

residue must still mean something. Either you will see something new

in addition to it, or something will occur to you in connection with it.’

When this work has been accomplished, the patient’s field of vision is

once  more  free  and  we  can  conjure  up  another  picture.  On  otheroccasions,  however,  a  picture  of  this  kind  will  remain  obstinately

before the patient’s inward eye, in spite of his having described it; and

this is an indication to me that he still has something important to tell

me about the topic of the picture. As soon as this has been done the

picture vanishes, like a ghost that has been laid.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        248

 

   It is of course of great importance for the progress of the analysis

that one should always turn out to be in the right vis-à-vis the patient,

otherwise one would always be dependent on what he chose to tell

one. It is therefore consoling to know that the pressure technique in

fact never fails, apart from a single case, which I shall have to discuss

later but of which I can at once say that it corresponds to a particular

motive for resistance. It can of course happen that one makes use of

the  procedure  in  circumstances  in  which  there  is  nothing  for  it  to

reveal.  For  instance,  we  may  ask  for  the  further  aetiology  of  a

symptom when we already have it completely before us, or we may

investigate  a  psychical  genealogy  of  a  symptom,  such  as  a  pain,

which is in fact a somatic one. In such cases the patient will equally

assert that nothing has occurred to him and this time he will be in the

right. We can avoid doing the patient an injustice if we make it a quite

general  rule  all  through  the  analysis  to  keep  an  eye  on  his  facial

expression  as  he  lies  quietly  before  us.  We  can  then  learn  to

distinguish  without  any  difficulty  the  restful  state  of  mind  that

accompanies the real absence of a recollection from the tension and

signs  of  emotion  with  which  he  tries  to  disavow  the  emerging

recollection,  in  obedience  to  defence.  Moreover,  experiences  like

these  make  it  possible  also  to  use  the  pressure  technique  for

purposes of differential diagnosis.

   Thus even with the assistance of the pressure technique the work is

by no means easy. The one advantage that we gain is of learning from

the results of this procedure the direction in which we have to conduct

our enquiries and the things that we have to insist upon to the patient.

With  some  cases  this  suffices.  The  principal  point  is  that  I  shouldguess the secret and tell it to the patient straight out; and he is then as

a rule obliged to abandon his rejection of it. In other cases more is

required. The patient’s persisting resistance is indicated by the fact

that connections are broken, solutions fail to appear, the pictures are

recalled indistinctly and incompletely. Looking back from a later period

of an analysis to an earlier one, we are often astonished to realize in

what a mutilated manner all the ideas and scenes emerged which we

extracted from the patient by the procedure of pressing. Precisely the

essential elements of the picture were missing - its relation to himself

or to the main contents of his thoughts - and that is why it remained

unintelligible.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        249

 

   I will give one or two examples of the way in which a censoring of

this  kind  operates  when  pathogenic  recollections  first  emerge.  For

instance, the patient sees the upper part of a woman’s body with the

dress not properly fastened - out of carelessness, it seems. It is not

until much later that he fits a head to this torso and thus reveals a

particular  person  and  his  relation  to  her.  Or  he  brings  up  a

reminiscence from his childhood of two boys. What they look like is

quite obscure to him, but they are said to have been guilty of some

misdeed. It is not until many months later and after the analysis has

made great advances that he sees this reminiscence once more and

recognizes himself in one of the children and his brother in the other.

   What means have we at our disposal for overcoming this continual

resistance?  Few, but they include almost all those by which one man

can ordinarily exert a psychical influence on another. In the first place,

we must reflect that a psychical resistance, especially one that has

been  in  force  for  a  long  time,  can  only  be  resolved  slowly  and  by

degrees, and we must wait patiently. In the next place, we may reckon

on  the  intellectual  interest  which  the  patient  begins  to  feel  after

working for a short time. By explaining things to him, by giving him

information  about  the  marvellous  world  of  psychical  processes  into

which we ourselves only gained insight by such analyses, we makehim himself into a collaborator, induce him to regard himself with the

objective  interest  of  an  investigator,  and  thus  push  back  his

resistance, resting as it does on an affective basis. But lastly - and this

remains  the  strongest  lever  -  we  must  endeavour,  after  we  have

discovered the motives for his defence, to deprive them of their value

or  even  to  replace  them  by  more  powerful  ones.  This  no  doubt  is

where it ceases to be possible to state psychotherapeutic activity in

formulas.  One  works  to  the  best  of  one’s  power,  as  an  elucidator

(where  ignorance  has  given  rise  to  fear),  as  a  teacher,  as  the

representative  of  a  freer  or  superior  view  of  the  world,  as  a  father

confessor who gives absolution, as it were, by a continuance of his

sympathy and respect after the confession has been made. One tries

to give the patient human assistance, so far as this is allowed by the

capacity of one’s own personality and by the amount of sympathy that

one can feel for the particular case. It is an essential precondition for

such psychical activity that we should have more or less divined the

nature of the case and the motives of the defence operating in it, and

fortunately the technique of insistence and pressure takes us as far as

this. The more such riddles we have already solved, the easier we

may find it to guess a new one and the sooner we shall be able to

start on the truly curative psychical work. For it is well to recognize this

clearly:  the  patient  only  gets  free  from  the  hysterical  symptom  by

reproducing the pathogenic impressions that caused it and by giving

utterance  to  them  with  an  expression  of  affect,  and  thus  the

therapeutic task consists solely in inducing him to do so; when once

this task has been accomplished there is nothing left for the physician

to correct or to remove. Whatever may be required for this purpose in

the way of counter-suggestions has already been expended during the

struggle against the resistance. The situation may be compared with

the unlocking of a locked door, after which opening it by turning the

handle offers no further difficulty.

   Besides the intellectual motives which we mobilize to overcome the

resistance, there is an affective factor, the personal influence of the

physician, which we can seldom do without, and in a number of cases

the latter alone is in a position to remove the resistance. The situation

here is no different from what it is elsewhere in medicine and there is

no therapeutic procedure of which one may say that it can do entirelywithout the co-operation of this personal factor.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        250

 

 

                                          (3)

 

      In  view  of  what  I  have  said  in  the  preceding  section  about  the

difficulties  of  my  technique,  which  I  have  unsparingly  exposed  (I

brought them together, incidentally, from the severest cases; things

often turn out very much more conveniently) - in view of all this, then,

everyone will no doubt feel inclined to ask whether it would not be

more expedient, instead of putting up with all these troubles, to make

a more energetic use of hypnosis or to restrict the use of the cathartic

method to patients who can be put under deep hypnosis. As regards

the  latter  proposal  I  should  have  to  answer  that  in  that  case  the

number of suitable patients, so far as my skill is concerned, would

dwindle far too much; and I would meet the first piece of advice with

the suspicion that the forcible imposition of hypnosis might not spare

us much resistance. My experiences on this point, oddly enough, have

not been numerous, and I cannot, therefore, go beyond a suspicion.

But  where  I  have  carried  out  a  cathartic  treatment  under  hypnosis

instead of under concentration, I did not find that this diminished the

work I had to do. Not long ago I completed a treatment of this kind in

the course of which I caused a hysterical paralysis of the legs to clear

up.  The  patient  passed  into  a  state  which  was  very  different

psychically  from  waking  and  which  was  characterized  physically  by

the fact that it was impossible for her to open her eyes or get up till I

had  called  out  to  her:  ‘Now  wake  up!’  None  the  less  I  have  never

come  across  greater  resistance  than  in  this  case.  I  attached  no

importance  to  these  physical  signs,  and  towards  the  end  of  the

treatment, which lasted ten months, they had ceased to be noticeable.

But in spite of this the patient’s state while we were working lost none

of  its  psychical  characteristics  -  the  capacity  she  possessed  for

remembering unconscious material and her quite special relation tothe  figure  of  the  physician.  On  the  other  hand,  I  have  given  an

example  in  the  case  history  of  Frau  Emmy  von  N.  of  a  cathartic

treatment in the deepest somnambulism in which resistance played

scarcely any part. But it is also true that I learnt from that lady nothing

whose  telling  might  have  called  for  any  special  overcoming  of

objections, nothing that she could not have told me even in a waking

state, supposing we had been acquainted for some time and she had

thought fairly highly of me. I never reached the true causes of her

illness, which were no doubt identical with the causes of her relapse

after my treatment (for this was my first attempt with this method); and

the only occasion on which I happened to ask her for a reminiscence

which  involved  an  erotic  element  I  found  her  just  as  reluctant  and

untrustworthy in what she told me as I did later with any of my non-

somnambulistic  patients.  I  have  already  spoken  in  that  lady’s  case

history of the resistance which she put up even during somnambulism

to other requests and suggestions of mine. I have become altogether

sceptical  about  the  value  of  hypnosis  in  facilitating  cathartic

treatments, since I have experienced instances in which during deep

somnambulism  there  has  been  absolute therapeutic  recalcitrance,

where  in  other  respects  the  patient  has  been  perfectly  obedient.  I

reported a case of this kind briefly on p. 90 n., and I could add others.

I may admit, too, that this experience has corresponded pretty well to

the requirement I insist upon that there shall be a quantitative relation

between cause and effect in the psychical field as well.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        251

 

 

   In what I have hitherto said the idea of resistance has forced its way

into  the  foreground.  I  have  shown  how,  in  the  course  of  our

therapeutic work, we have been led to the view that hysteria originates

through  the  repression  of  an  incompatible  idea  from  a  motive  of

defence. On this view, the repressed idea would persist as a memory

trace that is weak (has little intensity), while the affect that is torn from

it would be used for a somatic innervation. (That is, the excitation is‘converted’.)  It  would  seem,  then,  that  it  is  precisely  through  its

repression that the idea becomes the cause of morbid symptoms -

that is to say, becomes pathogenic. A hysteria exhibiting this psychical

mechanism may be given the name of ‘defence hysteria’.

   Now both of us, Breuer and I, have repeatedly spoken of two other

kinds of hysteria, for which we have introduced the terms ‘hypnoid

hysteria’ and ‘retention hysteria’. It was hypnoid hysteria which was

the first of all to enter our field of study. I could not, indeed, find a

better example of it than Breuer’s first case, which stands at the head

of  our  case  histories.  Breuer  has  put  forward  for  such  cases  of

hypnoid  hysteria  a  psychical  mechanism  which  is  substantially

different from that of defence by conversion. In his view what happens

in hypnoid hysteria is that an idea becomes pathogenic because it has

been received during a special psychical state and has from the first

remained  outside  the  ego.  No  psychical  force  has  therefore  been

required in order to keep it apart from the ego and no resistance need

be  aroused  if  we  introduce  it  into  the  ego  with  the  help  of  mental

activity  during  somnambulism.  And  Anna  O.’s  case  history  in  fact

shows no sign of any such resistance.

   I regard this distinction as so important that, on the strength of it, I

willingly adhere to this hypothesis of there being a hypnoid hysteria.

Strangely  enough,  I  have  never  in  my  own  experience  met  with  a

genuine hypnoid hysteria. Any that I took in hand has turned into a

defence hysteria. It is not, indeed, that I have never had to do with

symptoms  which  demonstrably  arose  during  dissociated  states  of

consciousness and were obliged for that reason to remain excluded

from the ego. This was sometimes so in my cases as well; but I was

able  to  show  afterwards  that  the  so-called  hypnoid  state  owed  its

separation to the fact that in it a psychical group had come into effect

which had previously been split off by defence. In short, I am unable to

suppress a suspicion that somewhere or other the roots of hypnoid

and defence hysteria come together, and that there the primary factor

is defence. But I can say nothing about this.

      My  judgement  is  for  the  moment  equally  uncertain  as  regards

‘retention hysteria’, in which the therapeutic work is supposed equally

to proceed without resistance. I had a case which I looked upon as a

typical retention hysteria and I rejoiced in the prospect of an easy andcertain success. But this success did not occur, though the work was

in fact easy. I therefore suspect, though once again subject to all the

reserve which is proper to ignorance, that at the basis of retention

hysteria, too, an element of defence is to be found which has forced

the whole process in the direction of hysteria. It is to be hoped that

fresh observations will soon decide whether I am running the risk of

falling into one-sidedness and error in thus favouring an extension of

the concept of defence to the whole of hysteria.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        252

 

 

   I have dealt so far with the difficulties and technique of the cathartic

method,  and  I  should  like  to  add  a  few  indications  as  to  the  form

assumed by an analysis when this technique is adopted. For me this

is a highly interesting subject, but I cannot expect it to arouse similar

interest in others, who have not yet carried out an analysis of this kind.

I shall, it is true, once more be talking about the technique, but this

time it will be about inherent difficulties for which we cannot hold the

patients responsible and which must be partly the same in a hypnoid

or retention hysteria as in the defence hysterias which I have before

my eyes as a model. I approach this last part of my exposition with the

expectation that the psychical characteristics which will be revealed in

it  may  one  day  acquire  a  certain  value  as  raw  material  for  the

dynamics of ideation.

   The first and most powerful impression made upon one during such

an analysis is certainly that the pathogenic psychical material which

has ostensibly been forgotten, which is not at the ego’s disposal and

which plays no part in association and memory, nevertheless in some

fashion lies ready to hand and in correct and proper order. It is only a

question of removing the resistances that bar the way to the material.

In other respects this material is known, in the same way in which we

are  able  to  know  anything;  the  correct  connections  between  the

separate  ideas  and  between  them  and  the  non-pathogenic  ones,

which are frequently remembered, are in existence; they have beencompleted  at  some  time  and  are  stored  up  in  the  memory.  The

pathogenic  psychical  material  appears  to  be  the  property  of  an

intelligence which is not necessarily inferior to that of the normal ego.

The  appearance  of  a  second  personality  is  often  presented  in  the

most deceptive manner.

   Whether this impression is justified, or whether in thinking this we

are not dating back to the period of the illness an arrangement of the

psychical material which in fact was made after recovery - these are

questions which I should prefer not to discuss as yet, and not in these

pages. The observations made during such analyses can in any case

be most conveniently and clearly described if we regard them from the

position that we are able to assume after recovery for the purpose of

surveying the case as a whole.

      As  a  rule,  indeed,  the  situation  is  not  as  simple  as  we  have

represented it in particular cases - for instance, where there is one

symptom only, which has arisen from one major trauma. We do not

usually find a single hysterical symptom, but a number of them, partly

independent of one another and partly linked together. We must not

expect  to  meet  with  a single  traumatic  memory  and  a single

pathogenic idea as its nucleus; we must be prepared for successions

of partial traumas and concatenations of pathogenic trains of thought.

A monosymptomatic traumatic hysteria is, as it were, an elementary

organism, a unicellular creature, as compared with the complicated

structure of such comparatively severe neuroses as we usually meet

with.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        253

 

   The psychical material in such cases of hysteria presents itself as a

structure  in  several  dimensions  which  is  stratified  in  at  least  three

different ways. (I hope I shall presently be able to justify this pictorial

mode of expression.) To begin with there is a nucleus consisting in

memories of events or trains of thought in which the traumatic factor

has  culminated  or  the  pathogenic  idea  has  found  its  purest

manifestation. Round this nucleus we find what is often an incrediblyprofuse  amount  of  other  mnemic  material  which  has  to  be  worked

through in the analysis and which is, as we have said, arranged in a

threefold order.

   In the first place there is an unmistakable linear chronological order

which obtains within each separate theme. As an example of this I will

merely quote the arrangement of the material in Breuer’s analysis of

Anna O. Let us take the theme of becoming deaf, of not hearing. This

was differentiated according to seven sets of determinants, and under

each  of  these  seven  headings  ten  to  over  a  hundred  individual

memories  were  collected  in  chronological  series  (p. 35).  It  was  as

though  we  were  examining  a  dossier  that  had  been  kept  in  good

order. The analysis of my patient Emmy von N. contained similar files

of memories though they were not so fully enumerated and described.

These files form a quite general feature of every analysis and their

contents always emerge in a chronological order which is as infallibly

trustworthy as the succession of days of the week or names of the

month in a mentally normal person. They make the work of analysis

more difficult by the peculiarity that, in reproducing the memories, they

reverse the order in which these originated. The freshest and newest

experience in the file appears first, as an outer cover, and last of all

comes the experience with which the series in fact began.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        254

 

   I have described such groupings of similar memories into collections

arranged in linear sequences (like a file of documents, a packet, etc.)

as  constituting  ‘themes’.  These  themes  exhibit  a  second  kind  of

arrangement. Each of them is - I can not express it in any other way -

stratified concentrically round the pathogenic nucleus. It is not hard to

say what produces this stratification, what diminishing or increasing

magnitude  is  the  basis  of  this  arrangement.  The  contents  of  each

particular stratum are characterized by an equal degree of resistance,

and that degree increases in proportion as the strata are nearer to the

nucleus. Thus there are zones within which there is all equal degree of

modification of consciousness, and the different themes extend acrossthese  zones.  The  most  peripheral  strata  contain  the  memories  (or

files),  which,  belonging  to  different  themes,  are  easily  remembered

and have always been clearly conscious. The deeper we go the more

difficult it becomes for the emerging memories to be recognized, till

near the nucleus we come upon memories which the patient disavows

even in reproducing them.

   It is this peculiarity of the concentric stratification of the pathogenic

psychical  material  which,  as  we  shall  hear,  lends  to  the  course  of

these  analyses  their  characteristic  features.  A  third  kind  of

arrangement has still to be mentioned - the most important, but the

one about which it is least easy to make any general statement. What

I have in mind is an arrangement according to thought-content, the

linkage made by a logical thread which reaches as far as the nucleus

and  tends  to  take  an  irregular  and  twisting  path,  different  in  every

case. This arrangement has a dynamic character, in contrast to the

morphological  one  of  the  two  stratifications  mentioned  previously.

While  these  two  would  be  represented  in  a  spatial  diagram  by  a

continuous  line,  curved  or  straight,  the  course  of  the  logical  chain

would have to be indicated by a broken line which would pass along

the most roundabout paths from the surface to the deepest layers and

back,  and  yet  would  in  general  advance  from  the  periphery  to  the

central nucleus, touching at every intermediate halting-place - a line

resembling the zig-zag line in the solution of a Knight’s Move problem,

which cuts across the squares in the diagram of the chess-board.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        255

 

   I must dwell for a moment longer on this last simile in order to

emphasize a point in which it does not do justice to the characteristics

of the subject of the comparison. The logical chain corresponds not

only to a zig-zag, twisted line, but rather to a ramifying system of lines

and more particularly to a converging one. It contains nodal points at

which two or more threads meet and thereafter proceed as one; and

as  a  rule  several  threads  which  run  independently,  or  which  are

connected at various points by side-paths, debouch into the nucleus.To put this in other words, it is very remarkable how often a symptom

is determined in several ways, is ‘overdetermined’.

      My  attempt  to  demonstrate  the  organization  of  the  pathogenic

psychical material will be complete when I have introduced one more

complication. For it can happen that there is more than one nucleus in

the pathogenic material - if, for instance, we have to analyse a second

outbreak  of  hysteria  which  has  an  aetiology  of  its  own  but  is

nevertheless connected with a first outbreak of acute hysteria which

was got over years earlier. It is easy to imagine, if this is so, what

additions there must be to the strata and paths of thought in order to

establish a connection between the two pathogenic nuclei.

   I shall now make one or two further remarks on the picture we have

just arrived at of the organization of the pathogenic material. We have

said  that  this  material  behaves  like  a  foreign  body,  and  that  the

treatment, too, works like the removal of a foreign body from the living

tissue. We are now in a position to see where this comparison fails. A

foreign body does not enter into any relation with the layers of tissue

that surround it, although it modifies them and necessitates a reactive

inflammation in them. Our pathogenic psychical group, on the other

hand,  does  not  admit  of  being  cleanly  extirpated  from  the  ego.  Its

external strata pass over in every direction into portions of the normal

ego;  and,  indeed,  they  belong  to  the  latter  just  as  much  as  to  the

pathogenic organization. In analysis the boundary between the two is

fixed purely conventionally, now at one point, now at another, and in

some places it cannot be laid down at all. The interior layers of the

pathogenic organization are increasingly alien to the ego, but once

more without there being any visible boundary at which the pathogenic

material begins. In fact the pathogenic organization does not behave

like a foreign body, but far more like an infiltrate. In this simile the

resistance  must  be  regarded  as  what  is  infiltrating.  Nor  does  the

treatment consist in extirpating something - psychotherapy is not able

to do this for the present - but in causing the resistance to melt and in

thus enabling the circulation to make its way into a region that has

hitherto been cut off.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria                                                                                        256

 

   (I am making use here of a number of similes, all of which have only

a very limited resemblance to my subject and which, moreover, are

incompatible with one another. I am aware that this is so, and I am in

no  danger  of  over-estimating  their  value.  But  my  purpose  in  using

them is to throw light from different directions on a highly complicated

topic which has never yet been represented. I shall therefore venture

to continue in the following pages to introduce similes in the same

manner, though I know this is not free from objection.)

   If it were possible, after the case had been completely cleared up, to

demonstrate the pathogenic material to a third person in what we now

know is its complicated and multi-dimensional organization, we should

rightly  be  asked  how  a  camel  like  this  got  through  the  eye  of  the

needle. For there is some justification for speaking of the ‘defile’ of

consciousness. The term gains meaning and liveliness for a physician

who carries out an analysis like this. Only a single memory at a time

can enter ego-consciousness. A patient who is occupied in working

through such a memory sees nothing of what is pushing after it and

forgets  what  has  already  pushed  its  way  through.  If  there  are

difficulties in the way of mastering this single pathogenic memory - as,

for instance, if the patient does not relax his resistance against it, if he

tries to repress or mutilate it - then the defile is, so to speak, blocked.

The work is at a standstill, nothing more can appear, and the single

memory which is in process of breaking through remains in front of the

patient until he has taken it up into the breadth of his ego. The whole

spatially-extended mass of psychogenic material is in this way drawn

through a narrow cleft and thus arrives in consciousness cut up, as it

were, into pieces or strips. It is the psychotherapist’s business to put

these together once more into the organization which he presumes to

have existed. Anyone who has a craving for further similes may think

at this point of a Chinese puzzle.

   If we are faced with starting such an analysis, in which we have

reason to expect an organization of pathogenic material like this, we

shall be assisted by what experience has taught us, namely that it is

quite  hopeless  to  try  to  penetrate  directly  to  the  nucleus  of  the

pathogenic  organization.  Even  if  we  ourselves  could  guess  it,  thepatient would not know what to do with the explanation offered to him

and would not be psychologically changed by it.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        257

 

   There is nothing for it but to keep at first to the periphery of the

psychical structure. We begin by getting the patient to tell us what he

knows  and  remembers,  while  we  are  at  the  same  time  already

directing his attention and overcoming his slighter resistances by the

use  of  the  pressure  procedure.  Whenever  we  have  opened  a  new

path by thus pressing on his forehead, we may expect him to advance

some distance without fresh resistance.

   After we have worked in this way for some time, the patient begins

as a rule to co-operate with us. A great number of reminiscences now

occur  to  him,  without  our  having  to  question  him  or  set  him  tasks.

What we have done is to make a path to an inner stratum within which

the patient now has spontaneously at his disposal material that has an

equal degree of resistance attaching to it. It is best to allow him for a

time to reproduce such material without being influenced. It is true that

he himself is not in a position to uncover important connections, but he

may be left to clear up material lying within the same stratum. The

things that he brings up in this way often seem disconnected, but they

offer  material  which  will  be  given  point  when  a  connection  is

discovered later on.

   Here we have in general to guard against two things. If we interfere

with the patient in his reproduction of the ideas that pour in on him, we

may  ‘bury’  things  that  have  to  be  freed  later  with  a  great  deal  of

trouble. On the other hand we must not over-estimate the patient’s

unconscious ‘intelligence’ and leave the direction of the whole work to

it. If I wanted to give a diagrammatic picture of our mode of operation,

I might perhaps say that we ourselves undertake the opening up of

inner strata, advancing radially, whereas the patient looks after the

peripheral extension of the work.

   Advances are brought about, as we know, by overcoming resistance

in the manner already indicated. But before this, we have as a ruleanother task to perform. We must get hold of a piece of the logical

thread, by whose guidance alone we may hope to penetrate to the

interior. We cannot expect that the free communications made by the

patient, the material from the most superficial strata, will make it easy

for  the  analyst  to  recognize  at  what  points  the  path  leads  into  the

depths or where he is to find the starting-points of the connections of

thought of which he is in search. On the contrary, this is precisely what

is carefully concealed; the account given by the patient sounds as if it

were  complete  and  self-contained.  It  is  at  first  as  though  we  were

standing before a wall which shut out every prospect and prevents us

from having any idea whether there is anything behind it, and if so,

what.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        258

 

   But if we examine with a critical eye the account that the patient has

given us without much trouble or resistance, we shall quite infallibly

discover gaps and imperfections in it. At one point the train of thought

will be visibly interrupted and patched up by the patient as best he

may, with a turn of speech or an inadequate explanation; at another

point we come upon a motive which would have to be described as a

feeble one in a normal person. The patient will not recognize these

deficiencies when his attention is drawn to them. But the physician will

be  right  in  looking  behind  the  weak  spots  for  an  approach  to  the

material  in  the  deeper  layers  and  in  hoping  that  he  will  discover

precisely there the connecting threads for which he is seeking with the

pressure  procedure.  Accordingly,  we  say  to  the  patient:  ‘You  are

mistaken; what you are putting forward can have nothing to do with

the present subject. We must expect to come upon something else

here, and this will occur to you under the pressure of my hand.’

   For we may make the same demands for logical connection and

sufficient motivation in a train of thought, even if it extends into the

unconscious, from a hysterical patient as we should from a normal

individual.  It  is  not  within  the  power  of  a  neurosis  to  relax  these

relations. If the chains of ideas in neurotic and particularly in hystericalpatients produce a different impression, if in them the relative intensity

of different ideas seems inexplicable by psychological determinants

alone, we have already found out the reason for this and can attribute

it  to the  existence  of  hidden  unconscious  motives.  We  may  thus

suspect the presence of such secret motives wherever a breach of

this kind in a train of thought is apparent or when the force ascribed by

the patient to his motives goes far beyond the normal.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        259

 

      In  carrying  out  this  work  we  must  of  course  keep  free  from  the

theoretical prejudice that we are dealing with the abnormal brains of

‘dégénérés’ and ‘déséquilibrés’,¹ who are at liberty, owing to a stigma,

to throw overboard the common psychological laws that govern the

connection  of  ideas  and  in  whom  one  chance  idea  may  become

exaggeratedly  intense  for  no  motive  and  another  may  remain

indestructible for no psychological reason. Experience shows that the

contrary is true of hysteria. Once we have discovered the concealed

motives,  which  have  often  remained  unconscious,  and  have  taken

them into account, nothing that is puzzling or contrary to rule remains

in hysterical connections of thought, any more than in normal ones.

      In  this  way,  then,  by  detecting  lacunas  in  the  patient’s  first

description, lacunas which are often covered by ‘false connections’,

we get hold of a piece of the logical thread at the periphery, and from

this point on we clear a further path by the pressure technique.

   In doing this, we very seldom succeed in making our way right into

the interior along one and the same thread. As a rule it breaks off half-

way:  the  pressure  fails  and  either  produces  no  result  or  one  that

cannot be clarified or carried further in spite of every effort. We soon

learn, when this happens, to avoid the mistakes into which we might

fall.  The  patient’s  facial  expression  must  decide  whether  we  have

really come to an end, or whether this is an instance which requires no

psychical  elucidation,  or  whether  what  has  brought  the  work  to  a

standstill  is  excessive  resistance.  In  the  last  case,  if  we  cannot

promptly  overcome  the  resistance  we  may  assume  that  we  havefollowed  the  thread  into  a  stratum  which  is  for  the  time  being  still

impenetrable. We drop it and take up another thread, which we may

perhaps follow equally far. When we have arrived at this stratum along

all the threads and have discovered the entanglements on account of

which  the  separate  threads  could  not  be  followed  any  further  in

isolation, we can think of attacking the resistance before us afresh.

 

   ¹ [‘Degenerate’ and ‘unbalanced’ persons.]

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        260

 

      It  is  easy  to  imagine  how  complicated  a  work  of  this  kind  can

become.  We  force  our  way  into  the  internal  strata,  overcoming

resistances all the time; we get to know the themes accumulated in

one  of  these  strata  and  the  threads  running  through  it,  and  we

experiment how far we can advance with our present means and the

knowledge we have acquired; we obtain preliminary information about

the contents of the next strata by means of the pressure technique; we

drop threads and pick them up again; we follow them as far as nodal

points; we are constantly making up arrears; and every time that we

pursue  a  file  of  memories  we  are  led  to  some  side-path,  which

nevertheless  eventually  joins  up  again.  By  this  method  we  at  last

reach  a  point  at  which  we  can  stop  working  in  strata  and  can

penetrate by a main path straight to the nucleus of the pathogenic

organization. With this the struggle is won, though not yet ended. We

must go back and take up the other threads and exhaust the material.

But now the patient helps us energetically. His resistance is for the

most part broken.

   In these later stages of the work it is of use if we can guess the way

in which things are connected up and tell the patient before we have

uncovered it. If we have guessed right, the course of the analysis will

be  accelerated;  but  even  a  wrong  hypothesis  helps  us  on,  by

compelling the patient to take sides and by enticing him into energetic

denials which betray his undoubted better knowledge.

   We learn with astonishment from this that we are not in a position to

force anything on the patient about the things of which he is ostensiblyignorant or to influence the products of the analysis by arousing an

expectation. I have never once succeeded, by foretelling something, in

altering or falsifying the reproduction of memories or the connection of

events; for if I had, it would inevitably have been betrayed in the end

by some contradiction in the material. If something turned out as I had

foretold, it was invariably proved by a great number of unimpeachable

reminiscences that I had done no more than guess right. We need not

be  afraid,  therefore,  of  telling  the  patient  what  we  think  his  next

connection of thought is going to be. It will do no harm.

   Another observation, which is constantly repeated, relates to the

patient’s  spontaneous  reproductions.  It  may  be  asserted  that  every

single reminiscence which emerges during an analysis of this kind has

significance. An intrusion of irrelevant mnemic images (which happen

in some way or other to be associated with the important ones) in fact

never occurs. An exception which does not contradict this rule may be

postulated  for  memories  which,  unimportant  in  themselves,  are

nevertheless  indispensable  as  a  bridge,  in  the  sense  that  the

association  between  two  important  memories  can  only  be  made

through them.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        261

 

   The length of time during which a memory remains in the narrow

defile in front of the patient’s consciousness is, as has already been

explained,  in  direct  proportion  to  its  importance.  A  picture  which

refuses  to  disappear  is  one  which  still  calls  for  consideration,  a

thought which cannot be dismissed is one that needs to be pursued

further. Moreover, a recollection never returns a second time once it

has been dealt with; an image that has been ‘talked away’ is not seen

again. If nevertheless this does happen we can confidently assume

that the second time the image will be accompanied by a new set of

thoughts, or the idea will have new implications. In other words, they

have not been completely dealt with. Again, it frequently happens that

an image or thought will re-appear in different degrees of intensity,

first as a hint and later with complete clarity. This, however, does notcontradict what I have just asserted.

      Among  the  tasks  presented  by  analysis  is  that  of  getting  rid  of

symptoms which are capable of increasing in intensity or of returning:

pains,  symptoms  (such  as  vomiting)  which  are  due  to  stimuli,

sensations  or  contractures.  While  we  are  working  at  one  of  these

symptoms  we  come  across  the  interesting  and  not  undesired

phenomenon  of  ‘joining  in  the  conversation’.  The  problematical

symptom re-appears, or appears with greater intensity, as soon as we

reach the region of the pathogenic organization which contains the

symptom’s aetiology, and thenceforward it accompanies the work with

characteristic oscillations which are instructive to the physician. The

intensity of the symptom (let us take for instance a desire to vomit)

increases the deeper we penetrate into one of the relevant pathogenic

memories;  it  reaches  its  climax  shortly  before  the  patient  gives

utterance  to  that  memory;  and  when  he  has  finished  doing  so  it

suddenly diminishes or even vanishes completely for a time. If, owing

to resistance, the patient delays his telling for a long time, the tension

of the sensation - of the desire to vomit - becomes unbearable, and if

we cannot force him to speak he actually begins to vomit. In this way

we  obtain  a  plastic  impression  of  the  fact  that  ‘vomiting’  takes  the

place of a psychical act (in this instance, the act of utterance ), exactly

as the conversion theory of hysteria maintains.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        262

 

   This oscillation in intensity on the part of the hysterical symptom is

then  repeated  every  time  we  approach  a  fresh  memory  which  is

pathogenic  in  respect  of  it.  The  symptom,  we  might  say,  is  on  the

agenda all the time. If we are obliged temporarily to drop the thread to

which  this  symptom  is  attached,  the  symptom,  too,  retires  into

obscurity, to emerge once more at a later period of the analysis. This

performance goes on until the working-over of the pathogenic material

disposes of the symptom once and for all.

   In all this, strictly speaking, the hysterical symptom is not behaving

in  any  way  differently  from  the  memory-picture  or  the  reproducedthought which we conjure up under the pressure of our hand. In both

cases  we  find  the  same  obsessionally  obstinate  recurrence  in  the

patient’s memory, which has to be disposed of. The difference lies

only  in  the  apparently  spontaneous  emergence  of  the  hysterical

symptoms, while, as we very well remember, we ourselves provoked

the  scenes  and  ideas.  In  fact,  however,  there  is  an  uninterrupted

series, extending from the unmodified mnemic residues of affective

experiences and acts of thought to the hysterical symptoms, which are

the mnemic symbols of those experiences and thoughts.

   The phenomenon of hysterical symptoms joining in the conversation

during the analysis involves a practical drawback, to which we ought

to be able to reconcile the patient. It is quite impossible to effect an

analysis of a symptom at a single stretch or to distribute the intervals

in our work so that they fit in precisely with pauses in the process of

dealing  with  the  symptom.  On  the  contrary,  interruptions  which  are

imperatively prescribed by incidental circumstances in the treatment,

such as the lateness of the hour, often occur at the most inconvenient

points, just as one may be approaching a decision or just as a new

topic  emerges.  Every  newspaper  reader  suffers  from  the  same

drawback  in  reading  the  daily  instalment  of  his  serial  story,  when,

immediately after the heroine’s decisive speech or after the shot has

rung out, he comes upon the words: ‘To be continued.’ In our own

case the topic that has been raised but not dealt with, the symptom

that  has  become  temporarily  intensified  and  has  not  yet  been

explained, persists in the patient’s mind and may perhaps be more

troublesome to him than it has otherwise been. He will simply have to

make the best of this; there is no other way of arranging things. There

are patients who, in the course of an analysis, simply cannot get free

of a topic that has once been raised and who are obsessed by it in the

interval  between  two  treatments;  since  by  themselves  they  cannot

take any steps towards getting rid of it, they suffer more, to begin with,

than they did before the treatment. But even such patients learn in the

end to wait for the doctor and to shift all the interest that they feel in

getting rid of the pathogenic material on to the hours of treatment,

after which they begin to feel freer in the intervals.

                                   Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        263

 

 

   The general condition of patients during an analysis of this kind also

deserves notice. For a time it is uninfluenced by the treatment and

continues  to  be  an  expression  of  the  factors  that  were  operative

earlier. But after this there comes a moment when the treatment takes

hold of the patient; it grips his interest, and thenceforward his general

condition  becomes  more  and  more  dependent  on  the  state  of  the

work. Every time something new is elucidated or an important stage in

the process of the analysis is reached, the patient, too, feels relieved

and enjoys a foretaste, as it were, of his approaching liberation. Every

time the work halts and confusion threatens, the psychical burden by

which he is oppressed increases; his feeling of unhappiness and his

incapacity  for  work  grow  more  intense.  But  neither  of  these  things

happens  for  more  than  a  short  time.  For  the  analysis  proceeds,

disdaining to boast because the patient feels well for the time being

and going on its way regardless of his periods of gloom. We feel glad,

in general, when we have replaced the spontaneous oscillations in his

condition by oscillations which we ourselves have provoked and which

we understand, just as we are glad when we see the spontaneous

succession  of  symptoms  replaced  by  an  order  of  the  day  which

corresponds to the state of the analysis.

   To begin with, the work becomes more obscure and difficult, as a

rule,  the  deeper  we  penetrate  into  the  stratified  psychical  structure

which I have described above. But once we have worked our way as

far as the nucleus, light dawns and we need not fear that the patient’s

general condition will be subject to any severe periods of gloom. But

the reward of our labours, the cessation of the symptoms, can only be

expected when we have accomplished the complete analysis of every

individual  symptom;  and  indeed,  if  the  individual  symptoms  are

interconnected  at  numerous  nodal  points,  we  shall  not  even  be

encouraged  during  the  work  by  partial  successes.  Thanks  to  the

abundant causal connections, every pathogenic idea which has not

yet been got rid of operates as a motive for the whole of the products

of the neurosis, and it is only with the last word of the analysis that thewhole clinical picture vanishes, just as happens with memories that

are reproduced individually.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        264

 

      If  a  pathogenic  memory  or  a  pathogenic  connection  which  had

formerly been withdrawn from the ego-consciousness is uncovered by

the work of the analysis and introduced into the ego, we find that the

psychical  personality  which  is  thus  enriched  has  various  ways  of

expressing  itself  with  regard  to  what  it  has  acquired.  It  happens

particularly often that, after we have laboriously forced some piece of

knowledge  on  a  patient,  he  will  declare:  ‘I’ve  always  known  that,  I

could have told you that before.’ Those with some degree of insight

recognize afterwards that this is a piece of self-deception and blame

themselves for being ungrateful. Apart from this, the attitude adopted

by the ego to its new acquisition depends in general on the stratum of

analysis from which that acquisition originates. Things that belong to

the external strata are recognized without difficulty; they had, indeed,

always remained in the ego’s possession, and the only novelty to the

ego is their connection with the deeper strata of pathological material.

Things  that  are  brought  to  light  from  these  deeper  strata  are  also

recognized  and  acknowledged,  but  often  only  after  considerable

hesitations  and  doubts.  Visual  memory-images  are  of  course  more

difficult to disavow than the memory-traces of mere trains of thought.

Not at all infrequently the patient begins by saying: ‘It’s possible that I

thought this, but I can’t remember having done so.’ And it is not until

he has been familiar with the hypothesis for some time that he comes

to recognize it as well; he remembers - and confirms the fact, too, by

subsidiary links - that he really did once have the thought. I make it a

rule,  however,  during  the  analysis  to  keep  my  estimate  of  the

reminiscence  that  comes  up  independent  of  the  patient’s

acknowledgement of it. I shall never be tired of repeating that we are

bound  to  accept  whatever  our  procedure  brings  to  light.  If  there  is

anything in it that is not genuine or correct, the context will later on tell

us to reject it. But I may say in passing that I have scarcely ever hadoccasion  to  disavow  subsequently  a  reminiscence  that  has  been

provisionally  accepted.  Whatever  has  emerged  has,  in  spite  of  the

most  deceptive  appearance  of  being  a  glaring  contradiction,

nevertheless turned out to be correct.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        265

 

   The ideas which are derived from the greatest depth and which form

the nucleus of the pathogenic organization are also those which are

acknowledged  as  memories  by  the  patient  with  greatest  difficulty.

Even  when  everything  is  finished  and  the  patients  have  been

overborne  by  the  force  of  logic  and  have  been  convinced  by  the

therapeutic  effect  accompanying  the  emergence  of  precisely  these

ideas - when, I say, the patients themselves accept the fact that they

thought  this  or  that,  they  often  add:  ‘But  I  can’t remember  having

thought it.’ It is easy to come to terms with them by telling them that

the thoughts were unconscious. But how is this state of affairs to be

fitted  into  our  own  psychological  views?  Are  we  to  disregard  this

withholding of recognition on the part of patients, when, now that the

work is finished, there is no longer any motive for their doing so?  Or

are  we  to  suppose  that  we  are  really  dealing  with  thoughts  which

never came about, which merely had a possibility of existing, so that

the treatment would lie in the accomplishment of a psychical act which

did not take place at the time? It is clearly impossible to say anything

about this - that is, about the state which the pathogenic material was

in before the analysis - until we have arrived at a thorough clarification

of  our  basic  psychological  views,  especially  on  the  nature  of

consciousness.  It  remains,  I  think,  a  fact  deserving  serious

consideration  that  in  our  analyses  we  can  follow  a  train  of  thought

from the conscious into the unconscious (i.e. into something that is

absolutely  not  recognized  as  a  memory),  that  we  can  trace  it  from

there for some distance through consciousness once more and that

we  can  see  it  terminate  in  the  unconscious  again,  without  this

alternation of ‘psychical illumination’ making any change in the train of

thought  itself,  in  its  logical  consistency  and  in  the  interconnectionbetween its various parts. Once this train of thought was before me as

a whole I should not be able to guess which part of it was recognized

by the patient as a memory and which was not. I only, as it were, see

the peaks of the train of thought dipping down into the unconscious -

the  reverse  of  what  has  been  asserted  of  our  normal  psychical

processes.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        266

 

 

      I  have  finally  to  discuss  yet  another  topic,  which  plays  an

undesirably large part in the carrying out of cathartic analyses such as

these.  I  have  already  admitted  the  possibility  of  the  pressure

technique failing, of its not eliciting any reminiscence in spite of every

assurance  and  insistence.  If  this  happens,  I  said,  there  are  two

possibilities: either, at the point at which we are investigating, there is

really nothing more to be found - and this we can recognize from the

complete  calmness  of  the  patient’s  facial  expression;  or  we  have

come up against a resistance which can only be overcome later, we

are faced by a new stratum into which we cannot yet penetrate - and

this,  once  more,  we  can  infer  from  the  patient’s  facial  expression,

which is tense and gives evidence of mental effort. But there is yet a

third  possibility  which  bears  witness  equally  to  an  obstacle,  but  an

external obstacle, and not one inherent in the material. This happens

when the patient’s relation to the physician is disturbed, and it is the

worst obstacle that we can come across. We can, however, reckon on

meeting it in every comparatively serious analysis.

   I have already indicated the important part played by the figure of

the  physician  in  creating  motives  to  defeat  the  psychical  force  of

resistance. In not a few cases, especially with women and where it is

a  question  of  elucidating  erotic  trains  of  thought,  the  patient’s  co-

operation becomes a personal sacrifice, which must be compensated

by some substitute for love. The trouble taken by the physician and his

friendliness have to suffice for such a substitute. If, now, this relation

of the patient to the physician is disturbed, her co-operativeness fails,too; when the physician tries to investigate the next pathological idea,

the  patient  is  held  up  by  an  intervening  consciousness  of  the

complaints against the physician that have been accumulating in her.

In my experience this obstacle arises in three principal cases.

   (1) If there is a personal estrangement - if, for instance, the patient

feels she has been neglected, has been too little appreciated or has

been  insulted,  or  if  she  has  heard  unfavourable  comments  on  the

physician or the method of treatment. This is the least serious case.

The obstacle can easily be overcome by discussion and explanation,

even  though  the  sensitiveness  and  suspiciousness  of  hysterical

patients may occasionally attain surprising dimensions.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        267

 

      (2)  If  the  patient  is  seized  by  a  dread  of  becoming  too  much

accustomed to the physician personally, of losing her independence in

relation to him, and even of perhaps becoming sexually dependent on

him. This is a more important case, because its determinants are less

individual.  The  cause  of  this  obstacle  lies  in  the  special  solicitude

inherent  in  the  treatment.  The  patient  then  has  a  new  motive  for

resistance, which is manifested not only in relation to some particular

reminiscence but at every attempt at treatment. It is quite common for

the patient to complain of a headache when we start on the pressure

procedure;  for  her  new  motive  for  resistance  remains  as  a  rule

unconscious and is expressed by the production of a new hysterical

symptom. The headache indicates her dislike of allowing herself to be

influenced.

   (3) If the patient is frightened at finding that she is transferring on to

the figure of the physician the distressing ideas which arise from the

content  of  the  analysis.  This  is  a  frequent,  and  indeed  in  some

analyses  a  regular,  occurrence.  Transference  on  to  the  physician

takes place through a false connection. I must give an example of this.

In one of my patients the origin of a particular hysterical symptom lay

in a wish, which she had had many years earlier and had at once

relegated to the unconscious, that the man she was talking to at thetime  might  boldly  take  the  initiative  and  give  her  a  kiss.  On  one

occasion, at the end of a session, a similar wish came up in her about

me. She was horrified at it, spent a sleepless night, and at the next

session, though she did not refuse to be treated, was quite useless for

work. After I had discovered the obstacle and removed it, the work

proceeded  further;  and  lo  and  behold:  the  wish  that  had  so  much

frightened  the  patient  made  its  appearance  as  the  next  of  her

pathogenic  recollections  and  the  one  which  was  demanded  by  the

immediate  logical  context.  What  had  happened  therefore  was  this.

The  content  of  the  wish  had  appeared  first  of  all  in  the  patient’s

consciousness  without  any  memories  of  the  surrounding

circumstances which would have assigned it to a past time. The wish

which was present was then, owing to the compulsion to associate

which was dominant in her consciousness, linked to my person, with

which the patient was legitimately concerned; and as the result of this

mésalliance - which I describe as a ‘false connection’ - the same affect

was provoked which had forced the patient long before to repudiate

this forbidden wish. Since I have discovered this, I have been able,

whenever I have been similarly involved personally, to presume that a

transference  and  a  false  connection  have  once  more  taken  place.

Strangely  enough,  the  patient  is  deceived  afresh  every  time  this  is

repeated.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        268

 

   It is impossible to carry any analysis to a conclusion unless we know

how to meet the resistance arising in these three ways. But we can

find a way of doing so if we make up our minds that this new symptom

that has been produced on the old model must be treated in the same

way  as  the  old  symptoms.  Our  first  task  is  to  make  the  ‘obstacle’

conscious  to  the  patient.  In  one  of  my  patients,  for  instance,  the

pressure  procedure  suddenly  failed.  I  had  reason  to  suppose  that

there was an unconscious idea of the kind mentioned under (2) above,

and I dealt with it at the first attempt by taking her by surprise. I told

her that some obstacle must have arisen to continuing the treatment,but that the pressure procedure had at least the power to show her

what  this  obstacle  was;  I  pressed  on  her  head,  and  she  said  in

astonishment: ‘I see you sitting on the chair here; but that’s nonsense.

What can it mean?’ I was then able to enlighten her. With another

patient the ‘obstacle’ used not to appear directly as a result of my

pressure, but I was always able to discover it if I took the patient back

to  the  moment  at  which  it  had  originated.  The  pressure  procedure

never failed to bring this moment back for us. When the obstacle had

been discovered and demonstrated the first difficulty was cleared out

of the way. But a greater one remained. It lay in inducing the patient to

produce  information  where  apparently  personal  relations  were

concerned and where the third person coincided with the figure of the

physician.

      To  begin  with  I  was  greatly  annoyed  at  this  increase  in  my

psychological work, till I came to see that the whole process followed

a law; and I then noticed, too, that transference of this kind brought

about no great addition to what I had to do. For the patient the work

remained  the  same:  she  had  to  overcome  the  distressing  affect

aroused  by  having  been  able  to  entertain  such  a  wish  even  for  a

moment; and it seemed to make no difference to the success of the

treatment whether she made this psychical repudiation the theme of

her work in the historical instance or in the recent one connected with

me.  The  patients,  too,  gradually  learnt  to  realize  that  in  these

transferences on to the figure of the physician it was a question of a

compulsion and an illusion which melted away with the conclusion of

the analysis. I believe, however, that if I had neglected to make the

nature of the ‘obstacle’ clear to them I should simply have given them

a  new  hysterical  symptom  -  though,  it  is  true,  a  milder  one  -  in

exchange for another which had been generated spontaneously.

 


                                  Studies On Hysteria

                                                                                        269

 

 

   I have now given enough indications, I think, of the way in which

these analyses have been carried out and of the observations that Ihave  made  in  the  course  of  them.  What  I  have  said  may  perhaps

make  some  things  seem  more  complicated  than  they  are.  Many

problems  answer  themselves  when  we  find  ourselves  engaged  in

such work. I did not enumerate the difficulties of the work in order to

create an impression that, in view of the demands a cathartic analysis

makes  on  physician  and  patient  alike,  it  is  only  worth  while

undertaking one in the rarest cases. I allow my medical activities to be

governed by the contrary assumption, though I cannot, it is true, lay

down the most definite indications for the application of the therapeutic

method described in these pages without entering into an examination

of the more important and comprehensive topic of the treatment of the

neuroses in general. I have often in my own mind compared cathartic

psychotherapy  with  surgical  intervention.  I  have  described  my

treatments as psychotherapeutic operations; and I have brought out

their  analogy  with  the  opening  up  of  a  cavity  filled  with  pus,  the

scraping out of a carious region, etc. An analogy of this kind finds its

justification not so much in the removal of what is pathological as in

the establishment of conditions that are more likely to lead the course

of the process in the direction of recovery.

   When I have promised my patients help or improvement by means

of  a  cathartic  treatment  I  have  often  been  faced  by  this  objection:

‘Why, you tell me yourself that my illness is probably connected with

my circumstances and the events of my life. You cannot alter these in

any way. How do you propose to help me, then?’ And I have been

able to make this reply: ‘No doubt fate would find it easier than I do to

relieve you of your illness. But you will be able to convince yourself

that much will be gained if we succeed in transforming your hysterical

misery into common unhappiness. With a mental life that has been

restored to health you will be better armed against that unhappiness.’

                                                                                         270

 

        PREFACE TO FREUD’S SHORTER WRITINGS 1893-1906

                                        (1906)

 

 


                                                                                        271

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                        272

 

            PREFACE TO FREUD’S COLLECTION OF SHORTER

                                    WRITINGS ON

    THE THEORY OF THE NEUROSES FROM THE YEARS 1893-

                                          1906

 

In response to many wishes that have reached me, I have decided to

lay before my colleagues in collected form the minor works on the

neuroses which I have published since 1893. They consist of fourteen

short  papers,  mostly  in  the  nature  of  preliminary  communications,

which have appeared in scientific proceedings or medical periodicals -

three of them in French. The two last (XIII and XIV), which give a very

succinct account of my present position as regards both the aetiology

and the treatment of the neuroses, are taken from L. Löwefeld’s well-

known volumes, Die psychischen Zwangserscheinungen, 1904, and

the  fourth  edition  of Sexualleben  und  Nervenleiden,  1906,  having

been  written  by  me  at  the  request  of  their  author,  who  is  an

acquaintance of mine.

   The present collection serves as an introduction and supplement to

my  larger  publications  dealing  with  the  same  topics  - Studies  on

Hysteria  (with  Dr.  J.  Breuer),  1895; The  Interpretation  of  Dreams,

1900; The Psychopathology of Everyday Life, 1901 and 1904; Jokes

and  their  Relation  to  the  Unconscious, 1905; Three  Essays  on  the

Theory  of  Sexuality,1905; Fragment  of  an  Analysis  of  a  Case  ofHysteria, 1905. The fact that I have put my Obituary of J.-M. Charcot

at the head of this collection of my short papers should be regarded

not  only  as  the  repayment  of  a  debt  of  gratitude,  but  also  as  an

indication of the point at which my own work branches off from the

master’s.

   No one who is familiar with the course of development of human

knowledge will be surprised to learn that I have in the meantime gone

beyond some of the opinions which are expressed here, and have

seen my way to modifying others. Nevertheless, I have been able to

retain the greater part of them unaltered and in fact have no need to

withdraw anything as wholly erroneous or completely worthless.

                                                                                         273

 

                                        CHARCOT

                                        (1893)

 


                                                                                        274

 

Intentionally left blank

 


 275

 

                                        CHARCOT

 

On  the  16th  of  August  of  this  year,  J.M.  Charcot  died  suddenly,

without pain or illness, after a life of happiness and fame. In him, all

too soon, the young science of neurology has lost its greatest leader,

neurologists  of  every  country  have  lost  their  master  teacher  and

France  has  lost  one  of  her  foremost  men.  He  was  only  sixty-eight

years old; his physical strength and mental vigour, together with the

hopes he so frankly expressed, seemed to promise him the long life

which has been granted to not a few mental workers of this century.

The  nine  imposing  volumes  of  his Oevres complètes,  in  which  his

pupils had collected his contributions to medicine and neuropathology,

his Leçons du mardi, the yearly reports of his clinic at the Salpêtrière,

and other works besides - all these publications will remain precious to

science and to his pupils; but they cannot take the place of the man,

who had still much more to give and to teach and whose person or

whose writings no one has yet approached without learning something

from them.

   He took an honest, human delight in his own great success and

used to enjoy talking of his beginnings and the road he had travelled.

His scientific curiosity, he said, had been aroused early, when he was

still a young interne, by the mass of material presented by the facts of

neuropathology, material which was not in the least understood at the

time. In those days, whenever he went the rounds with his senior inone of the departments of the Salpêtrière (the institution for the care of

women) amid all the wilderness of paralyses, spasms and convulsions

for which forty years ago there was neither name nor understanding,

he would say: ‘Faudrait y retourner et y rester’, and he kept his word.

When he became médecin des hôspitaux, he at once took steps to

enter the Salpêtrière in one of the departments for nervous patients.

Having  got  there,  he  stayed  where  he  was  instead  of  doing  what

French  senior  physicians  are  entitled  to  do  -  transferring  in  regular

succession  from  one  department  to  another  and  from  hospital  to

hospital, and at the same time changing their speciality as well.

 


                                          Charcot

                                                                                        276

 

      Thus  his  first  impression  and  the  resolution  it  led  him  to  were

decisive for the whole of his further development. His having a great

number  of  chronic  nervous  patients  at  his  disposal  enabled  him  to

make use of his own special gifts. He was not a reflective man, not a

thinker: he had the nature of an artist - he was, as he himself said, a

‘visuel’, a man who sees. Here is what he himself told us about his

method of working. He used to look again and again at the things he

did not understand, to deepen his impression of them day by day, till

suddenly an understanding of them dawned on him. In his mind’s eye

the apparent chaos presented by the continual repetition of the same

symptoms  then  gave  way  to  order:  the  new  nosological  pictures

emerged, characterized by the constant combination of certain groups

of symptoms. The complete and extreme cases, the ‘types’, could be

brought into prominence with the help of a certain sort of schematic

planning, and, with these types as a point of departure, the eye could

travel over the long series of ill-defined cases - the ‘formes frustes’ -

which,  branching  off  from  one  or  other  characteristic  feature  of  the

type, melt away into indistinctness. He called this kind of intellectual

work, in which he had no equal, ‘practising nosography’, and he took

pride in it. He might be heard to say that the greatest satisfaction a

man could have was to see something new - that is, to recognize it as

new; and he remarked again and again on the difficulty and value ofthis kind of ‘seeing’. He would ask why it was that in medicine people

only see what they have already learned to see. He would say that it

was wonderful how one was suddenly able to see new things - new

states of illness - which must probably be as old as the human race;

and that he had to confess to himself that he now saw a number of

things which he had overlooked for thirty years in his hospital wards.

No physician needs to be told what a wealth of forms were acquired

by  neuropathology  through  him,  and  what  increased  precision  and

sureness of diagnosis were made possible by his observations. But

the pupil who spent many hours with him going round the wards of the

Salpêtrière - that museum of clinical facts, the names and peculiar

characteristics of which were for the most part derived from him would

be reminded of Cuvier, whose statue, standing in front of the Jardin

des  Plantes,  shows  that  great  comprehender  and  describer  of  the

animal world surrounded by a multitude of animal forms; or else he

would recall the myth of Adam, who, when God brought the creatures

of  Paradise  before  him  to  be  distinguished  and  named,  may  have

experienced  to  the  fullest  degree  that  intellectual  enjoyment  which

Charcot praised so highly.

   Charcot, indeed, never tired of defending the rights of purely clinical

work,  which  consists  in  seeing  and  ordering  things,  against  the

encroachments of theoretical medicine. On one occasion there was a

small  group  of  us,  all  students  from  abroad,  who,  brought  up  on

German  academic  physiology,  were  trying  his  patience  with  our

doubts about his clinical innovations. ‘But that can’t be true,’ one of us

objected, ‘it contradicts the Young-Helmholtz theory.’ He did not reply

‘So much the worse for the theory, clinical facts come first’ or words to

that effect; but he did say something which made a great impression

on us: ‘La theorie, c’est bon, mais ca n’empeche pas d’exister’.

 


                                          Charcot

                                                                                        277

 

      For  a  whole  number  of  years  Charcot  occupied  the  Chair  of

Pathological  Anatomy  in  Paris,  and  he  carried  on  his

neuropathological  studies  and  lectures,  which  quickly  made  himfamous abroad as well as in France, on a voluntary basis and as a

secondary  occupation.  It  was  a  piece  of  good  fortune  for

neuropathology that the same man could undertake the discharge of

two  functions:  on  the  one  hand  he  created  the  nosological  picture

through clinical observation, and on the other he demonstrated that

the  same  anatomical  changes  underlay  the  disease  whether  it

appeared  as  a  type  or  as  a forme  fruste.  It  is  very  generally

recognized  how  successful  this  anatomical  clinical  method  of

Charcot’s  was  in  the  field  of  organic  nervous  diseases  -  in  tabes,

multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and so on. Years of

patient waiting were often necessary before the presence of organic

change  could  be  proved  in  those  chronic  illnesses  which  are  not

directly fatal; and only in a hospital for incurables like the Salpêtrière

was it possible to keep the patients under observation for such long

periods  of  time.  Charcot  made  his  first  demonstration  of  this  kind

before he had charge of a department. While he was still a student he

happened  to  engage  a  maid-servant  who  suffered  from  a  peculiar

tremor and could not find a situation on account of her clumsiness.

Charcot  recognized  her  condition  as  a paralysie  choréiforme,  a

disease which had already been described by Duchenne, but whose

basis was unknown. Charcot kept this interesting servant, although in

the course of the years she cost him a small fortune in dishes and

plates. When at last she died he was able to demonstrate from her

case that paralysie choréiforme was the clinical expression of multiple

cerebro-spinal sclerosis.

   Pathological anatomy has to serve neuropathology in two ways.

Besides  demonstrating  the  presence  of  a  morbid  change,  it  must

establish the localization of that change; and we all know that during

the last two decades the second part of this task has aroused the

greater  interest  of  the  two  and  has  been  more  actively  pursued.

Charcot played a most distinguished part in this work, too, although

the  pioneer  discoveries  were  not  made  by  him.  To  begin  with  he

followed in the footsteps of our fellow-countryman, Türck, who is said

to have lived and carried on his researches in comparative isolation

among us. When the two great innovations came - the Hitzig-Fritsch

stimulation experiments and Flechsig’s findings on the development of

the spinal cord - which ushered in a new epoch in our knowledge ofthe  ‘localization  of  nervous  diseases’,  Charcot’s  lectures  on

localization played the largest and best part towards bringing the new

theories into touch with the clinical work and making them fruitful for it.

As  regards  in  especial  the  relationship  of  the  somatic  muscular

apparatus to the motor area of the human cerebrum, I may remind the

reader  of  the  long  time  during  which  the  more  exact  nature  and

topography of this relationship was in question. (Was there a common

representation of both extremities in the same areas? or was there a

representation  of  the  upper  extremity  in  the  anterior  central

convolution and if the lower extremity in the posterior one - that is, a

vertical  disposition?)  At  last,  continued  clinical  observations  and

experiments  in  stimulation  and  extirpation  on  living  subjects  during

surgical  operations  decided  the  question  in  favour  of  the  view  of

Charcot and Pitres that the middle third of the central convolutions

mainly serves the representation of the arm, while the upper third and

the mesial portion serve that of the leg - that is to say, that in the

motor area the disposition is a horizontal one.

 


                                          Charcot

                                                                                        278

 

      An  enumeration  of  Charcot’s  separate  contributions  would  not

enable us to establish his significance for neuropathology. For during

the  last  two  decades  there  have  not  been  many  themes  of  any

importance  in  whose  formulation  and  discussion  the  school  of  the

Salpêtrière has not had an outstanding share; and the ‘school of the

Salpêtrière’ was, of course, Charcot himself, who, with the wealth of

his experience, the transparent clarity of his diction and the plasticity

of his descriptions, could easily be recognized in every publication of

the school. Among the circle of young men whom he thus gathered

round  him  and  made  into  participants  in  his  researches,  a  few

eventually rose to a consciousness of their own individuality and made

a brilliant name for themselves. Now and then, even, it happened that

one of them would come forward with an assertion which seemed to

the master to be more clever than correct; and this he would argue

against with plenty of sarcasm in his conversation and lectures, butwithout  doing  any  damage  to  his  affectionate  relationship  with  his

pupil. And in fact Charcot leaves behind him a host of pupils whose

intellectual  quality  and  whose  achievements  up  to  now  are  a

guarantee that the study and practice of neuropathology in Paris will

not so quickly slip down from the height to which Charcot has brought

them.

 


                                          Charcot

                                                                                        279

 

      In  Vienna  we  have  repeatedly  had  occasion  to  realize  that  the

intellectual  significance  of  an  academic  teacher  is  not  necessarily

combined  with  a  direct  personal  influence  on  younger  men  which

leads to the creation of a large and important school. If Charcot was

so much more fortunate in this respect we must put it down to the

personal qualities of the man - to the magic that emanated from his

looks and from his voice, to the kindly openness which characterized

his manner as soon as his relations with someone had overcome the

stage  of  initial  strangeness,  to  the  willingness  with  which  he  put

everything at the disposal of his pupils, and to his life-long loyalty to

them. The hours he spent in his wards were hours of companionship

and of an exchange of ideas with the whole of his medical staff. He

never  shut  himself  away  from  them  there.  The  youngest  newly-

qualified physician walking the wards had a chance of seeing him at

his  work  and  might  interrupt  him  at  it;  and  the  same  freedom  was

enjoyed  by  students  from  abroad,  who,  in  later  years,  were  never

lacking  at  his  rounds.  And,  lastly,  on  the  evenings  when  Madame

Charcot  was  at  home  to  a  distinguished  company,  assisted  by  a

highly-gifted  daughter  who  was  growing  up  in  the  likeness  of  her

father,  the  pupils  and  medical  assistants  who  were  always  present

met the guests as part of the family.

   In 1882 or 1883, the circumstances of Charcot’s life and work took

on their final form. People had come to realize that the activities of this

man were a part of the assets of the nation’s ‘gloire’, which, after the

unfortunate war of 1870-1, was all the more jealously guarded. The

government, at the head of which was Charcot’s old friend, Gambetta,created a Chair of Neuropathology for him in the Faculty of Medicine

(so that he could give up the Chair of Pathological Anatomy) and also

a  clinic,  with  auxiliary  scientific  departments,  at  the  Salpêtrière.  ‘Le

service de M. Charcot’ now included, in addition to the old wards for

chronic female patients, several clinical rooms where male patients,

too, were received, a huge out-patient department - the ‘consultation

externe’ -, a histological laboratory, a museum, an electro-therapeutic

department, an eye and ear department and a special photographic

studio.  All  these  things  were  so  many  means  of  keeping  former

assistants and pupils permanently at the clinic in secure posts. The

two-storeyed, weathered-looking buildings and the courtyards which

they  enclosed  reminded  the  stranger  vividly  of  our Allgemeines

Krankenhaus; but no doubt the resemblance did not go far enough. ‘It

may  not  be  beautiful  here,  perhaps,’  Charcot  would  say  when  he

showed a visitor his domain, ‘but there is room for everything you want

to do.’

 


                                          Charcot

                                                                                        280

 

      Charcot  was  in  the  very  prime  of  life  when  this  abundance  of

facilities for teaching and research were placed at his disposal. He

was a tireless worker, and always, I believe, the busiest in the whole

institute.  His  private  consultations,  to  which  patients  flocked  ‘from

Samarkand and the Antilles’, could not keep him from his teaching

activities  or  his  researches.  There  is  no  doubt  that  this  throng  of

people did not turn to him solely because he was a famous discoverer

but quite as much because he was a great physician and friend of

man, who could always find an answer to a problem and who, when

the present state of science did not allow him to know, was able to

make a good guess. He has often been blamed for his therapeutic

method which, with its multiplicity of prescriptions, could not but offend

a  rationalistic  conscience.  But  he  was  simply  continuing  the

procedures  which  were  customary  at  that  time  and  place,  without

deceiving  himself  much  about  their  efficacy.  He  was,  however,  not

pessimistic  in  his  therapeutic  expectations,  and  repeatedly  showedreadiness to try new methods of treatment in his clinic: their short-lived

success was to find its explanation elsewhere.

      As  a  teacher,  Charcot  was  positively  fascinating.  Each  of  his

lectures was a little work of art in construction and composition; it was

perfect in form and made such an impression that for the rest of the

day one could not get the sound of what he had said out of one’s ears

or the thought of what he had demonstrated out of one’s mind. He

seldom demonstrated a single patient, but

mostly a series of similar or contrasting cases which he compared with

one another. In the hall in which he gave his lectures there hung a

picture which showed ‘citizen’ Pinel having the chains taken off the

poor madmen in the Salpêtrière. The Salpêtrière, which had witnessed

so many horrors during the Revolution, had also been the scene of

this most humane of all revolutions. At such lectures Maître Charcot

himself made a curious impression. He, who at other times bubbled

over with vivacity and cheerfulness and who always had a joke on his

lips, now looked serious and solemn under his little velvet cap; indeed,

he even seemed to have grown older. His voice sounded subdued.

We  could  almost  understand  how  ill-disposed  strangers  could

reproach the whole lecture with being theatrical. Those who spoke like

this  were  doubtless  accustomed  to  the  formlessness  of  German

clinical lectures, or else forgot that Charcot gave only one lecture in

the week and could therefore prepare it carefully.

      In  this  formal  lecture,  in  which  everything  was  prepared  and

everything had to have its place, Charcot was no doubt following a

deeply-rooted tradition; but he also felt the need to give his audience a

less elaborated picture of his activities. This purpose was served by

his out-patient clinic of which he took personal charge in what were

known as his ‘Leçons du mardi’. There he took up cases which were

completely unknown to him; he exposed himself to all the chances of

an  examination,  all  the  errors  of  a  first  investigation;  he  would  put

aside his authority on occasion and admit - in one case that he could

arrive at no diagnosis and in another that he had been deceived by

appearances;  and  he  never  appeared  greater  to  his  audience  than

when, by giving the most detailed account of his processes of thought

and  by  showing  the  greatest  frankness  about  his  doubts  and

hesitations, he had thus sought to narrow the gulf between teacherand pupil. The publication of these improvised lectures, given in the

year 1887 and 1888, at first in French and now in German as well, has

also  immeasurably  widened  the  circle  of  his  admirers;  and  never

before has a work on neuropathology had such a success with the

medical public as this.

 


                                          Charcot

                                                                                        281

 

   At about the time at which the clinic was established and at which he

gave up the Chair of Pathological Anatomy, a change occurred in the

direction of Charcot’s scientific pursuits, and to this we owe the finest

of his work. He now pronounced that the theory of organic nervous

illnesses was for the time being fairly complete, and he began to turn

his  attention  almost  exclusively  to  hysteria,  which  thus  all  at  once

became the focus of general interest. This, the most enigmatic of all

nervous diseases, for the evaluation of which medicine had not yet

found  a  serviceable  angle  of  approach,  had  just  then  fallen  into

thorough discredit; and this discredit extended not only to the patients

but to the physicians who concerned themselves with the neurosis. It

was held that in hysteria anything was possible, and no credence was

given to a hysteric about anything. The first thing that Charcot’s work

did was to restore its dignity to the topic. Little by little, people gave up

the scornful smile with which the patient could at that time feel certain

of being met. She was no longer necessarily a malingerer, for Charcot

had  thrown  the  whole  weight  of  his  authority  on  the  side  of  the

genuineness  and  objectivity  of  hysterical  phenomena.  Charcot  had

repeated on a small scale the act of liberation in memory of which

Pinel’s portrait hung in the lecture hall of the Salpêtrière. Once the

blind fear of being made a fool of by the unfortunate patient had been

given up - a fear which till then had stood in the way of a serious study

of  the  neurosis  -  the  question  could  arise  as  to  what  method  of

approach would lead most quickly to a solution of the problem. A quite

unbiased  observer  might  have  arrived  at  this  conclusion:  if  I  find

someone  in  a  state  which  bears  all  the  signs  of  a  painful  affect  -

weeping, screaming and raging - the conclusion seems probable thata  mental  process  is  going  on  in  him  of  which  those  physical

phenomena are the appropriate expression. A healthy person, if he

were asked, would be in a position to say what impression it was that

was tormenting him; but the hysteric would answer that he did not

know. The problem would at once arise of how it is that a hysterical

patient is overcome by an affect about whose cause he asserts that

he knows nothing. If we keep to our conclusion that a corresponding

psychical process must be present, and if nevertheless we believe the

patient when he denies it; if we bring together the many indications

that the patient is behaving as though he does know about it; and if we

enter into the history of the patient’s life and find some occasion, some

trauma, which would appropriately evoke precisely those expressions

of feeling - then everything points to one solution: the patient is in a

special state of mind in which all his impressions or his recollections of

them are no longer held together by an associative chain, a state of

mind in which it is possible for a recollection to express its affect by

means of somatic phenomena without the group of the other mental

processes,  the  ego,  knowing  about  it  or  being  able  to  intervene  to

prevent  it.  If  we  had  called  to  mind  the  familiar  psychological

difference  between  sleep  and  waking,  the  strangeness  of  our

hypothesis might have seemed less. No one should object that the

theory of a splitting of consciousness as a solution to the riddle of

hysteria is much too remote to impress an unbiased and untrained

observer.  For,  by  pronouncing  possession  by  a  demon  to  be  the

cause of hysterical phenomena, the Middle Ages in fact chose this

solution; it would only have been a matter of exchanging the religious

terminology  of  that  dark  and  superstitious  age  for  the  scientific

language of to-day.

 


                                          Charcot

                                                                                        282

 

   Charcot, however, did not follow this path towards an explanation of

hysteria,  although  he  drew  copiously  upon  the  surviving  reports  of

witch trials and of possession, in order to show that the manifestations

of the neurosis were the same in those days as they are now. Hetreated hysteria as just another topic in neuropathology; he gave a

complete description of its phenomena, demonstrated that these had

their  own  laws  and  uniformities,  and  showed  how  to  recognize  the

symptoms which enable a diagnosis of hysteria to be made. The most

painstaking  investigations,  initiated  by  himself  and  his  pupils,

extended  over  hysterical  disturbances  of  sensibility  in  the  skin  and

deeper tissues, over the behaviour of the sense organs, and over the

peculiarities of hysterical contractures and paralyses, and of trophic

disturbances and changes in metabolism. The many different forms of

hysterical attack were described, and a schematic plan was drawn up

by depicting the typical configuration of the major hysterical attack as

occurring in four stages, which made it possible to trace the commonly

observed ‘minor’ attacks back to this same typical configuration. The

localization and frequency of occurrence of the so-called ‘hysterogenic

zones’ and their relationship to the attacks were also studied, and so

on. Once all this information about the manifestations of hysteria had

been  arrived  at,  a  number  of  surprising  discoveries  were  made.

Hysteria  in  males,  and  especially  in  men  of  the  working  class  was

found  far  more  often  than  had  been  expected;  it  was  convincingly

shown that certain conditions which had been put down to alcoholic

intoxication  or  lead-poisoning  were  of  a  hysterical  nature;  it  was

possible  to  subsume  under  hysteria  a  whole  number  of  affections

which  had  hitherto  not  been  understood  and  which  had  remained

unclassified; and where the neurosis had become joined with other

disorders to form complex pictures, it was possible to separate out the

part  played  by  hysteria.  Most  far-reaching  of  all  were  the

investigations  into  nervous  illnesses  which  followed  upon  severe

traumas - the ‘traumatic neuroses’ - views about which are still under

discussion and in connection with which Charcot has successfully put

forward the arguments in favour of hysteria.

   After the latest extensions of the concept of hysteria had so often led

to a rejection of aetiological diagnosis, it became necessary to enter

into  the  aetiology  of  hysteria  itself.  Charcot  put  forward  a  simple

formula  for  this:  heredity  was  to  be  regarded  as  the  sole  cause.

Accordingly,  hysteria  was  a  form  of  degeneracy,  a  member  of  the

‘famille névropathique’. All other aetiological factors played the part of

incidental causes, of ‘agents provocateurs’.   The construction of this great edifice was naturally not achieved

without violent opposition. But it was the sterile opposition of an old

generation  who  did  not  want  to  have  their  views  changed.  The

younger  among  the  neuropathologists,  including  those  in  Germany,

accepted Charcot’s teaching to a greater or lesser degree. Charcot

himself was completely certain that his theories about hysteria would

triumph. When it was objected that the four stages of hysteria, hysteria

in men, and so on, were not observable outside France, he pointed

out how long he himself had overlooked these things, and he said

once more that hysteria was the same in all places and at every time.

He was very sensitive about the accusation that the French were a far

more neurotic nation than any other and that hysteria was a kind of

national bad habit; and he was much pleased when a paper ‘On a

Case  of  Reflex  Epilepsy’,  which  dealt  with  a  Prussian  Grenadier,

enabled him to make a long range diagnosis of hysteria.

 


                                          Charcot

                                                                                        283

 

   At one point in his work Charcot rose to a level higher even than that

of his usual treatment of hysteria. The step he took assured him for all

time, too, the fame of having been the first to explain hysteria. While

he  was  engaged  in  the  study  of  hysterical  paralyses  arising  after

traumas, he had the idea of artificially reproducing those paralyses,

which he had earlier differentiated with care from organic ones. For

this purpose he made use of hysterical patients whom he put into a

state  of  somnambulism  by  hypnotizing  them.  He  succeeded  in

proving, by an unbroken chain of argument, that these paralyses were

the  result  of  ideas  which  had  dominated  the  patient’s  brain  at

moments of a special disposition. In this way, the mechanism of a

hysterical  phenomenon  was  explained  for  the  first  time.  This

incomparably fine piece of clinical research was afterwards taken up

by his own pupil, Pierre Janet, as well as by Breuer and others, who

developed  from  it  a  theory  of  neurosis  which  coincided  with  the

mediaeval view - when once they had replaced the ‘demon’ of clerical

phantasy by a psychological formula.   Charcot’s concern with hypnotic phenomena in hysterical patients

led to very great advances in this important field of hitherto neglected

and despised facts, for the weight of his name put an end once and for

all to any doubt about the reality of hypnotic manifestations. But the

exclusively  nosographical  approach  adopted  at  the  School  of  the

Salpêtrière was not suitable for a purely psychological subject. The

restriction  of  the  study  of  hypnosis  to  hysterical  patients,  the

differentiation between major and minor hypnotism, the hypothesis of

three stages of ‘major hypnosis’, and their characterization by somatic

phenomena  -  all  this  sank  in  the  estimation  of  Charcot’s

contemporaries  when  Liébeault’s  pupil,  Bernheim,  set  about

constructing  the  theory  of  hypnotism  on  a  more  comprehensive

psychological foundation and making suggestion the central point of

hypnosis.  It  is  only  the  opponents  of  hypnotism  who,  content  to

conceal  their  lack  of  personal  experience  behind  an  appeal  to

authority,  still  cling  to  Charcot’s  assertions  and  who  like  to  take

advantage of a pronouncement made by him in his last years, in which

he denied to hypnosis any value as a therapeutic method.

 


                                          Charcot

                                                                                        284

 

   Furthermore, the aetiological theories supported by Charcot in his

doctrine of the ‘famille névropathique’, which he made the basis of his

whole concept of nervous disorders, will no doubt soon require sifting

and  emending.  So  greatly  did  Charcot  over-estimate  heredity  as  a

causative  agent  that  he  left  no  room  for  the  acquisition  of  nervous

illness.  To  syphilis  he  merely  allotted  a  modest  place  among  the

‘agents provocateurs’; nor did he make a sufficiently sharp distinction

between organic nervous affections and neuroses, either as regards

their aetiology or in other respects. It is inevitable that the advance of

our science, as it increases our knowledge, must at the same time

lessen the value of a number of things that Charcot taught us; but

neither changing times nor changing views can diminish the fame of

the man whom - in France and elsewhere - we are mourning to-day.

 VIENNA, August 1893.

                                                                                         285

 

          ON THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM OF HYSTERICAL

                            PHENOMENA: A LECTURE

                                        (1893)

 


                                                                                        286

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                        287

 

          ON THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM OF HYSTERICAL

                                    PHENOMENA ¹

 

Gentlemen,  -  I  am  appearing  before  you  to-day  with  the  object  of

giving you a report on a work the first part of which has already been

published in the Zentralblatt für Neurologie under the names of Josef

Breuer and myself. As you may gather from the title of the work, it

deals with the pathogenesis of hysterical symptoms and suggests that

the immediate reasons for the development of hysterical symptoms

are to be looked for in the sphere of psychical life.

   But before I enter further into the contents of this joint work, I must

explain the position it occupies and name the author and the discovery

which,  in  substance  at  least,  we  have  taken  as  our  starting  point,

although our contribution has been developed quite independently.

 

   As you know, Gentlemen, all the modern advances made in the

understanding and knowledge of hysteria are derived from the work of

Charcot.  In  the  first  half  of  the  eighties,  Charcot  began  to  turn  his

attention  to  the  ‘major  neurosis’,  as  the  French  call  hysteria.  In  a

series of researches he has succeeded in proving the presence of

regularity  and  law  where  the  inadequate  or  half-hearted  clinical

observations of other people saw only malingering or a puzzling lack

of conformity to rule. It may safely be said that everything new thathas been learnt about hysteria in recent times goes back directly or

indirectly to his suggestions. But among Charcot’s numerous works,

none,  in  my  estimate,  is  of  higher  value  than  the  one  in  which  he

taught  us  to  understand  the  traumatic  paralyses  which  appear  in

hysteria; and since it is precisely this work of which ours appears as a

continuation, I hope you will allow me to lay this subject before you

once again in some detail.

 

   ¹ A lecture delivered by Dr. Sigm. Freud at a meeting of the ‘Wiener medizinischer Club’ on

January 11, 1893. Special shorthand report by the Wiener medizinische Presse, revised by
the lecturer.
 


          On The Psychical Mechanism Of Hysterical Phenomena

                                                                                        288

 

   We will take the case of a person who is subjected to a trauma

without  having  been  ill  previously  and  perhaps  without  ever  having

any hereditary taint. The trauma must fulfil certain conditions. It must

be severe - that is, it must be of a kind involving the idea of mortal

danger, of a threat to life. But it must not be severe in the sense of

bringing psychical activity to an end. Otherwise it will not produce the

result  we  expect  from  it.  Thus,  for  instance,  it  must  not  involve

concussion  of  the  brain  or  any  really  serious  injury.  Moreover,  the

trauma must have a special relation to some part of the body. Let us

suppose that a heavy billet of wood falls on a workman’s shoulder The

blow  knocks  him  down,  but  he  soon  realizes  that  nothing  has

happened and goes home with a slight contusion. After a few weeks,

or after some months, he wakes up one morning and notices that the

arm  that  was  subjected  to  the  trauma  is  hanging  down  limp  and

paralysed,  though  in  the  interval,  in  what  might  be  called  the

incubation period, he has made perfectly good use of it. If the case is

a typical one, it may happen that peculiar attacks set in - that, after an

aura, the subject suddenly collapses, raves, and becomes delirious;

and, if he speaks in his delirium, what he says may show that the

scene of his accident is being repeated in him, embellished, perhaps,

with various imaginary pictures. What has been happening here? How

is this phenomenon to be explained?      Charcot  explains  the  process  by  reproducing  it,  by  inducing  the

paralysis in a patient artificially. In order to bring this about, he needs

a patient who is already in a hysterical state; he further requires the

condition of hypnosis and the method of suggestion. He puts a patient

of this kind into deep hypnosis and gives him a light blow on the arm.

The  arm  drops;  it  is  paralysed  and  shows  precisely  the  same

symptoms as occur in spontaneous traumatic paralysis. The blow may

also  be  replaced  by  a  direct  verbal  suggestion:  ‘Look!  your  arm  is

paralysed!’  In  this  case  too  the  paralysis  exhibits  the  same

characteristics.

 


          On The Psychical Mechanism Of Hysterical Phenomena

                                                                                        289

 

   Let us try to compare the two cases: on the one hand a trauma, on

the  other  a  traumatic  suggestion.  The  final  result,  the  paralysis,  is

exactly the same in both cases. If the trauma in the one case can be

replaced in the other case by a verbal suggestion, it is plausible to

suppose that an idea of this kind was responsible for the development

of the paralysis in the case of the spontaneous traumatic paralysis as

well. And in fact a number of patients report that at the moment of the

trauma they actually had a feeling that their arm was smashed. If this

were  so,  the  trauma  could  really  be  completely  equated  with  the

verbal  suggestion.  But  to  complete  the  analogy  a  third  factor  is

required. In order that the idea ‘your arm is paralysed’ should be able

to provoke a paralysis in the patient, it was necessary for him to be in

a state of hypnosis. But the workman was not in a state of hypnosis.

Nevertheless, we may assume that he was in a special state of mind

during the trauma; and Charcot is inclined to equate that affect with

the artificially induced state of hypnosis. This being so, the traumatic

spontaneous paralysis is completely explained and brought into line

with  the  paralysis  produced  by  suggestion;  and  the  genesis  of  the

symptom is unambiguously determined by the circumstances of the

trauma.

   Charcot has, moreover, repeated the same experiment in order to

explain the contractures and pains which appear in traumatic hysteria;and  in  my  opinion  there  is  scarcely  any  point  at  which  he  has

penetrated into the understanding of hysteria more deeply than here.

But his analysis goes no further: we do not learn how other symptoms

are  generated,  and  above  all  we  do  not  learn  how  hysterical

symptoms come about in common, non-traumatic hysteria.

 

   At about the same time, Gentlemen, at which Charcot was thus

throwing  light  on  hystero-traumatic  paralyses,  Dr.  Breuer  between

1880 and 1882, undertook the medical care of a young lady who - with

a non-traumatic aetiology - fell ill of a severe and complicated hysteria

(accompanied by paralyses, contractures, disturbances of speech and

vision,  and  psychical  peculiarities  of  every  kind),  while  she  was

nursing her sick father. This case will retain an important place in the

history  of  hysteria,  since  it  was  the  first  one  in  which  a  physician

succeeded in elucidating all the symptoms of the hysterical state, in

learning the origin of each symptom and at the same time in finding a

means of causing that symptom to disappear We may say that it was

the first case of hysteria to be made intelligible. Dr. Breuer kept back

the conclusions which followed from this case till he could be certain

that it did not stand alone. After I returned, in 1886, from a course of

study under Charcot, I began, with Breuer’s constant co-operation, to

make close observations on a fairly large number of hysterical patients

and  to  examine  them  from  this  point  of  view;  and  I  found  that  the

behaviour  of  this  first  patient  had  in  fact  been  typical  and  that  the

inferences which were justified by that case could be carried over to a

considerable number of hysterical patients, if not to all.

 


          On The Psychical Mechanism Of Hysterical Phenomena

                                                                                        290

 

   Our material consisted of cases of common, that is of non-traumatic,

hysteria.  Our  procedure  was  to  take  each  separate  symptom  and

enquire  into  the  circumstances  in  which  it  had  made  its  first

appearance; and we endeavoured in this way to arrive at a clear idea

of the precipitating cause that symptom. Now you must not suppose

that this is a simple job. If you question patients along these lines, youwill as a rule receive no answer at all to begin with. In a small group of

cases the patients have their reasons for not saying what they know.

But in a greater number of cases the patients have no notion of the

context of their symptoms. The method by which something can be

learnt is an arduous one. It is as follows. The patients must be put

under hypnosis and then questioned as to the origin of some particular

symptom - as to when it first appeared and what they remember in

that connection. While they are in this state, the memory, which was

not at their disposal in a waking state, returns. We have learnt in this

manner  that,  to  put  it  roughly,  there  is  an  affectively  coloured

experience behind most, if not all, phenomena of hysteria; and further,

that  this  experience  is  of  such  a  kind  that  it  at  once  makes  the

symptom to which it relates intelligible and shows accordingly that the

symptom, once again, is unambiguously determined. If you will allow

me  to  equate  this  affectively  coloured  experience  with  the  major

traumatic  experience  underlying  traumatic  hysteria,  I  can  at  once

formulate  the  first  thesis  at  which  we  have  arrived:  ‘There  is  a

complete  analogy  between  traumatic  paralysis  and  common,  non-

traumatic hysteria.’ The only difference is that in the former a major

trauma has been operative, whereas in the latter there is seldom a

single major event to be signalized, but rather a series of affective

impressions - a whole story of suffering. But there is nothing forced in

equating  such  a  story,  which  appears  as  the  determining  factor  in

hysterical  patients,  with  the  accident  which  occurs  in  traumatic

hysteria. For no one doubts any longer to-day that even in the case of

the major mechanical trauma in traumatic hysteria what produces the

result is not the mechanical factor but the affect of fright, the psychical

trauma. The first thing that follows from all this, then, is that the pattern

of traumatic hysteria, as it was laid down by Charcot for hysterical

paralyses, applies quite generally to all hysterical phenomena, or at

least to the great majority of them. In every case what we have to deal

with  is  the  operation  of  psychical  traumas,  which  unambiguously

determine the nature of the symptoms that arise.

 


          On The Psychical Mechanism Of Hysterical Phenomena

                                                                                        291 

 

   I will now give you a few instances of this. First, here is an example

of the occurrence of contractures. Throughout the whole period of her

illness, Breuer’s patient, whom I have already mentioned, exhibited a

contracture of the right arm. It emerged under hypnosis that at a time

before she had fallen ill she was subjected to the following trauma.

She was sitting half-dozing at the bedside of her sick father; her right

arm was hanging over the back of her chair and went to sleep. At this

moment she had a terrifying hallucination; she tried to fend it off with

her arm but was unable to do so. This gave her a violent fright, and for

the time being the matter ended there. It was not until the outbreak of

her hysteria that the contracture of the arm set in. In another woman

patient,  I  observed  that  her  speech  was  interrupted  by  a  peculiar

‘clacking’  with her tongue, which resembled the cry of a capercaillie. I

had been familiar with this symptom for months and regarded it as a

tic. It was only after I once happened to question her under hypnosis

about its origin that I discovered that the noise had first appeared on

two occasions. On each of these she had made a firm decision to

keep absolutely quiet. This happened once when she was nursing a

child of hers who was seriously ill. (Nursing sick people often plays a

part in the aetiology of hysteria.) The child had fallen asleep and she

was determined not to make any noise that might wake it. But fear that

she might make a noise turned into actually making one - an instance

of ‘hysterical counter-will’;  she pressed her lips together and made

the  clacking  noise  with  her  tongue.  Many  years  later  the  same

symptom had arisen a second time, once again when she had made a

decision to be absolutely quiet, and it had persisted ever afterwards. A

single precipitating cause is often not enough to fixate a symptom; but

if  this  same  symptom  appears  several  times  accompanied  by  a

particular affect, it becomes fixated and chronic.

 


          On The Psychical Mechanism Of Hysterical Phenomena

                                                                                        292

 

   One of the commonest symptoms of hysteria is a combination ofanorexia and vomiting. I know of a whole number of cases in which

the occurrence of this symptom is explained quite simply. Thus in one

patient vomiting persisted after she had read a humiliating letter just

before  a  meal  and  had  been  violently  sick  after  it.  In  other  cases

disgust at food could be quite definitely related to the fact that, owing

to the institution of the ‘common table’, a person may be compelled to

eat his meal with someone he detests. The disgust is then transferred

from the person to the food. The woman with the tic whom I have just

mentioned  was  particularly  interesting  in  this  respect.  She  ate

uncommonly  little  and  only  under  pressure.  I  learnt  from  her  in

hypnosis that a series of psychical traumas had eventually produced

this  symptom  of  disgust  at  food.  While  she  was  still  a  child,  her

mother, who was very strict, insisted on her eating any meat she had

left over at her midday meal two hours later, when it was cold and the

fat was all congealed. She did so with great disgust and retained the

memory of it; so that later on, when she was no longer subjected to

this  punishment,  she  regularly  felt  disgust  at  mealtimes.  Ten  years

later she used to sit at table with a relative who was tubercular and

kept constantly spitting across the table into the spitoon during meals.

A little while later she was obliged to share her meals with a relative

who, as she knew, was suffering from a contagious disease. Breuer’s

patient,  again,  behaved  for  some  time  like  someone  suffering  from

hydrophobia.  During  hypnosis  it  turned  out  that  she  had  once

unexpectedly seen a dog drinking out of a tumbler of water of hers.

 


          On The Psychical Mechanism Of Hysterical Phenomena

                                                                                        293

 

      Sleeplessness  or  disturbed  sleep  are  also  symptoms  that  are

usually susceptible to the most precise explanation. Thus, for years on

end a woman could never get to sleep till six in the morning. She had

for a long time slept in the room adjoining her sick husband, who used

to rise at six o’clock. After that hour she had been able to sleep in

quiet; and she behaved in the same way once more many years later

during a hysterical illness. Another case was that of a man. He was a

hysterical patient who had slept very badly for the last twelve years.His  sleeplessness,  however,  was  of  a  quite  special  sort.  In  the

summer  he  slept  excellently,  but  in  the  winter  very  badly;  and  in

November he slept quite particularly badly. He had no notion what this

was due to. Enquiry revealed that in November twelve years earlier he

had watched for many nights at the bedside of his son, who was ill

with diphtheria.

      Breuer’s  patient,  to  whom  I  have  so  often  referred,  offered  an

example of a disturbance of speech. For a long period of her illness

she  spoke  only  English  and  could  neither  speak  nor  understand

German.  This  symptom  was  traced  back  to  an  event  which  had

happened before the outbreak of her illness. While she was in a state

of great anxiety, she had attempted to pray but could find no words. At

last a few words of a child’s prayer in English occurred to her. When

she fell ill later on, only the English language was at her command.

 


          On The Psychical Mechanism Of Hysterical Phenomena

                                                                                        294

 

   The determination of the symptom by the psychical trauma is not so

transparent  in  every  instance.  There  is  often  only  what  may  be

described as a ‘symbolic’ relation between the determining cause and

the  hysterical  symptom.  This  is  especially  true  of  pains.  Thus  one

patient  suffered  from  piercing  pains  between  her  eyebrows.  The

reason  was  that  once  when  she  was  a  child  her  grandmother  had

given her an enquiring, ‘piercing’ look. The same patient suffered for a

time  from  violent  pains  in  her  right  heel,  for  which  there  was  no

explanation. These pains, it turned out, were connected with an idea

that occurred to the patient when she made her first appearance in

society. She was overcome with fear that she might not ‘find herself

on a right footing’. Symbolizations of this kind were employed by many

patients for a whole number of so-called neuralgias and pains. It is as

though there were an intention to express the mental state by means

of a physical one; and linguistic usage affords a bridge by which this

can be effected. In the case, however, of what are after all the typical

symptoms  of  hysteria-  such  as  hemi-anaesthesia,  restriction  of  the

visual field, epileptiform convulsions, etc. - a psychical mechanism ofthis sort cannot be demonstrated. On the other hand this can often be

done in respect to the hysterogenic zones.

      These  examples,  which  I  have  chosen  out  of  a  number  of

observations,  seem  to  offer  proof  that  the  phenomena  of  common

hysteria  can  safely  be  regarded  as  being  on  the  same  pattern  as

those of traumatic hysteria, with the involvement of psychical, as vs.

actual  physical  trauma  and  that  accordingly  every  hysteria  can  be

looked upon as traumatic hysteria in the sense of implying a psychical

trauma and that every hysterical phenomenon is determined by the

nature of the trauma.

 


          On The Psychical Mechanism Of Hysterical Phenomena

                                                                                        295

 

 

   The further question which would then have to be answered is as to

the nature of the causal connection between the determining factor

which  we  have  discovered  during  hypnosis  and  the  phenomenon

which persists subsequently as a chronic symptom. This connection

might  be  of  various  kinds.  It  might  be  of  the  type  that  we  should

describe  as  a  ‘releasing’  factor.  For  instance,  if  someone  with  a

disposition to tuberculosis receives a blow on the knee as a result of

which he develops a tubercular inflammation of the joint, the blow is a

simple  releasing  cause.  But  this  is  not  what  happens  in  hysteria.

There is another kind of causation - namely, direct causation. We can

elucidate this from the picture of a foreign body, which continues to

operate unceasingly as a stimulating cause of illness until it is got rid

of. Cessante causa cessat effectus.¹ Breuer’s observation shows us

that  there  is  a  connection  of  this  latter  kind  between  the  psychical

trauma and the hysterical phenomenon. For Breuer learnt from his first

patient  that  the  attempt  at  discovering  the  determining  cause  of  a

symptom  was  at  the  same  time  a  therapeutic  manoeuvre.  The

moment  at  which  the  physician  finds  out  the  occasion  when  the

symptom first appeared and the reason for its appearance is also the

moment  at  which  the  symptom  vanishes.  When,  for  instance,  the

symptom  presented  by  the  patient  consists  in  pains,  and  when  weenquire from him under hypnosis as to their origin, he will produce a

series  of  memories  in  connection  with  them.  If  we  can  succeed  in

eliciting a really vivid memory in him, and if he sees things before him

with all their original actuality, we shall observe that he is completely

dominated by some affect. And if we then compel him to put this affect

into words, we shall find that, at the same time as he is producing this

violent affect, the phenomenon of his pains emerges very markedly

once  again  and  that  thenceforward  the  symptom,  in  its  chronic

character,  disappears.  This  is  how  events  turned  out  in  all  the

instances  I  have  quoted.  And  it  was  an  interesting  fact  that  the

memory of this particular event was to an extraordinary degree more

vivid than the memory of any others, and that the affect accompanying

it  was  as  great,  perhaps,  as  it  had  been  when  the  event  actually

occurred. It could only be supposed that the psychical trauma does in

fact continue to operate in the subject and maintains the hysterical

phenomenon, and that it comes to an end as soon as the patient has

spoken about it.

   As I have just said, if, in accordance with our procedure, one arrives

at the psychical trauma by making enquiries from the patient under

hypnosis, one discovers that the memory concerned is quite unusually

strong  and  has  retained  the  whole  of  its  affect.  The  question  now

arises how it is that an event which occurred so long ago - perhaps

ten  or  twenty  years  -  can  persist  in  exercising  its  power  over  the

subject, how it is that these memories have not been subject to the

processes of wearing away and forgetting.

 

   ¹ [‘When the cause ceases the effect ceases’]

 


          On The Psychical Mechanism Of Hysterical Phenomena

                                                                                        296

 

   With a view to answering this question, I should like to begin with a

few remarks on the conditions which govern the wearing-away of the

contents of our ideational life. We will start from a thesis that may be

stated  in  the  following  terms.  If  a  person  experiences  a  psychical

impression,  something  in  his  nervous  system  which  we  will  for  themoment  call  the  sum  of  excitation  is  increased.  Now  in  every

individual there exists a tendency to diminish this sum of excitation

once more, in order to preserve his health. The increase of the sum of

excitation takes place along sensory paths, and its diminution along

motor ones. So we may say that if anything impinges on someone he

reacts in a motor fashion. We can now safely assert that it depends on

this reaction how much of the initial psychical impression is left. Let us

consider this in relation to a particular example. Let us suppose that a

man  is  insulted,  is  given  a  blow  or  something  of  the  kind.  This

psychical trauma is linked with an increase in the sum of excitation of

his nervous system. There then instinctively arises an inclination to

diminish this increased excitation immediately. He hits back, and then

feels easier; he may perhaps have reacted adequately-that is, he may

have got rid of as much as had been introduced into him. Now this

reaction  may  take  various  forms.  For  quite  slight  increases  in

excitation,  alterations  in  his  own  body  may  perhaps  be  enough:

weeping, abusing, raging, and so on. The more intense the trauma,

the  greater  is  the  adequate  reaction.  The  most  adequate  reaction,

however  is  always  a  deed.  But,  as  an  English  writer  has  wittily

remarked,  the  man  who  first  flung  a  word  of  abuse  at  his  enemy

instead  of  a  spear  was  the  founder  of  civilization.  Thus  words  are

substitutes for deeds, and in some circumstances (e. g. in Confession)

the  only  substitutes.  Accordingly,  alongside  the  adequate  reaction

there is one that is less adequate. If, however, there is no reaction

whatever to a psychical trauma, the memory of it retains the affect

which  it  originally  had.  So  that  if  someone  who  has  been  insulted

cannot avenge the insult either by a retaliatory blow or by a word of

abuse, the possibility arises that the memory of the event may call up

in him once more the affect which was originally present. An insult that

has been repaid, even if only in words, is recollected quite differently

from  one  that  has  had  to  be  accepted;  and  linguistic  usage

characteristically describes an insult that has been suffered in silence

as a ‘mortification’. Thus, if for any reason there can be no reaction to

a psychical trauma, it retains its original affect, and when someone

cannot get rid of the increase in stimulation by ‘abreacting’ it, we have

the possibility of the event in question remaining a psychical trauma.

Incidentally,  a  healthy  psychical  mechanism  has  other  methods  ofdealing with the affect of a psychical trauma even if motor reaction

and reaction by words are denied to it - namely by working it over

associatively and by producing contrasting ideas. Even if the person

who has been insulted neither hits back nor replies with abuse, he can

nevertheless  reduce  the  affect  attaching  to  the  insult  by  calling  up

such contrasting ideas as those of his own worthiness, of his enemy’s

worthlessness, and so on. Whether a healthy man deals with an insult

in one way or the other, he always succeeds in achieving the result

that the affect which was originally strong in his memory eventually

loses intensity and that finally the recollection, having lost its affect,

falls a victim to forgetfulness and the process of wearing-away.

 


          On The Psychical Mechanism Of Hysterical Phenomena

                                                                                        297

 

   Now we have found that in hysterical patients there are nothing but

impressions which have not lost their affect and whose memory has

remained vivid. It follows, therefore, that these memories in hysterical

patients,  which  have  become  pathogenic,  occupy  an

exceptionalposition  as  regards  the  wearing-away  process;  and

observation  shows  that,  in  the  case  of  all  the  events  which  have

become determinants of hysterical phenomena, we are dealing with

psychical  traumas  which  have  not  been  completely  abreacted,  or

completely  dealt  with.  Thus  we  may  assert  that hysterical  patients

suffer from incompletely abreacted psychical traumas.

   We find two groups of conditions under which memories become

pathogenic.  In  the  first  group  the  memories  to  which  the  hysterical

phenomena can be traced back have for their content ideas which

involved a trauma so great that the nervous system had not sufficient

power  to  deal  with  it  in  any  way,  or  ideas  to  which  reaction  was

impossible for social reasons (this applies frequently to married life);

or lastly the subject may simply refuse to react, may not want to react

to the psychical trauma. In this last case the contents of the hysterical

deliria often turn out to be the very circle of ideas which the patient in

his normal state has rejected, inhibited and suppressed with all his

might.(For  instance,  blasphemies  and  erotic  ideas  occur  in  thehysterical deliria of nuns.)  But in a second group of cases the reason

for the absence of a reaction lies not in the content of the psychical

trauma  but  in  other  circumstances.  For  we  very  often  find  that  the

content and determinants of hysterical phenomena are events which

are  in  themselves  quite  trivial,  but  which  have  acquired  high

significance  from  the  fact  that  they  occurred  at  specially  important

moments  when  the  patient’s  predisposition  was  pathologically

increased. For instance, the affect of fright may have arisen in the

course of some other severe affect and may on that account have

attained  such  great  importance.  States  of  this  kind  are  of  short

duration and are, as one might say, out of communication with the rest

of the subject’s mental life. While he is in a state of auto-hypnosis

such as this, he cannot get rid associatively of an idea that occurs to

him, as he can in a waking state. After considerable experience with

these phenomena, we think it probable that in every hysteria we are

dealing ‘with a rudiment of what is called  ‘double conscience’, dual

consciousness, and that a tendency to such a dissociation and with it

the  emergence  of  abnormal  states  of  consciousness,  which  we

propose to call ‘hypnoid’, is the basic phenomenon of hysteria.

 


          On The Psychical Mechanism Of Hysterical Phenomena

                                                                                        298

 

 

   Let us now consider the manner in which our therapy operates. It

falls in with one of the dearest human wishes - the wish to be able to

do  something  over  again.  Someone  has  experienced  a  psychical

trauma without reacting to it sufficiently. We get him to experience it a

second time, but under hypnosis; and we now compel him to complete

his reaction to it. He can then get rid of the idea’s affect, which was so

to say ‘strangulated’, and when this is done the operation of the idea is

brought  to  an  end.  Thus  we  cure  -  not  hysteria  but  some  of  its

individual symptoms - by causing an unaccomplished reaction to be

completed.

   You must not suppose, then, that very much has been gained by

this for the therapeutics of hysteria. Hysteria, like the neuroses, has itsdeeper causes; and it is those deeper causes that set limits, which are

often very appreciable, to the success of our treatment.

                                                                                         299

 

                  THE NEURO-PSYCHOSES OF DEFENCE

                                        (1894)

 


                                                                                        300

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                        301

 

                  THE NEURO-PSYCHOSES OF DEFENCE

 

(AN ATTEMPT AT A PSYCHOLOGICAL THEORY OF ACQUIRED

                              HYSTERIA, OF MANY

            PHOBIAS, AND OBSESSIONS AND OF CERTAIN

                        HALLUCINATORY PSYCHOSES)

 

      After  making  a  detailed  study  of  a  number  of  nervous  patients

suffering  from  phobias  and  obsessions,  I  was  led  to  attempt  an

explanation of those symptoms; and this enabled me afterwards to

arrive successfully at the origin of pathological ideas of this sort in new

and different cases. My explanation therefore seems to me to deserve

publication  and  further  examination.  Simultaneously  with  this

‘psychological theory of phobias and obsessions’ my observation of

patients resulted in a contribution to the theory of hysteria, or rather to

a  change  in  it,  which  appears  to  take  into  account  an  important

characteristic that is common both to hysteria and to the neuroses I

have just mentioned. Furthermore, I had occasion to gain insight into

what is undoubtedly a form of mental disease, and I found at the same

time that the point of view which I had tentatively adopted established

an  intelligible  connection  between  these  psychoses  and  the  two

neuroses  under  discussion.  At  the  end  of  this  paper  I  shall  bring

forward a working hypothesis which I have made use of in all three

instances. 


                        The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        302

 

 

                                            I

 

   Let me begin with the change which seems to me to be called for in

the theory of the hysterical neurosis.

   Since the fine work done by Pierre Janet, Josef Breuer and others, it

may be taken as generally recognized that the syndrome of hysteria,

so far as it is as yet intelligible, justifies the assumption of there being

a  splitting  of  consciousness,  accompanied  by  the  formation  of

separate psychical groups. Opinions are less settled, however, about

the origin of this splitting of consciousness and about the part played

by this characteristic in the structure of the hysterical neurosis.

   According to the theory of Janet (1892-4 and 1893), the splitting of

consciousness is a primary feature of the mental change in hysteria. It

is  based  on  an  innate  weakness  of  the  capacity  for  psychical

synthesis, on the narrowness of the ‘field of consciousness (champ de

la conscience)' which, in the form of a psychical stigma, is evidence of

the degeneracy of hysterical individuals.

   In contradistinction to Janet’s view, which seems to me to admit of a

great variety of objections, there is the view put forward by Breuer in

our joint communication (Breuer and Freud, 1893). According to him,

‘the basis and sine qua non of hysteria’ is the occurrence of peculiar

dream-like  states  of  consciousness  with  a  restricted  capacity  for

association, for which he proposes the name ‘hypnoid states’. In that

case,  the  splitting  of  consciousness  is  secondary  and  acquired;  it

comes about because the ideas which emerge in hypnoid states are

cut off from associative communication with the rest of the content of

consciousness.

      I  am  now  in  a  position  to  bring  forward  evidence  of  two  other

extreme  forms  of  hysteria  in  which  it  is  impossible  to  regard  the

splitting of consciousness as primary in Janet’s sense. In the first of

these  forms  I  was  repeatedly  able  to  show  that the  splitting  in  thecontent of consciousness is the result of an act of will on the part of

the patient; that is to say, it is initiated by an effort of will whose motive

can be specified. By this I do not, of course, mean that the patient

intends to bring about a splitting of his consciousness. His intention is

a different one; but, instead of attaining its aim, it produces a splitting

of consciousness.

 


                        The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        303

 

   In the third form of hysteria, which we have demonstrated by means

of  a  psychical  analysis  of  intelligent  patients,  the  splitting  of

consciousness plays an insignificant part, or perhaps none at all. They

are those cases in which what has happened is only that the reaction

to  traumatic  stimuli  has  failed  to  occur,  and  which  can  also,

accordingly,  be  resolved  and  cured  by  ‘abreaction’.¹  These  are  the

pure ‘retention hysterias’.

   As regards the connection with phobias and obsessions, I am only

concerned with the second form of hysteria. For reasons which will

soon  be  evident,  I  shall  call  this  form  ‘defence  hysteria’,  using  the

name to distinguish it from hypnoid hysteria and retention hysteria. I

may  also  provisionally  present  my  cases  of  defence  hysteria  as

‘acquired’ hysteria, since in them there was no question either of a

grave hereditary taint or of an individual degenerative atrophy.

   For these patients whom I analysed had enjoyed good mental health

up to the moment at which an occurrence of incompatibility took place

in their ideational life - that is to say, until their ego was faced with an

experience,  an  idea  or  a  feeling  which  aroused  such  a  distressing

affect that the subject decided to forget about it because he had no

confidence  in  his  power  to  resolve  the  contradiction  between  that

incompatible idea and his ego by means of thought-activity.

   In females incompatible ideas of this sort arise chiefly on the soil of

sexual experience and sensation; and the patients can recollect as

precisely as could be desired their efforts at defence, their intention of

‘pushing the thing away’, of not thinking of it, of suppressing it. I will

give  some  examples,  which  I  could  easily  multiply,  from  my  ownobservation: the case of a girl, who blamed herself because, while she

was nursing her sick father, she had thought about a young man who

had made a slight erotic impression on her; the case of a governess

who had fallen in love with her employer and had resolved to drive this

inclination out of her mind because it seemed to her incompatible with

her pride; and so on.²

 

   ¹ Cf. our joint communication, ibid., 2, 8-9.

    ² These  examples  are  taken  from  a  volume  by  Breuer  and  myself  which  is  still  in

preparation and which deals in detail with the psychical mechanism of hysteria.

 


                        The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        304

 

   I cannot, of course, maintain that an effort of will to thrust things of

this  kind  out  of  one’s  thoughts  a  pathological  act;  nor  do  I  know

whether  and  in  what  way  intentional  forgetting  succeeds  in  those

people who, under the same psychical influences, remain healthy. I

only know that this kind of ‘forgetting’ did not succeed with the patients

I analysed, but led to various pathological reactions which produced

either  hysteria  or  an  obsession  or  a  hallucinatory  psychosis.  The

ability to bring about one of these states - which are all of them bound

up with a splitting of consciousness -by means of an effort of will of

this  sort,  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  manifestation  of  a  pathological

disposition,  although  such  a  disposition  is  not  necessarily  identical

with individual or hereditary ‘degeneracy’.

   As regards the path which leads from the patient’s effort of will to the

onset of the neurotic symptom, I have formed an opinion which may

be  expressed,  in  current  psychological  abstractions,  somewhat  as

follows. The task which the ego, in its defensive attitude, sets itself of

treating the incompatible idea as ‘non arivée’ simply cannot be fulfilled

by it. Both the memory-trace and the affect which is attached to the

idea  are  there  once  and  for  all  and  cannot  be  eradicated.  But  it

amounts to an approximate fulfilment of the task if the ego succeeds

in turning this powerful idea into a weak one, in robbing it of the affect

- the sum of excitation - with which it is loaded. The weak idea will

then have virtually no demands to make on the work of association.But the sum of excitation which has been detached from it must be put

to another use.

 


                        The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        305

 

      Up  to  this  point  the  processes  in  hysteria,  and  in  phobias  and

obsessions are the same; from now on their paths diverge. In hysteria,

the incompatible idea is rendered innocuous by its sum of excitation

being transformed into something somatic.  For  this  I  should  like  to

propose the name of conversion.

   The conversion may be either total or partial. It proceeds along the

line  of  the  motor  or  sensory  innervation  which  is  related  -  whether

intimately or more loosely - to the traumatic experience. By this means

the ego succeeds in freeing itself from the contradiction; but instead, it

has burdened itself with a mnemic symbol which finds a lodgement in

consciousness,  like  a  sort  of  parasite,  either  in  the  form  of  an

unresolvable  motor  innervation  or  as  a  constantly  recurring

hallucinatory sensation, and which persists until a conversion in the

opposite direction takes place. Consequently the memory-trace of the

repressed idea has, after all, not been dissolved; from now on, it forms

the nucleus of a second psychical group.

 


                        The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        306

 

   I will only add a few more words to this view of the psycho-physical

processes  in  hysteria.  When  once  such  a  nucleus  for  a  hysterical

splitting-off  has  been  formed  at  a  ‘traumatic  moment’,  it  will  be

increased  at  other  moments  (which  might  be  called  ‘auxiliary

moments’) whenever the arrival of a fresh impression of the same sort

succeeds  in  breaking  through  the  barrier  erected  by  the  will,  in

furnishing the weakened idea with fresh affect and in re-establishing

for a time the associative link between the two psychical groups, until

a further conversion sets up a defence. The distribution of excitation

thus brought about in hysteria usually turns out to be an unstable one.The  excitation  which  is  forced  into  a  wrong  channel  (ie  which  has

been channelled into a somatic innervation) now and then finds its

way back to the idea from which it has been detached, and it then

compels the subject either to work over the idea associatively or to get

rid  of  it  in  hysterical  attacks  -  as  we  see  in  the  familiar  contrast

between  attacks  and  chronic  symptoms.  The  operation  of  Breuer’s

cathartic method lies in leading back the excitation in this way from the

somatic  to  the  psychical  sphere  deliberately,  and  in  then  forcibly

bringing about a settlement of the contradiction by means of thought-

activity and a discharge of the excitation by talking.

   If the splitting of consciousness which occurs in acquired hysteria is

based  upon  an  act  of  will,  then  we  have  a  surprisingly  simple

explanation of the remarkable fact that hypnosis regularly widens the

restricted  consciousness  of  a  hysteric  and  allows  access  to  the

psychical  group  that  has  been  split  off.  Indeed,  we  know  it  as  a

peculiarity  of  all  states  resembling  sleep  that  they  suspend  the

distribution  of  excitation  on  which  the  ‘will’    of  the  conscious

personality is based.

      Thus  we  see  that  the  characteristic  factor  in  hysteria  is  not  the

splitting of consciousness but the capacity for conversion, and we may

adduce  as  an  important  part  of  the  disposition  to  hysteria  -  a

disposition which in other respects is still unknown - a psycho-physical

aptitude for transposing very large sums of excitation into the somatic

innervation.

   This aptitude does not, in itself, exclude psychical health; and it only

leads to hysteria in the event of there being a psychical incompatibility

or an accumulation of excitation. In taking this view, Breuer and I are

coming  closer  to  Oppenheim’s¹  and  Strümpell’s²  well-known

definitions of hysteria, and are diverging from Janet, who assigns too

great  an  importance  to  the  splitting  of  consciousness  in  his

characterization of hysteria.³ The presentation given here may claim to

have  made  intelligible  the  connection  between  conversion  and  the

hysterical splitting of consciousness.

 

   ¹ According to Oppenheim, hysteria is an intensified expression of motion. The ‘expression

of  emotion’,  however,  represents  the  amount  of  psychical  excitation  which  normally
undergoes conversion.

   ² Strümpell maintains that in hysteria the disturbance lies psycho-physical sphere - in theregion where the somatic and the mental are linked together.

   ³ In the second section of his acute paper ‘Quelques définitions . . .’ Janet has himself dealt

with the objection which argues that splitting of consciousness occurs in psychoses and in so-
called  ‘psychasthenia’  as  well  as  in  hysteria,  but  in  my  judgement  he  has  not  met  it
satisfactorily. It is in the main this objection which obliges him to describe hysteria as a form of
degeneracy. But he has failed to produce any characteristic which sufficiently distinguishes
the splitting of consciousness in hysteria from that in psychoses and similar states.
 


                        The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        307

 

                                            II

 

   If someone with a disposition lacks the aptitude for conversion, but

if,  nevertheless,  in  order  to  fend  off  an  incompatible  idea,  he  sets

about separating it from its affect, then that affect is obliged to remain

in  the  psychical  sphere.  The  idea,  now  weakened,  is  still  left  in

consciousness, separated from all association. But  its  affect,  which

has  become  free,  attaches  itself  to  other  ideas  which  are  not  in

themselves incompatible; and, thanks to this ‘false connection’, those

ideas  turn  into  obessional  ideas.  This,  in  a  few  words,  is  the

psychological  theory  of  obsessions  and  phobias  mentioned  at  the

beginning of this paper.

   I will now indicate which of the various elements put forward in this

theory can be directly demonstrated and which have been filled in by

me. What can be directly demonstrated, apart from the end-product of

the process - the obsession - is in the first place the source of the

affect  which  is  now  in  a  false  connection.  In  all  the  cases  I  have

analysed  it  was  the  subject’s sexual  life  that  had  given  rise  to  a

distressing affect of precisely the same quality as that attaching to his

obsession.  Theoretically,  it  is  not  impossible  that  this  affect  should

sometimes arise in other fields; I can only report that so far I have not

come across any other origin. Moreover, it is easy to see that it is

precisely sexual life which brings with it the most copious occasions

for the emergence of incompatible ideas.

   Furthermore, the most unambiguous statements by the patients give

proof  of  the  effort  of  will,  the  attempt  at  defence,  upon  which  the

theory lays emphasis; and at least in a number of cases the patientsthemselves  inform  us  that  their  phobia  or  obsession  made  its  first

appearance after the effort of will had apparently succeeded in its aim.

‘Something very disagreeable happened to me once and I tried very

hard  to  put  it  away  from  me  and  not  to  think  about  it  any  more.  I

succeeded at last; but then I got this other thing, which I have not

been able to get rid of since.’ It was with these words that a woman

patient confirmed the chief points of the theory I have developed here.

 


                        The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        308

 

   Not everyone who suffers from obsessions is as clear as this about

their  origin.  As  a  rule,  when  one  draws  a  patient’s  attention  to  the

original idea of a sexual kind, the answer is: ’It can’t come from that. I

didn’t think at all much about that. For a moment I was frightened, but

I turned my mind away from it and I haven’t been troubled by it since.’

In  this  frequent  objection  we  have  evidence  that  the  obsession

represents a substitute or surrogate for the incompatible sexual idea

and has taken its place in consciousness.

   Between the patient’s effort of will, which succeeds in repressing the

unacceptable  sexual  idea,  and  the  emergence  of  the  obsessional

idea, which, though having little intensity in itself, is now supplied with

an incomprehensibly strong affect, yawns the gap which the theory

here developed seeks to fill. The separation of the sexual idea from its

affect  and  the  attachment  of  the  latter  to  another,  suitable  but  not

incompatible  idea-these  are  processes  which  occur  without

consciousness. Their existence can only be presumed, but can not be

proved  by  any  clinico-psychological  analysis.  Perhaps  it  would  be

more correct to say that these processes are not of a psychical nature

at  all,  that  they  are  physical  processes  whose  psychical

consequences  present  themselves  as  if  what  is  expressed  by  the

terms ‘separation of the idea from its affect’ and ‘false connection’ of

the latter had really taken place.

      Alongside  of  the  cases  which  show  a  sequence  between  an

incompatible sexual idea and an obsessional idea, we find a number

of  other  cases  in  which  obsessional  ideas  and  sexual  ideas  of  adistressing  character  are  present  simultaneously.  To  call  the  latter

‘sexual  obsessional  ideas’  will  not  do  very  well,  for  they  lack  one

essential  feature  of  obsessional  ideas:  they  turn  out  to  be  fully

justified,  whereas  the  distressing  character  of  ordinary  obsessional

ideas is a problem for both doctor and patient. So far as I have been

able to see my way in cases of this kind, what is happening is that a

perpetual defence is going on against sexual ideas that are continually

coming up afresh - a piece of work, that is to say, which has not yet

come to completion.

 


                        The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        309

 

      So  long  as  the  patients  are  aware  of  the  sexual  origin  of  their

obsessions, they often keep them secret. If they do complain about

them,  they  usually  express  their  astonishment  that  they  should  be

subject to the affect in question - that they should feel anxiety, or have

certain  impulses,  and  so  on.  To  the  experienced  physician,  on  the

contrary, the affect seems justified and comprehensible; what he finds

noticeable is only that an affect of that kind should be linked with an

idea which does not merit it. The affect of the obsession appears to

him, in other words, as being dislodged or transposed; and if he has

accepted what has been said in these pages, he will be able, in a

number of cases of obsessions, to attempt to re-translate them into

sexual terms.

   To provide this secondary connection for the liberated affect, any

idea can be made use of which is either able, from its nature, to be

united with an affect of the quality in question, or which has certain

relations to the incompatible idea which make it seem as though it

could serve as a surrogate for it. Thus, for example, liberated anxiety,

whose sexual origin must not be remembered by the patient, will seize

upon  the  common  primary  phobias  of  mankind  about  animals,

thunderstorms,  darkness  and  so  on,  or  upon  things  which  are

unmistakably associated in one way or another with what is sexual-

such as micturition, defaecation, or dirtying and contagion generally.

   The ego gains much less advantage from choosing transposition ofaffect  as  a  method  of  defence  than  from  choosing  the  hysterical

conversion of psychical excitation into somatic innervation. The affect

from which the ego has suffered remains as it was before, unaltered

and undiminished, the only difference being that the incompatible idea

is kept down and shut out from recollection. The repressed ideas, as

in  the  other  case,  form  the  nucleus  of  a  second  psychical  group,

which, I believe, is accessible even without the help of hypnosis. If

phobias and obsessions are unaccompanied by the striking symptoms

which characterize the formation of an independent psychical group in

hysteria, this is doubtless because in their case the whole alteration

has remained in the psychical sphere and the relationship between

psychical  excitation  and  somatic  innervation  has  undergone  no

change.

 


                        The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        310

 

 

   To illustrate what has been said about obsessions, I will give a few

examples which are, I imagine, of a typical kind:

   (1) A girl suffered from obsessional self-reproaches. If she read

something in the papers about coiners, the thought would occur to her

that  she,  too,  had  made  counterfeit  money;  if  a  murder  had  been

committed by an unknown person, she would ask herself anxiously

whether it was not she who had done the deed. At the same time she

was  perfectly  conscious  of  the  absurdity  of  these  obsessional

reproaches. For a time, this sense of guilt gained such an ascendancy

over her that her powers of criticism were stifled and she accused

herself to her relatives and her doctor of having really committed all

these crimes. (This was an example of a psychosis through simple

intensification - an ‘Überwältigungspsychose’.) Close questioning then

revealed the source from which her sense of guilt arose. Stimulated by

a  chance  voluptuous  sensation,  she  had  allowed  herself  to  be  led

astray by a woman friend into masturbating, and had practised it for

years, fully conscious of her wrong-doing and to the accompaniment

of  the  most  violent,  but,  as  usual,  ineffective  self-reproaches.  Anexcessive  indulgence  after  going  to  a  ball  had  produced  the

intensification  that  led  to  the  psychosis.  After  a  few  months  of

treatment and the strictest surveillance, the girl recovered.

 


                        The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        311

 

   (2) Another girl suffered from the dread of being overcome by the

need to urinate, and of being unable to avoid wetting herself, ever

since  a  need  of  this  kind  had  in  fact  once  obliged  her  to  leave  a

concert hall during the performance. By degrees this phobia had made

her completely incapable of enjoying herself or of going into society.

She only felt well if she knew that there was a W. C. near at hand

which she could reach unobtrusively. There was no question of any

organic  complaint  which  might  justify  this  mistrust  in  her  power  to

control her bladder; when she was at home, in quiet conditions, or at

night, the need to urinate did not arise. A detailed examination showed

that the need had occurred first in the following circumstances. In the

concert hall a gentleman to whom she was not indifferent had taken a

seat not far from her. She began to think about him and to imagine

herself sitting beside him as his wife. During this erotic reverie she had

the bodily sensation which is to be compared with an erection in a

man, and which in her case - I do not know if this is always so - ended

with a slight need to urinate. She now became greatly frightened by

the  sexual  sensation  (to  which  she  was  normally  accustomed)

because  she  had  resolved  within  herself  to  combat  this  particular

liking, as well as any other she might feel; and next moment the affect

had become transferred on to the accompanying need to urinate and

compelled  her  after  an  agonizing  struggle  to  leave  the  hall.  In  her

ordinary  life  she  was  so  prudish  that  she  had  an  intense  horror  of

everything to do with sex and could not contemplate the thought of

ever marrying. On the other hand, she was so hyperaesthetic sexually

that  during  every  erotic  reverie,  in  which  she  readily  indulged,  the

same  voluptuous  sensation  appeared.  The  erection  was  each  time

accompanied by the need to urinate, though without its making any

impression on her until the scene in the concert hall. The treatment ledto an almost complete control over her phobia.

 


                        The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        312

 

   (3) A young married woman who, in five years of marriage, had had

only one child, complained to me of an obsessional impulse to throw

herself out of the window or from the balcony, and also of a fear which

seized her when she saw a sharp knife, of stabbing her child with it.

She  admitted  that  marital  intercourse  seldom  occurred,  and  only

subject to precautions against conception, but she did not miss it, she

said, as hers was not a sensual nature. At this point I ventured to tell

her that at the sight of a man she had erotic ideas and that she had

therefore  lost  confidence  in  herself  and  regarded  herself  as  a

depraved  person,  capable  of  anything.  The  translation  back  of  the

obsessional idea into sexual terms was successful. In tears, she at

once confessed the long-concealed poverty of her marriage; and later

she  told  me  also  of  distressing  ideas  of  an  unmodified  sexual

character such as the often-recurring sensation of something forcing

itself under her skirt.

 

   I have turned observations of this kind to account in my therapeutic

work  by  leading  back  the  attention  of  patients  with  phobias  and

obsessions  to  the  repressed  sexual  ideas  in  spite  of  all  their

protestations,  and,  wherever  possible,  by  stopping  up  the  sources

from  which  those  ideas  sprang.  I  cannot,  of  course,  assert  that all

phobias and obsessions arise in the manner I have shown here. In the

first  place,  my  experience  of  them  includes  only  a  limited  number

compared with the frequency of these neuroses; and in the second

place,  I  myself  am  aware  that  such  ‘psychasthenic’  symptoms,  as

Janet  terms  them,  are  not  all  equivalent.¹  There  are,  for  instance,

purely hysterical phobias. Nevertheless, I think that it will be possible

to show the presence of the mechanism of transposition of affect in

the great majority of phobias and obsessions, and I would therefore

urge that these neuroses, which are found in an isolated state as often

as in combination with hysteria or neurasthenia, should not be throwninto a heap along with common neurasthenia, for the basic symptoms

of which there is no ground at all to assume a psychical mechanism.

 

   ¹ The group of typical phobias, of which agoraphobia is a typical model, cannot be traced

back  to  the  psychical  mechanism  described  above;  on  the  contrary,  the  mechanism  of
agoraphobia differs from that of obsessions proper, and of the phobias that are reducible to
them, in one decisive point. There is no repressed idea from which the anxiety affect might
have been separated off. The anxiety of these phobias has another origin.
 


                        The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        313

 

                                            III

 

      In  both  the  instances  considered  so  far,  defence  against  the

incompatible idea was effected by separating it from its affect; the idea

itself  remained  in  consciousness,  even  though  weakened  and

isolated. There is, however, a much more energetic and successful

kind of defence. Here, the ego rejects the incompatible idea together

with its affect and behaves as if the idea had never occurred to the

ego at all. But from the moment at which this has been successfully

done the subject is in a psychosis, which can only be classified as

‘hallucinatory confusion. A single example may serve to illustrate this

statement:

   A girl had given her first impulsive affection to a man, and firmly

believed that he returned her love. In fact, she was wrong; the young

man  had  a  different  motive  for  visiting  the  house.  Disappointments

were  not  wanting.  At  first  she  defended  herself  against  them  by

effecting a hysterical conversion of the experiences in question and

thus preserved her belief that one day he would come and ask her

hand.  But  at  the  same  time  she  felt  unhappy  and  ill,  because  the

conversion was incomplete and because she was continually being

met by fresh painful impressions. Finally, in a state of great tension,

she  awaited  his  arrival  on  a  particular  day,  the  day  of  a  family

celebration. But the day wore on and he did not appear. When all the

trains by which he could arrive had come and gone, she passed into a

state of hallucinatory confusion: he had arrived, she heard his voice in

the garden, she hurried down in her night-dress to receive him. Fromthat  time  on  she  lived  for  two  months  in  a  happy  dream,  whose

content was that he was there, always at her side, and that everything

was as it had been before (before the time of the disappointments

which  she  had  so  laboriously  fended  off).  Her  hysteria  and  her

depression of spirits were overcome. During her illness she was silent

about the whole latter period of doubt and suffering; she was happy so

long as she was left undisturbed, and she broke out in fury only when

some rule of conduct insisted on by those around her hindered her in

something  which  seemed  to  her  to  follow  quite  logically  from  her

blissful dream. This psychosis, which had been unintelligible at the

time,  was  explained  ten  years  later  with  the  help  of  a  hypnotic

analysis.

 


                        The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        314

 

   The fact to which I now wish to call attention is that the content of a

hallucinatory  psychosis  of  this  sort consists  precisely  in  the

accentuation  of  the  idea  which  was  threatened  by  the  precipitating

cause of the onset of the illness. One is therefore justified in saying

that the ego has fended off the incompatible idea through a flight into

psychosis. The process by which this has been achieved once more

eludes the subject’s self perception, as it eludes psychologico-clinical

analysis.  It  must  be  regarded  as  the  expression  of  a  pathological

disposition of a fairly high degree and it may be described more or

less as follows. The ego breaks away from the incompatible idea; but

the latter is inseparably connected with a piece of reality, so that, in so

far as the ego achieves this result, it, too, has detached itself wholly or

in  part  from  reality.  In  my  opinion  this  latter  event  is  the  condition

under which the subject’s ideas receive the vividness of hallucinations;

and thus when the defence has been successfully carried out he finds

himself in a state of hallucinatory confusion.

      I  have  only  very  few  analyses  of  psychoses  of  this  sort  at  my

disposal. But I think we have to do here with a type of psychical illness

which is very frequently employed. For no insane asylum is without

what must be regarded as analogous examples - the mother who hasfallen ill from the loss of her baby, and now rocks a piece of wood

unceasingly  in  her  arms,  or  the  jilted  bride  who,  arrayed  in  her

wedding-dress, has for years been waiting for her bridegroom.

 

   It is perhaps not superfluous to point out that the three methods of

defence  here  described  and,  along  with  them,  the  three  forms  of

illness to which those methods lead, may be combined in the same

person.  The  simultaneous  appearance  of  phobias  and  hysterical

symptoms which is so often observed in practice is one of the factors

which  render  it  difficult  to  separate  hysteria  clearly  from  other

neuroses  and  which  make  it  necessary  to  set  up  the  category  of

‘mixed  neuroses’.  It  is  true  that  hallucinatory  confusion  is  not  often

compatible  with  a  persistence  of  hysteria,  nor,  as  a  rule,  of

obsessions.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  rare  for  a  psychosis  of

defence  episodically  to  break  through  the  course  of  a  hysterical  or

mixed neurosis.

 

   I should like, finally, to dwell for a moment on the working hypothesis

which  I  have  made  use  of  in  this  exposition  of  the  neuroses  of

defence. I refer to the concept that in mental functions something is to

be  distinguished  -  a  quota  of  affect  or  sum  of  excitation  -  which

possesses  all  the  characteristics  of  a  quantity  (though  we  have  no

means  of  measuring  it),  which  is  capable  of  increase,  diminution,

displacement and discharge, and which is spread over the memory-

traces of ideas somewhat as an electric charge is spread over the

surface of a body.

   This hypothesis which, incidentally, already underlies our theory of

‘abreaction’  in  our  ‘Preliminary  Communication’  (1893a),  can  be

applied in the same sense as physicists apply the hypothesis of a flow

of electric fluid. It is provisionally justified by its utility in co-ordinating

and explaining a great variety of psychical states.

 

VIENNA, end of January 1894.

                                                                                         315

 

                            OBSESSIONS AND PHOBIAS

        THEIR PSYCHICAL MECHANISM AND THEIR AETIOLOGY

                                        (1895)

 


                                                                                        316

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                        317

 

                            OBSESSIONS AND PHOBIAS

        THEIR PSYCHICAL MECHANISM AND THEIR AETIOLOGY

 

I  shall  begin  by  challenging  two  assertions  which  are  often  found

repeated  in  regard  to  the  syndromes  ‘obsessions’  and  ‘phobias’.  It

must be said, first, that they cannot be included under neurasthenia

proper, since the patients afflicted with these symptoms are no more

often neurasthenics than not; and secondly, that we are not justified in

regarding them as the effect of mental degeneracy, because they are

found in persons no more degenerate than the majority of neurotics in

general, because they sometimes improve, and sometimes, indeed,

we even succeed in curing them.¹

      Obsessions  and  phobias  are  separate  neuroses,  with  a  special

mechanism and aetiology which I have succeeded in demonstrating in

a certain number of cases, and which, I hope, will prove similar in a

good number of fresh cases.

   As regards classification of the subject, I propose in the first place to

exclude  a  group  of  intense  obsessions  which  are  nothing  but

memories, unaltered images of important events. As an example, I

may cite Pascal’s obsession: he always thought he saw an abyss on

his left hand ‘after he had nearly been thrown into the Seine in his

coach’.  Such  obsessions  and  phobias,  which  might  be  called

traumatic, are allied to the symptoms of hysteria.   Apart from this group we must distinguish: (a) true obsessions (b)

phobias. The essential difference between them is the following:

   Two constituents are found in every obsession: (1) an idea that

forces itself upon the patient (2) an associated emotional state. Now in

the group of phobias this emotional state is always one of ‘anxiety’,

while  in  true  obsessions  other  emotional  states,  such  as  doubt,

remorse, or anger, may occur just as well as anxiety. I will first attempt

to  explain  the  really  remarkable  psychological  mechanism  of  true

obsessions, a mechanism quite different from that of the phobias.

 

   ¹ I am very glad to find that the authors of the most recent work on this subject express

opinions very similar to mine. Cf. Gélineau (1894), and Hack Tuke (1894).
 


                                Obsessions And Phobias

                                                                                        318

 

                                            I

 

   In many true obsessions it is quite plain that the emotional state is

the principal thing, since that state persists unchanged while the idea

associated  with  it  varies.  The  girl  in  Case  1  quoted  below,  for

example, felt remorse in some degree for all sorts of reasons - for

having  stolen,  for  having  ill-treated  her  sisters,  for  having  made

counterfeit money, etc. People who doubt have many doubts at the

same time or in succession. It is the emotional state which remains

constant  in  them;  the  idea  changes.  In  other  cases  the  idea,  too,

seems fixated, as in Case 4, of the girl who pursued the servants in

the  house  with  an  incomprehensible  hatred,  though  constantly

changing the individual object.

   Now a careful psychological analysis of these cases shows that the

emotional state, as such, is always justified. The girl in Case 1, who

suffered from remorse, had good reasons for it; the women in Case 3

who doubted their powers of resistance to temptation knew very well

why. The girl in Case 4, who detested servants, had good reasons for

complaining, etc. Only, and it is in these two characteristics that the

pathological  mark  lies,  (1) the  emotional  state  persists  indefinitely,

and, (2) the associated idea is no longer the appropriate original one,related to the aetiology of the obsession, but is one which replaces it,

a substitute for it.

   The proof of this is the fact that we can always find in the previous

history of the patient, at the beginning of the obsession, the original

idea that has been replaced. The replaced ideas all have common

attributes;  they  correspond  to  really  distressing  experiences  in  the

subject’s sexual life which he is striving to forget. He succeeds merely

in  replacing  the  incompatible  idea  by  another  ill-adapted  for  being

associated  with  the  emotional  state,  which  for  its  part  remains

unchanged. It is this mésalliance between the emotional state and the

associated  idea  that  accounts  for  the  absurdity  so  characteristic  of

obsessions.

 


                                Obsessions And Phobias

                                                                                        319

 

      I  will  now  bring  forward  my  observations  and  conclude  with  an

attempt at a theoretical explanation.

 

   Case 1. A girl reproached herself for things which she knew were

absurd:  for  having  stolen,  for  having  made  counterfeit  money,  for

being involved in a conspiracy, etc., according to what she happened

to have been reading during the day.

   Reinstatement of the replaced idea: She reproached herself with the

masturbation she had been practising in secret without being able to

renounce it. She was cured by careful surveillance which prevented

her from masturbating.

      Case  2.  A  young  man,  a  medical  student,  suffered  from  an

analogous obsession. He reproached himself for all sorts of immoral

acts:  for  having  killed  his  cousin,  for  having  violated  his  sister,  for

having set fire to a house, etc. He got to the point of having to turn

round in the street to see whether he had not killed the last passer-by.

   Reinstatement: He had been much affected by reading in a quasi-

medical book that masturbation, to which he was addicted, destroyed

one’s morale.

   Case 3. Several women complained of an obsessional impulse tothrow themselves out of the window, to stab their children with knives,

scissors, etc.

   Reinstatement:  Obsessions  based  on  typical  temptations.  These

were  women  who,  not  being  at  all  satisfied  in  marriage,  had  to

struggle  against  the  desires  and  voluptuous  ideas  that  constantly

troubled them at the sight of other men.

   Case 4. A girl who was perfectly sane and very intelligent displayed

an  uncontrollable  hatred  against  the  servants  in  the  house.  It  had

been started in connection with an impertinent servant, and had been

transferred  from  servant  to  servant,  to  an  extent  that  made

housekeeping  impossible.  The  feeling  was  a  mixture  of  hate  and

disgust. She gave as a reason for it that the coarseness of these girls

spoilt her idea of love.

   Reinstatement: This girl had been an involuntary witness of a love-

scene in which her mother had taken part. She had hidden her face,

had stopped up her ears, and had done her utmost to forget it, as it

disgusted her and would have made it impossible for her to remain

with  her  mother,  whom  she  loved  tenderly.  She  succeeded  in  her

efforts, but her anger at her idea of love having been defiled persisted

within her, and this emotional state soon linked itself to the idea of a

person who could take her mother’s place.

 


                                Obsessions And Phobias

                                                                                        320

 

   Case 5. A girl had become almost completely isolated on account of

an  obsessional  fear  of  incontinence  of  urine.  She  could  no  longer

leave her room or receive visitors without having urinated a number of

times. When she was at home or entirely alone the fear did not trouble

her.

   Reinstatement: It was an obsession based on temptation or mistrust.

She did not mistrust her bladder, but her resistance to erotic impulses.

The origin of the obsession shows this clearly. Once, at the theatre, on

seeing  a  man  who  attracted  her,  she  had  felt  an  erotic  desire,

accompanied (as spontaneous pollutions in women always are) by a

desire to urinate. She was obliged to leave the theatre, and from thatmoment on she was a prey to the fear of having the same sensation,

but  the  desire  to  urinate  had  replaced  the  erotic  one.  She  was

completely cured.

 

   Although the cases I have enumerated show varying degrees of

complexity, they have this in common: the original (incompatible) idea

has been replaced by another idea, the substituted idea. In the cases

which I now append, the original idea has been replaced, but not by

another idea; it has been replaced by acts or impulses which originally

served as measures of relief or as protective procedures, and are now

grotesquely  associated  with  an  emotional  state  which  does  not  fit

them, but which has persisted unchanged, and which has remained as

justifiable as it was at its origin.

 

      Case  6. Obsessional  arithmomania.  -  A  woman  found  herself

obliged to count the boards in the floor, the steps in the stair case, etc.

- acts which she performed in a ridiculous state of anxiety.

   Reinstatement: She had begun the counting in order to distract her

mind from obsessional ideas (of temptation). She had succeeded in

doing  so,  but  the  impulse  to  count  had  replaced  the  original

obsession.

 


                                Obsessions And Phobias

                                                                                        321

 

   Case 7.Obsessional brooding and speculating. - A woman suffered

from attacks of this obsession which ceased only when she was ill,

and then gave place to hypochondriacal fears. The theme of her worry

was always a part or function of her body; for example, respiration:

‘Why must I breathe? Suppose I didn’t want to breathe?’ etc.

   Reinstatement: At the very beginning she had suffered from the fear

of  becoming  insane,  a  hypochondriacal  phobia  common  enough

among women who are not satisfied by their husbands, as she was

not. To assure herself that she was not going mad, that she was still in

possession  of  her  mental  faculties,  she  had  begun  to  ask  herself

questions and concern herself with serious problems. This calmed herat first, but with time the habit of speculation replaced the phobia. For

more  than  fifteen  years,  periods  of  fear  (pathophobia)  and  of

obsessive speculating had alternated in her.

      Case  8. Folie  du  doute.  -  Several  cases  showed  the  typical

symptoms of this obsession but were explained very simply. These

persons had suffered or were still suffering from various obsessions,

and the knowledge that the obsessions had disturbed all their acts and

had many times interrupted their train of thought provoked a legitimate

doubt about the reliability of their memory. The confidence of each

one of us is shaken, and we all of us have to re-read a letter or repeat

a calculation if our attention has been distracted several times during

the  performance  of  the  act.  Doubt  is  a  quite  logical  result  when

obsessions are present.

   Case 9. Folie du doute (Hesitation). - The girl in Case 4 had become

extremely  slow  in  the  performance  of  all  her  everyday  actions,

particularly in her toilet. She took hours to tie her shoe laces or to

clean her finger-nails. By way of explanation she said she could not

make her toilet while the obsessional ideas were occupying her, nor

immediately afterwards. As a result, she had become accustomed to

wait a definite length of time after each return of the obsessional idea.

 


                                Obsessions And Phobias

                                                                                        322

 

      Case  10. Folie  du  doute. (Fear  of  scraps  of  paper.)  -  A  young

woman had suffered from scruples after having written a letter; at the

same  time  she  collected  all  the  pieces  of  paper  she  saw.  She

explained this by confessing to a love which she had formerly refused

to admit. As a result of constantly repeating her lover’s name, she was

seized with a fear that the name might have slipped off the end of her

pen, that she might have written it upon some scrap of paper in a

pensive moment.¹

      Case  11. Mysophobia.  -  A  woman  kept  washing  her  hands

constantly and touched door-handles only with her elbow.

   Reinstatement: It was the case of Lady Macbeth. The washing was

symbolic, designed to replace by physical purity the moral purity whichshe  regretted  having  lost.  She  tormented  herself  with  remorse  for

conjugal infidelity, the memory of which she had resolved to banish

from her mind. In addition, she used to wash her genitals.

 

   As regards the theory of this process of substitution, I will content

myself with answering three questions that arise here.

   (1) How can the substitution come about?

      It  seems  to  be  the  expression  of  a  special  inherited  mental

disposition.  At  any  rate,  ‘similar  heredity’  is  often  enough  found  in

obsessional cases, and in hysteria. Thus the patient in Case 2 told me

that  his  father  had  suffered  from  similar  symptoms.  He  once

introduced me to a first cousin who had obsessions and a tic convulsif;

and to his sister’s daughter, aged eleven, who already gave evidence

of obsessions (probably of remorse).

   (2) What is the motive for the substitution?

   I think it may be regarded as an act of defence (Abwehr) of the ego

against the incompatible idea. Among my patients there are some who

remember  a  deliberate  effort  to  banish  the  distressing  idea  or

recollection from the field of consciousness. (See Cases 3, 4, 11.) In

other cases the expulsion of the incompatible idea is brought about

which has left no trace in the patient’s memory.

      (3)  Why  does  the  emotional  state  that  is  associated  with  the

obsessional  idea  persist  indefinitely  instead  of  vanishing  like  other

states of our ego?

   This question may be answered by reference to the theory of the

genesis  of  hysterical  symptoms  developed  by  Breuer  and  myself.¹

Here I will only remark that, by the very fact of the substitution, the

disappearance of the emotional state is rendered impossible.

 

   ¹ Cf. the German popular song:

                Auf jedes weisse Blatt Papier möcht’ ich es schreiben:
                Dein ist mein Herz und soll es ewig, ewig bleiben.

 


                                Obsessions And Phobias

                                                                                        323

 

                                             II

 

   In addition to these two groups of true obsessions there is the class

of ‘phobias’, which must now be considered. I have already mentioned

the great difference between obsessions and phobias: that in the latter

the emotion is always one of anxiety, fear. I might add that obsessions

are varied and more specialized, phobias are more monotonous and

typical. But this distinction is not of capital importance.

      Among  the  phobias,  also,  two  groups  may  be  differentiated,

according to the nature of the object feared: (1) common phobias, an

exaggerated  fear  of  things  that  everyone  detests  or  fears  to  some

extent: such as night, solitude, death, illnesses, dangers in general,

snakes, etc. (2) contingent phobias, the fear of special conditions that

inspire no fear in the normal man; for example, agoraphobia and the

other phobias of locomotion. It is interesting to note that these phobias

have not the obsessive feature that characterizes true obsessions and

the common phobias. The emotional state appears in their instance

only under special conditions which the patient carefully avoids.

      The  mechanism  of  phobias  is  entirely  different  from  that  of

obsessions. Substitution is no longer the predominant feature in the

former; psychological analysis reveals no incompatible, replaced idea

in  them.  Nothing  is  ever  found  but the  emotional  state  of  anxiety

which, by a kind of selective process, brings up all the ideas adapted

to become the subject of a phobia. In the case of agoraphobia, etc.,

we often find the recollection of an anxiety attack; and what the patient

actually fears is the occurrence of such an attack under the special

conditions in which he believes he cannot escape it.

 

   ¹ ‘On the Psychical Mechanism of Hysterical Phenomena’ (1893a)

 


                                Obsessions And Phobias

                                                                                        324

 

   The anxiety belonging to this emotional state, which underlies all

phobias, is not derived from any memory; we may well wonder what

the source of this powerful condition of the nervous system can be.

   I hope to be able to demonstrate, on another occasion, that there isreason  to  distinguish  a  special  neurosis,  the  ‘anxiety  neurosis’,  of

which  the  chief  symptom  is  this  emotional  state.  I  shall  then

enumerate  its  various  symptoms  and  insist  on  the  necessity  for

differentiating  this  neurosis  from  neurasthenia,  with  which  it  is  now

confused. Phobias,  then, are  part  of  the  anxiety  neurosis,  and  are

almost always accompanied by other symptoms of the same group.

   The anxiety neurosis, too, has a sexual origin as far as I can see,

but it does not attach itself to ideas taken from sexual life; properly

speaking,  it  has  no  psychical  mechanism.  Its  specific  cause  is  the

accumulation  of  sexual  tension,  produced  by  abstinence  or  by

unconsummated  sexual  excitation  (using  the  term  as  a  general

formula  for  the  effects  of,  of  relative  impotence  in  the  husband,  of

excitation  without  satisfaction  in  engaged  couples,  of  enforced

abstinence, etc.).

   It is under such conditions, extremely frequent in modern society,

especially among women, that anxiety neurosis (of which phobias are

a psychical manifestation) develops.

   In conclusion I may point out that combinations of a phobia and an

obsession proper may co-exist, and that indeed this is a very frequent

occurrence.  We  may  find  that  a  phobia  had  developed  at  the

beginning of the disease as a symptom of anxiety neurosis. The idea

which constitutes the phobia and which is associated with the state of

fear  may  be  replaced  by  another  idea  or  rather  by  the protective

procedure  that  seemed  to  relieve  the  fear.  Case  7  (obsessive

speculating) presents a neat example of this group: a phobia along

with a true substitutive obsession.

                                                                                         325

 

          ON THE GROUNDS FOR DETACHING A PARTICULAR

                                SYNDROME FROM

          NEURASTHENIA UNDER THE DESCRIPTION ‘ANXIETY

                                      NEUROSIS’

                                        (1895)

 


                                                                                        326

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                        327

 

          ON THE GROUNDS FOR DETACHING A PARTICULAR

                                SYNDROME FROM

          NEURASTHENIA UNDER THE DESCRIPTION ‘ANXIETY

                                      NEUROSIS’

 

It  is  difficult  to  make  any  statement  of  general  validity  about

neurasthenia, so long as we use that name to cover all the things

which Beard has included under it. In my opinion, it can be nothing but

a  gain  to  neuropathology  if  we  make  an  attempt  to  separate  from

neurasthenia proper all those neurotic disturbances in which, on the

one hand, the symptoms are more firmly linked to one another than to

the typical symptoms of neurasthenia (such as intracranial pressure,

spinal irritation, and dyspepsia with flatulence and constipation ); and

which,  on  the  other  hand,  exhibit  essential  differences  in  their

aetiology and mechanism from the typical neurasthenic neurosis. If we

accept  this  plan,  we  shall  soon  obtain  a  fairly  uniform  picture  of

neurasthenia.  We  shall  then  be  in  a  position  to  differentiate  from

genuine neurasthenia more sharply than has hitherto been possible

various  pseudo-neurasthenias  (such  as  the  clinical  picture  of  the

organically determined nasal reflex neurosis, the nervous disorders of

the cachexias and arterio-sclerosis, the preliminary stages of generalparalysis of the insane, and of some psychoses). Further, it will be

possible - as Möbius has proposed - to eliminate some of the status

nervosi  of  hereditarily  degenerate  individuals;  and  we  shall  also

discover  reasons  why  a  number  of  neuroses  which  are  to-day

described as neurasthenia - in particular, neuroses of an intermittent

or periodical nature - ought rather to be included under melancholia.

But the most marked change of all will be introduced if we decide to

detach from neurasthenia the syndrome which I propose to describe in

the following pages and which satisfies especially fully the conditions

set out above. The symptoms of this syndrome are clinically much

more  closely  related  to  one  another  than  to  those  of  genuine

neurasthenia (that is, they frequently appear together and they replace

one another in the course of the illness); and both the aetiology and

the mechanism of this neurosis are fundamentally different from the

aetiology  and  mechanism  of  genuine  neurasthenia  as  it  will  be  left

after this separation has been effected.

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        328

 

   I call this syndrome ‘anxiety neurosis’, because all its components

can be grouped round the chief symptom of anxiety, because each

one of them has a definite relationship to anxiety. I thought that this

view of the symptoms of anxiety neurosis had originated with me, until

an  interesting  paper  by  E.  Hecker  (1893)  came  into  my  hands,  in

which I found the same interpretation expounded with all the clarity

and  completeness  that  could  be  desired.¹  Nevertheless,  although

Hecker recognizes certain symptoms as equivalents or rudiments of

an  anxiety  attack,  he  does  not  separate  them  from  the  domain  of

neurasthenia, as I propose to do. But this is evidently due to his not

having  taken  into  account  the  difference  between  the  aetiological

determinants  in  the  two  cases.  When  this  latter  difference  is

recognized there is no longer any necessity for designating anxiety

symptoms by the same name as genuine neurasthenic ones; for the

principal purpose of giving what is otherwise an arbitrary name is tomake it easier to lay down general statements.

 

   ¹ Anxiety is actually brought forward as one of the principal symptoms of neurasthenia in a

work by Kaan (1893).
 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        329

 

                                            I

 

            THE CLINICAL SYMPTOMATOLOGY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS

 

      What  I  call  ‘anxiety  neurosis’  may  be  observed  in  a  completely

developed form or in a rudimentary one, in isolation or combined with

other neuroses. It is of course the cases which are in some degree

complete and at the same time isolated which give particular support

to  the  impression  that  anxiety  neurosis  is  a  clinical  entity.  In  other

cases, where the syndrome corresponds to a ‘mixed neurosis’, we are

faced  with  the  task  of  picking  out  and  separating  those  symptoms

which  belong,  not  to  neurasthenia  or  hysteria,  and  so  on,  but  to

anxiety neurosis.

      The  clinical  picture  of  anxiety  neurosis  comprises  the  following

symptoms:

   (1) General irritability. This is a common nervous symptom and as

such  belongs  to  many status nervosi.  I  mention  it  here  because  it

invariably appears in anxiety neurosis and is important theoretically.

Increased irritability always points to an accumulation of excitation or

an inability to tolerate such an accumulation - that is, to an absolute or

a relative  accumulation  of  excitation.  One  manifestation  of  this

increased irritability seems to me to deserve special mention; I refer to

auditory hyperaesthesia, to an oversensitiveness to noise - a symptom

which  is  undoubtedly  to  be  explained  by  the  innate  intimate

relationship  between  auditory  impressions  and  fright.  Auditory

hyperaesthesia frequently turns out to be a cause of sleeplessness, of

which more than one form belongs to anxiety neurosis.

   (2) Anxious expectation. I cannot better describe the condition Ihave in mind than by this name and by adding a few examples. A

woman, for instance, who suffers from anxious expectation will think of

influenzal pneumonia every time her husband coughs when he has a

cold, and, in her mind’s eye, will see his funeral go past; if, when she

is coming towards the house, she sees two people standing by her

front door, she cannot avoid thinking that one of her children has fallen

out of the window; when she hears the bell ring, it is someone bringing

news of a death, and so on - while on all these occasions there has

been no particular ground for exaggerating a mere possibility.

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        330

 

   Anxious expectation, of course, shades off imperceptibly into normal

anxiety, comprising all that is ordinarily spoken of as anxiousness - or

a  tendency  to  take  a  pessimistic  view  of  things;  but  at  every

opportunity it goes beyond a plausible anxiousness of this kind, and it

is  frequently  recognized  by  the  patient  himself  as  a  kind  of

compulsion. For one form of anxious expectation - that relating to the

subject’s own health - we may reserve the old term hypochondria. The

height  reached  by  the  hypochondria  is  not  always  parallel  with  the

general  anxious  expectation;  it  requires  as  a  precondition  the

existence  of  paraesthesias  and  distressing  bodily  sensations.  Thus

hypochondria is the form favoured by genuine neurasthenics when, as

often happens, they fall victims to anxiety neurosis.

   A further expression of anxious expectation is no doubt to be found

in the inclination to moral anxiety, to scrupulousness and pedantry -

an inclination which is so often present in people with more than the

usual amount of moral sensitiveness and which likewise varies from

the normal to an exaggerated form in doubting mania.

      Anxious  expectation  is  the  nuclear  symptom  of  the  neurosis.  It

openly reveals, too, a portion of the theory of the neurosis. We may

perhaps say that here a quantum of anxiety in a freely floating state,

which, where there is expectation, controls the choice of ideas and is

always ready to link itself with any suitable ideational content.      (3)  But  anxiousness  -  which,  though  mostly  latent  as  regards

consciousness,  is  constantly  lurking  in  the  background  -  has  other

means  of  finding  expression  besides  this.  It  can  suddenly  break

through into consciousness without being aroused by a train of ideas,

and thus provoke an anxiety attack. An anxiety attack of this sort may

consist of the feeling of anxiety, alone, without any associated idea, or

accompanied by the interpretation that is nearest to hand, such as

ideas of the extinction of life, or of a stroke, or of a threat of madness;

or else some kind of paraesthesia (similar to the hysterical aura) may

be  combined  with  the  feeling  of  anxiety,  or,  finally,  the  feeling  of

anxiety  may  have  linked  to  it  a  disturbance  of  one  or  more  of  the

bodily  functions  -  such  as  respiration,  heart  action,  vasomotor

innervation  or  glandular  activity.  From  this  combination  the  patient

picks out in particular now one, now another, factor. He complains of

‘spasms of the heart’, ‘difficulty in breathing’, ‘outbreaks of sweating’,

‘ravenous hunger’, and such like; and, in his description, the feeling of

anxiety  often  recedes  into  the  background  or  is  referred  to  quite

unrecognizably as ‘being unwell’, ‘feeling uncomfortable’, and so on.

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        331

 

      (4)  Now  it  is  an  interesting  fact,  and  an  important  one  from  a

diagnostic point of view, that the proportion in which these elements

are mixed in an anxiety attack varies to a remarkable degree, and that

almost every accompanying symptom alone can constitute the attack

just  as  well  as  can  the  anxiety  itself.  There  are  consequently

rudimentary  anxiety  attacks  and equivalents  of  anxiety  attacks,  all

probably having the same significance, which exhibit a great wealth of

forms that has as yet been little appreciated. A closer study of these

larval  anxiety-states  (as  Hecker  calls  them)  and  their  diagnostic

differentiation  from  other  attacks  should  soon  become  a  necessary

task for neuropathologists.

 

      I  append  here  a  list  which  includes  only  those  forms  of  anxietyattack which are known to me:-

   (a) Anxiety attacks accompanied by disturbances of the heart action,

such  as  palpitation,  either  with  transitory  arrhythmia  or  with

tachycardia of longer duration which may end in serious weakness of

the heart and which is not always easily differentiated from organic

heart affection; and, again, pseudo-angina pectoris - diagnostically a

delicate subject!

      (b)  Anxiety  attacks  accompanied  by disturbances  of  respiration,

several forms of nervous dyspnoea, attacks resembling asthma, and

the like. I would emphasize that even these attacks are not always

accompanied by recognizable anxiety.

   (c) Attacks of sweating, often at night.

      (d)  Attacks  of tremor  and shivering  which  are  only  too  easily

confused with hysterical attacks.

   (e) Attacks of ravenous hunger, often accompanied by vertigo.

   (f) Diarrhoea coming on in attacks.

   (g) Attacks of locomotor vertigo.

   (h) Attacks of what are known as congestions, including practically

everything that has been termed vasomotor neurasthenia.

   (i) Attacks of paraesthesias. (But these seldom occur without anxiety

or a similar feeling of discomfort.)

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        332

 

   (5) Waking up at night in a fright (the pavor nocturnus of adults),

which is usually combined with anxiety, dyspnoea, sweating and so

on, is very often nothing else than a variant of the anxiety attack. This

disturbance  is  the  determinant  of  a  second  form  of  sleeplessness

within  the  field  of  anxiety  neurosis.  I  have  become  convinced,

moreover, that the pavor nocturnus of children, too, exhibits a form

which belongs to anxiety neurosis. The streak of hysteria about it, the

linking  of  the  anxiety  with  the  reproduction  of  an  appropriate

experience  or  a  dream,  causes  the pavor nocturnus  of  children  to

appear as something special. But the pavor can also emerge in a pureform, without any dream or recurring hallucination.

   (6) ‘Vertigo’ occupies a prominent place in the group of symptoms of

anxiety neurosis. In its mildest form it is best described as ‘giddiness’;

in its severer manifestations, as ‘attacks of vertigo’ (with or without

anxiety),  it  must  be  classed  among  the  gravest  symptoms  of  the

neurosis. The vertigo of anxiety neurosis is not rotatory nor does it

especially affect certain planes or directions, like Meniere’s vertigo. It

belongs to the class of locomotor or co-ordinatory vertigo, as does the

vertigo  in  oculomotor  paralysis.  It  consists  in  a  specific  state  of

discomfort, accompanied by sensations of the ground rocking, of the

legs giving way and of its being impossible to stand up any more;

while the legs feel as heavy as lead and tremble or the knees bend.

This vertigo never leads to a fall. On the other hand, I should like to

state that an attack of vertigo of this kind may have its place taken by

a  profound  fainting  fit.  Other  conditions  in  the  nature  of  fainting

occurring in anxiety neurosis appear to depend upon cardiac collapse.

   Attacks of vertigo are not seldom accompanied by the worst sort of

anxiety,  often  combined  with  cardiac  and  respiratory  disturbances.

According to my observations, vertigo produced by heights, mountains

and precipices is also often present in anxiety neurosis. Furthermore, I

am not sure whether it is not also right to recognize alongside of this a

vertigo a stomacho laeso.

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        333

 

   (7) On the basis of chronic anxiousness (anxious expectation) on

the  one  hand,  and  a  tendency  to  anxiety  attacks  accompanied  by

vertigo on the other, two groups of typical phobias develop, the first

relating  to  general  physiological  dangers,  the  second  relating  to

locomotion. To the first group belong fear of snakes, thunderstorms,

darkness,  vermin,  and  so  on,  as  well  as  the  typical  moral  over-

scrupulousness  and  forms  of  doubting  mania.  Here  the  available

anxiety  is  simply  employed  to  reinforce  aversions  which  are

instinctively implanted in everyone. But as a rule a phobia which actsin an obsessional manner is only formed if there is added to this the

recollection  of  an  experience  in  which  the  anxiety  was  able  to  find

expression  as,  for  instance,  after  the  patient  has  experienced  a

thunderstorm in the open. It is a mistake to try to explain such cases

as  being  simply  a  persistence  of  strong  impressions;  what  makes

these experiences significant and the memory of them lasting is, after

all, only the anxiety which was able to emerge at the time and which

can similarly emerge now. In other words, such impressions remain

powerful only in people with ‘anxious expectation’.

   The other group includes agoraphobia with all its accessory forms,

the whole of them characterized by their relation to locomotion. We

frequently find that this phobia is based on an attack of vertigo that

has preceded it; but I do not think that one can postulate such an

attack in every case. Occasionally we see that after a first attack of

vertigo without anxiety, locomotion, although henceforward constantly

accompanied by a sensation of vertigo, still continues to be possible

without restriction; but that, under certain conditions - such as being

alone or in a narrow street - when once anxiety is added to the attack

of vertigo, locomotion breaks down.

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        334

 

      The  relation  of  these  phobias  to  the  phobias  of  obsessional

neurosis, whose mechanism I made clear in an earlier paper¹ in this

periodical, is of the following kind. What they have in common is that

in both an idea becomes obsessional as a result of being attached to

an  available  affect.  The  mechanism  of transposition  of  affect  thus

holds  good  for  both  kinds  of  phobia.  But  in  the  phobias  of  anxiety

neurosis (1) this affect always has the same colour, which is that of

anxiety; and (2) the affect does not originate in a repressed idea, but

turns  out  to  be not  further  reducible  by  psychological  analysis,  nor

amenable  to  psychotherapy.  The  mechanism  of substitution,

therefore, does not hold good for the phobias of anxiety neurosis.

   Both kinds of phobias (and also obsessions) often appear side byside; although the atypical phobias, which are based on obsessions,

need not necessarily spring from the soil of anxiety neurosis. A very

frequent  and  apparently  complicated  mechanism  makes  its

appearance if, in what was originally a simple phobia belonging to an

anxiety  neurosis,  the  content  of  the  phobia  is  replaced  by  another

idea,  so  that  the  substitute  is subsequent  to  the  phobia.  What  are

most often employed as substitutes are the ‘protective measures’ that

were  originally  used  to  combat  the  phobia.  Thus,  for  instance,

’brooding mania’ arises from the subject’s endeavours to disprove that

he is mad, as his hypochondriacal phobia maintains; the hesitations

and doubt, and still more the repetitions, of folie du doute arise from a

justifiable doubt about the certainty of one’s own train of thought, since

one  is  conscious  of  its  persistent  disturbance  by  ideas  of  an

obsessional  sort,  and  so  on.  We  can  therefore  assert  that  many

syndromes, too, of obsessional neurosis, such as folie du doute and

the  like,  are  also  to  be  reckoned,  clinically  if  not  conceptually,  as

belonging to anxiety neurosis.²

 

   ¹ ‘The Neuro-Psychoses of Defence’ (1894a).

   ² See ‘Obsessions and Phobias’ (1895c).

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        335

 

      (8)  The  digestive  activities  undergo  only  a  few  disturbances  in

anxiety neurosis; but these are characteristic ones. Sensations such

as an inclination to vomit and nausea are not rare, and the symptom

of  ravenous  hunger  may,  by  itself  or  in  conjunction  with  other

symptoms (such as congestions), give rise to a rudimentary anxiety

attack. As a chronic change, analogous to anxious expectation, we

find an inclination to diarrhoea, and this has been the occasion of the

strangest diagnostic errors. Unless I am mistaken, it is this diarrhoea

to which Möbius (1894) has drawn attention recently in a short paper. I

suspect, further, that Peyer’s reflex diarrhoea, which he derives from

disorders  of  the  prostate  (Peyer,  1893),  is  nothing  else  than  this

diarrhoea of anxiety neurosis. The illusion of a reflex relationship iscreated because the same factors come into play in the aetiology of

anxiety neurosis as are at work in the setting up of such affections of

the prostate and similar disorders.

      The  behaviour  of  the  gastro-intestinal  tract  in  anxiety  neurosis

presents a sharp contrast to the influence of neurasthenia on those

functions. Mixed cases often show the familiar ‘alternation between

diarrhoea and constipation’. Analogous to this diarrhoea is the need to

urinate that occurs in anxiety neurosis.

   (9) The paraethesias which may accompany attacks of vertigo or

anxiety  are  interesting  because  they,  like  the  sensations  of  the

hysterical aura, become associated in a definite sequence; although I

find  that  these  associations,  in  contrast  to  the  hysterical  ones,  are

atypical and changing. A further similarity to hysteria is provided by

the fact that in anxiety neurosis a kind of conversion¹ takes place on to

bodily sensations, which may easily be overlooked - for instance, on to

rheumatic muscles. A whole number of what are known as rheumatic

individuals  who,  moreover,  can  be  shown  to be  rheumatic  -  are  in

reality  suffering  from  anxiety  neurosis.  Along  with  this  increase  of

sensitivity  to  pain,  I  have  also  observed  in  a  number  of  cases  of

anxiety neurosis a tendency to hallucinations; and these could not be

interpreted as hysterical.

   (10)  Several of the symptoms I have mentioned, which accompany

or take the place of an anxiety attack, also appear in a chronic form. In

that  case  they  are  still  less  easy  to  recognize,  since  the  anxious

sensation which goes with them is less clear than in an anxiety attack.

This is especially true of diarrhoea, vertigo and paraesthesias. Just as

an attack of vertigo can be replaced by a fainting fit, so chronic vertigo

can be replaced by a constant feeling of great feebleness, lassitude

and so on.

 

   ¹ See ‘The Neuro-Psychoses of Defence’ (1894a).

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        336

 

                                            II 

                  INCIDENCE AND AETIOLOGY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS

 

      In  some  cases  of  anxiety  neurosis  no  aetiology  at  all  is  to  be

discovered. It is worth noting that in such cases there is seldom any

difficulty in establishing evidence of a grave hereditary taint.

      But  where  there  are  grounds  for  regarding  the  neurosis  as  an

acquired one, careful enquiry directed to that end reveals that a set of

noxae and influences from sexual life are the operative aetiological

factors. These appear at first sight to be of a varied nature, but they

soon disclose the common character which explains why they have a

similar effect on the nervous system. Further, they are present either

alone or together with other noxae of a ‘stock’ kind, to which we may

ascribe a contributory effect. This sexual aetiology of anxiety neurosis

can  be  demonstrated  with  such  overwhelming  frequency  that  I

venture, for the purpose of this short paper, to disregard those cases

where the aetiology is doubtful or different.

   In order that the aetiological conditions under which anxiety neurosis

makes its appearance may be presented with greater accuracy, it will

be advisable to consider males and females separately. In females -

disregarding for the moment their innate disposition - anxiety neurosis

occurs in the following cases:

 

      (a)  As virginal  anxiety  or anxiety  in  adolescents.  A  number  of

unambiguous observations have shown me that anxiety neurosis can

be  produced  in  girls  who  are  approaching  maturity  by  their  first

encounter  with  the  problem  of  sex,  by  any  more  or  less  sudden

revelation  of  what  had  till  then  been  hidden  -  for  instance,  by

witnessing the sexual act, or being told or reading about these things.

Such  an  anxiety  neurosis  is  combined  with  hysteria  in  an  almost

typical fashion.

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        337

 

   (b) As anxiety in the newly married. Young married women whohave remained anaesthetic during their first cohabitations not seldom

fall ill of an anxiety neurosis, which disappears once more as soon as

the anaesthesia gives place to normal sensitivity. Since most young

wives remain healthy where there is initial anaesthesia of this kind, it

follows  that,  in  order  that  this  kind  of  anxiety  shall  emerge,  other

determinants are required; and these I will mention later.

   (c) As anxiety in women whose husbands suffer from ejaculatio

praecox or from markedly impaired potency; and (d) whose husbands

practise  coitus  interruptus  or  reservatus.  These  cases  belong

together, for on analysing a great number of instances it is easy to

convince  oneself  that  they  depend  simply  on  whether  the  woman

obtains satisfaction in coitus or not. If not, the condition for the genesis

of an anxiety neurosis is given. On the other hand, she is saved from

the neurosis if the husband who is affected with ejaculatio praecox is

able  immediately  to  repeat  coitus  with  better  success.  Coitus

reservatus by  means  of  condoms  is  not  injurious  to  the  woman,

provided she is very quickly excitable and the husband very potent;

otherwise, this kind of preventive intercourse is no less injurious than

the others. Coitus interruptus is nearly always a noxa. But for the wife

it is only so if the husband practises it regardlessly - that is to say, if he

breaks  off  intercourse  as  soon  as he  is  near  emission,  without

troubling himself about the course of the excitation in her. If, on the

other hand, the husband waits for his wife’s satisfaction, the coitus

amounts  to  a  normal  one  for her;  but he  will  fall  ill  of  an  anxiety

neurosis.  I  have  collected  and  analysed  a  large  number  of

observations, on which these assertions are based.

      (e)    Anxiety  neurosis  also  occurs  as  anxiety  in widows  and

intentionally abstinent  women,  not  seldom  in  a  typical  combination

with obsessional ideas; and

   (f) As anxiety in the climacteric during the last major increase of

sexual need.

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        338

    Cases (c) (d) and (e) comprise the conditions under which anxiety

neurosis in the female sex arises most frequently and most readily,

independently  of  hereditary  disposition.  It  is  in  reference  to  these

cases of anxiety neurosis - these curable acquired cases - that I shall

try to show that the sexual noxae discovered in them are really the

aetiological factor of the neurosis.

   Before doing so, however, I will discuss the sexual determinants of

anxiety neurosis in men. I propose to distinguish the following groups,

all of which have their analogies in women:

      (a)    Anxiety  of  intentionally abstinent  men,  which  is  frequently

combined  with  symptoms  of defence  (obsessional  ideas,  hysteria).

The  motives  which  are  responsible  for  intentional  abstinence  imply

that a number of people with a hereditary disposition, eccentrics, etc.,

enter into this category.

   (b) Anxiety in men in a state of unconsummated excitation (e.g.

during the period of engagement before marriage), or in those who

(from  fear  of  the  consequences  of  sexual  intercourse)  content

themselves  with  touching  or  looking  at  women.  This  group  of

determinants  -  which,  incidentally,  can  be  applied  unaltered  to  the

other  sex  (during  engagements  or  relations  in  which  sexual

intercourse is avoided) - provides the purest cases of the neurosis.

   (c) Anxiety in men who practise coitus interruptus. As has been said,

coitus interruptus is injurious to the woman if it is practised without

regard to her satisfaction; but it is injurious to the man if, in order to

obtain satisfaction for her, he directs coitus voluntarily and postpones

emission.  In  this  way  it  becomes  intelligible  that  when  a  married

couple practise coitus interruptus, it is, as a rule, only one partner who

falls  ill.  Moreover,  in  men  coitus  interruptus  only  rarely  produces  a

pure  anxiety  neurosis;  it  usually  produces  a  mixture  of  anxiety

neurosis and neurasthenia.

      (d)  Anxiety  in senescent  men.  There  are  men  who  have  a

climacteric like women, and who produce an anxiety neurosis at the

time of their decreasing potency and increasing libido.

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia                                                                                        339

 

   Finally, I must add two other cases which apply to both sexes:

   (a) People who, as a result of practising masturbation, have become

neurasthenics, fall victims to anxiety neurosis as soon as they give up

their form of sexual satisfaction. Such people have made themselves

particularly incapable of tolerating abstinence.

   I may note here, as being important for an understanding of anxiety

neurosis,  that  any  pronounced  development  of  that  affection  only

occurs among men who have remained potent and women who are

not anaesthetic. Among neurotics whose potency has already been

severely  damaged  by  masturbation,  the  anxiety  neurosis  resulting

from abstinence is very slight and is mostly restricted to hypochondria

and mild chronic vertigo. The majority of women, indeed, are to be

regarded  as  ‘potent’;  a  really  impotent  -  i.e.  a  really  anaesthetic  -

woman is in a similar way little susceptible to anxiety neurosis, and

she tolerates the noxae I have described remarkably well.

      How  far,  in  addition  to  this,  we  are  justified  in  postulating  any

constant relation between particular aetiological factors and particular

symptoms  in  the  complex  of  anxiety  neurosis,  I  should  not  like  to

discuss as yet in this paper.

   (b) The last of the aetiological conditions I have to bring forward

appears  at  first  sight  not  to  be  of  a  sexual  nature  at  all.  Anxiety

neurosis also arises - and in both sexes - as a result of the factor of

overwork  or  exhausting  exertion  -  as,  for  instance,  after  night-

watching, sick-nursing, or even after severe illness.

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        340

 

 

   The main objection to my postulate of a sexual aetiology for anxiety

neurosis will probably be to the following effect. Abnormal conditions

in  sexual  life  of  the  kind  I  have  described  are  found  so  extremely

frequently that they are bound to be forthcoming wherever one looksfor them. Their presence in the cases of anxiety neurosis which I have

enumerated  does  not,  therefore,  prove  that  we  have  unearthed  in

them the aetiology of the neurosis. Moreover, the number of people

who practise coitus interruptus and the like is incomparably larger than

the  number  who  are  afflicted  with  anxiety  neurosis,  and  the  great

majority of the former tolerate this noxa very well.

   To this I must reply in the first place that, considering the admittedly

enormous  frequency  of  the  neuroses  and  especially  of  anxiety

neurosis, it would certainly not be right to expect to find an aetiological

factor for them that is of rare occurrence; in the second place, that a

postulate  of  pathology  is  in  fact  satisfied,  if  in  an  aetiological

investigation  it  can  be  shown  that  the presence  of  an  aetiological

factor is more frequent than its effects, since, in order for these latter

to  occur,  other  conditions  may  have  to  exist  in  addition  (  such  as

disposition,  summation  of  specific  aetiological  elements,  or

reinforcement  by  other  stock  noxae);  and  further,  that  a  detailed

dissection  of  suitable  cases  of  anxiety  neurosis  proves  beyond

question the importance of the sexual factor. I will confine myself here,

however, to the single aetiological factor of coitus interruptus and to

bringing out certain observations which confirm it.

   (1) So long as an anxiety neurosis in young married women is not

yet  established,  but  only  appears  in  bouts  and  disappears  again

spontaneously, it is possible to demonstrate that each such bout of the

neurosis is traceable to a coitus which was deficient in satisfaction.

Two days after this experience - or, in the case of people with little

resistance, the day after - the attack of anxiety or vertigo regularly

appears, bringing in its train other symptoms of the neurosis. All this

vanishes  once  more,  provided  that  marital  intercourse  is

comparatively rare. A chance absence of the husband from home, or

a  holiday  in  the  mountains  which  necessitates  a  separation  of  the

couple,  has  a  good  effect.  The  gynaecological  treatment  which  is

usually resorted to in the first instance is beneficial because, while it

lasts, marital intercourse is stopped. Curiously enough the success of

local  treatment  is  only  transitory:  the  neurosis  sets  in  again  in  the

mountains, as soon as the husband begins his holiday too; and so on.

If, as a physician who understands this aetiology, one arranges, in a

case in which the neurosis has not yet been established, for coitusinterruptus  to  be  replaced  by  normal  intercourse,  one  obtains  a

therapeutic  proof  of  the  assertion  I  have  made.  The  anxiety  is

removed, and - unless there is fresh cause for it of the same sort - it

does not return.

   (2) In the anamneses of many cases of anxiety neurosis we find,

both in men and women, a striking oscillation in the intensity of its

manifestations,  and,  indeed,  in  the  coming  and  going  of  the  whole

condition. One year, they will tell you, was almost entirely good, but

the next one was dreadful; on one occasion the improvement seemed

to be due to a particular treatment, which, however, turned out to be

quite  useless  at  the  next  attack;  and  so  on.  If  we  enquire  into  the

number and sequence of the children and compare this record of the

marriage  with  the  peculiar  history  of  the  neurosis,  we  arrive  at  the

simple  solution  that  the  periods  of  improvement  or  good  health

coincided  with  the  wife’s  pregnancies,  during  which,  of  course,  the

need for preventive intercourse was no longer present. The husband

benefited by the treatment after which he found his wife pregnant -

whether  he  received  it  from  Pastor  Kneipp  or  at  a  hydropathic

establishment.

   (3) The anamnesis of patients often discloses that the symptoms of

anxiety neurosis have at some definite time succeeded the symptoms

of some other neurosis - neurasthenia, perhaps - and have taken their

place. In these instances it can quite regularly be shown that, shortly

before  this  change  of  the  picture,  a  corresponding  change  has

occurred in the form of the sexual noxa.

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        341

 

   Observations of this sort, which can be multiplied at will, positively

thrust a sexual aetiology on the doctor for a certain category of cases.

And other cases, which would otherwise remain unintelligible, can at

least be understood and classified without inconsistency by employing

that aetiology as a key. I have in mind those very numerous cases in

which,  it  is  true,  everything  is  present  that  has  been  found  in  theprevious  category  -  on  the  one  hand  the  manifestations  of  anxiety

neurosis, and on the other the specific factor of coitus interruptus - but

in which something else as well intrudes itself: namely, a long interval

between  the  presumed  aetiology  and  its  effects,  and  also  perhaps

aetiological factors that are not of a sexual nature. Take, for instance,

a man who, on receiving news of his father’s death, had a heart attack

and from that moment fell a victim to an anxiety neurosis. The case is

not comprehensible, for, till then, the man was not neurotic. The death

of  his  father,  who  was  well  advanced  in  years,  did  not  take  place

under in any way special circumstances, and it will be admitted that

the  normal  and  expected  decease  of  an  aged  father  is  not  one  of

those  experiences  which  usually  cause  a  healthy  adult  to  fall  ill.

Perhaps the aetiological analysis will become clearer if I add that this

man had been practising coitus interruptus for eleven years, with due

consideration for his wife’s satisfaction. The clinical symptoms are, at

least, exactly the same as those which appear in other people after

only  a  short  sexual  noxa  of  the  same  kind,  and  without  the

interpolation of any other trauma. A similar assessment must be made

of the case of a woman whose anxiety neurosis broke out after the

loss of her child, or of the student whose preparatory studies for his

final examination were interfered with by an anxiety neurosis. I think

that  in  these  instances,  too,  the  effect  is  not  explained  by  the

ostensible  aetiology.  One  is  not  necessarily  ‘overworked’  by  study,

and a healthy mother as a rule reacts only with normal grief to the loss

of a child. Above all, however, I should have expected the student, as

a result of his overwork, to acquire cephalasthenia, and the mother, as

a result of her bereavement, hysteria. That both should have been

overtaken by anxiety neurosis leads me to attach importance to the

fact that the mother had been living for eight years in conditions of

marital coitus interruptus, and that the student had for three years had

an ardent love affair with a ‘respectable’ girl whom he had to avoid

making pregnant.

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        342 

   These considerations lead us to the conclusion that the specific

sexual noxa of coitus interruptus, even when it is not able on its own

account to provoke an anxiety neurosis in the subject, does at least

provoke him to acquire it. The anxiety neurosis breaks out as soon as

there is added to the latent effect of the specific factor the effect of

another, stock noxa. The latter can act in the sense of the specific

factor  quantitatively  but  cannot  replace  it  qualitatively.  The  specific

factor always remains decisive for the form taken by the neurosis. I

hope to be able to prove this assertion concerning the aetiology of the

neuroses more comprehensively too.

   In addition, these latter remarks contain an assumption which is not

in  itself  improbable,  to  the  effect  that  a  sexual  noxa  like  coitus

interruptus comes into force through summation. A shorter or longer

time  is  needed  -  depending  on  the  individual’s  disposition  and  any

other inherited weaknesses of his nervous system - before the effect

of this summation becomes visible. Those individuals who apparently

tolerate coitus interruptus without harm, in fact become disposed by it

to the disorders of anxiety neurosis, and these may break out at some

time  or  other,  either  spontaneously  or  after  a  stock  trauma  which

would not ordinarily suffice for this; just as, by the path of summation,

a chronic alcoholic will in the end develop a cirrhosis or some other

illness, or will, under the influence of a fever, fall a victim to delirium.

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        343

 

 

                                            III

 

              FIRST STEPS TOWARD A THEORY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS

 

   The following theoretical discussion can only claim to have the value

of  a  first,  groping  attempt;  criticism  of  it  ought  not  to  affect  an

acceptance  of  the facts  which  have  been  brought  forward  above.

Moreover, an assessment of this ‘theory of anxiety neurosis’ is madethe more difficult from being only a fragment of a more comprehensive

account of the neuroses.

   What we have so far said about anxiety neurosis already provides a

few starting points for gaining an insight into the mechanism of this

neurosis. In the first place there was our suspicion that we had to do

with an accumulation of excitation; and then there was the extremely

important fact that the anxiety which underlies the clinical symptoms of

the  neurosis  can  be  traced  to no  psychical  origin.  Such  an  origin

would exist, for instance, if it was found that the anxiety neurosis was

based on a single or repeated justifiable fright, and that that fright had

since provided the source for the subject’s readiness for anxiety. But

this is not so. Hysteria or a traumatic neurosis can be acquired from a

single fright, but never anxiety neurosis. Since coitus interruptus takes

such  a  prominent  place  among  the  causes  of  anxiety  neurosis,  I

thought at first that the source of the continuous anxiety might lie in

the fear, recurring every time the sexual act was performed, that the

technique might go wrong and conception consequently take place.

But I have found that this state of feeling, either in the man or the

woman, during coitus interruptus has no influence on the generation of

anxiety neurosis, that women who are basically indifferent about the

consequence  of  a  possible  conception  are  just  as  liable  to  the

neurosis as those who shudder at the possibility, and that everything

depends  simply  on  which  partner  has  forfeited  satisfaction  in  this

sexual technique.

   A further point of departure is furnished by the observation, not so

far  mentioned,  that  in  whole  sets  of  cases  anxiety  neurosis  is

accompanied  by  a  most  noticeable  decrease  of  sexual  libido  or

psychical desire, so that on being told that their complaint results from

‘insufficient  satisfaction’,  patients  regularly  reply  that  that  is

impossible,  for  precisely  now  all  sexual  need  has  become

extinguished in them. From all these indications - that we have to do

with  an  accumulation  of  excitation;  that  the  anxiety  which  probably

corresponds to this accumulated excitation is of somatic origin, so that

what is being accumulated is a somatic excitation; and, further, that

this somatic excitation is of a sexual nature and that a decrease of

psychical participation in the sexual processes goes along with it - all

these indications, I say, incline us to expect that the mechanism ofanxiety is to be looked for in a deflection of somatic excitation from the

psychical sphere, and in a consequent abnormal employment of that

excitation.

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        344

 

   This concept of the mechanism of anxiety neurosis can be made

clearer if one accepts the following view of the sexual process, which

applies,  in  the  first  instance,  to  men.  In  the  sexually  mature  male

organism somatic sexual excitation is produced probably continuously

- and periodically becomes a stimulus to the psyche. In order to make

our ideas on this point firmer, I will add by way of interpolation that this

somatic  excitation  is  manifested  as  a  pressure  on  the  walls  of  the

seminal vesicles, which are lined with nerve endings; thus this visceral

excitation will develop continuously, but it will have to reach a certain

height before it is able to overcome the resistance of the intervening

path  of  conduction  to  the  cerebral  cortex  and  express  itself  as  a

psychical stimulus. When this has happened, however, the group of

sexual ideas which is present in the psyche becomes supplied with

energy  and  there  comes  into  being  the  psychical  state  of  libidinal

tension  which  brings  with  it  an  urge  to  remove  that  tension.  A

psychical unloading of this kind is only possible by means of what I

shall call specific or adequate action. This adequate action consists,

for the male sexual instinct, in a complicated spinal reflex act which

brings  about  the  unloading  of  the  nerve-endings,  and  in  all  the

psychical preparations which have to be made in order to set off that

reflex. Anything other than the adequate action would be fruitless, for

once the somatic sexual excitation has reached threshold value it is

turned  continuously  into  psychical  excitation,  and  something  must

positively take place which will free the nerve endings from the load of

pressure on them - which will, accordingly, remove the whole of the

existing  somatic  excitation  and  allow  the  subcortical  path  of

conduction to re-establish its resistance.

       On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        345

 

   I shall refrain from describing more complicated instances of the

sexual process in a similar way. I will only state that in essentials this

formula  is  applicable  to  women  as  well,  in  spite  of  the  confusion

introduced into the problem by all the artificial retarding and stunting of

the female sexual instinct. In women too we must postulate a somatic

sexual  excitation  and  a  state  in  which  this  excitation  becomes  a

psychical  stimulus  -  libido  -  and  provokes  the  urge  to  the  specific

action  to  which  voluptuous  feeling  is  attached.  Where  women  are

concerned, however, we are not in a position to say what the process

analogous to the relaxation of tension of the seminal vesicles may be.

   We can include within the framework of this description of the sexual

process not only the aetiology of anxiety neurosis but that of genuine

neurasthenia.  Neurasthenia  develops  whenever  the  adequate

unloading ( the adequate action) is replaced by a less adequate one -

thus,  when  normal  coition,  carried  out  in  the  most  favourable

conditions,  is  replaced  by  masturbation  or  spontaneous  emission.

Anxiety neurosis, on the other hand, is the product of all those factors

which prevent the somatic sexual excitation from being worked over

psychically. The manifestations of anxiety neurosis appear when the

somatic  excitation  which  has  been  deflected  from  the  psyche  is

expended subcortically in totally inadequate reactions.

   I will now attempt to discover whether the aetiological conditions for

anxiety neurosis which I set out above exhibit the common character

that  I  have  just  attributed  to  them.  The  first  aetiological  factor  I

postulated for men was intentional abstinence. Abstinence consists in

the  withholding  of  the  specific  action  which  ordinarily  follows  upon

libido.  Such  withholding  may  have  two  consequences.  In  the  first

place,  the  somatic  excitation  accumulates;  it  is  then  deflected  into

other paths, which hold out greater promise of discharge than does

the path through the psyche. Thus the libido will in the end sink, and

the excitation will manifest itself subcortically as anxiety. In the second

place,  if  the  libido  is  not  diminished,  or  if  the  somatic  excitation  is

expended, by a short cut, in emissions, or if, in consequence of beingforced back, the excitation really ceases, then all kinds of things other

than an anxiety neurosis will ensue. Abstinence, then, leads to anxiety

neurosis in the manner described above. But it is also the operative

agent  in  my  second  aetiological  group,  that  of  unconsummated

excitation. My third group, that of coitus reservatus with consideration

for  the  woman,  operates  by  disturbing  the  man’s  psychical

preparedness for the sexual process, in that it introduces alongside of

the task of mastering the sexual affect another psychical task, one of a

deflecting  sort.  In  consequence  of  this  psychical  deflection,  once

more, libido gradually disappears, and the further course of things is

then the same as in the case of abstinence. Anxiety in senescence

(the male climacteric) requires another explanation. Here there is no

diminution  of  libido;  but,  as  in  the  female  climacteric,  so  great  an

increase occurs in the production of somatic excitation that the psyche

proves relatively insufficient to master it.

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        346

 

   The aetiological conditions applying to women can be brought into

the framework of my scheme with no greater difficulties than in the

case of men. Virginal anxiety is a particularly clear example. For here

the  groups  of  ideas  to  which  the  somatic  sexual  excitation  should

become attached are not yet enough developed. In the newly-married

woman  who  is  anaesthetic,  anxiety  only  appears  if  the  first

cohabitations arouse a sufficient amount of somatic excitation. When

the local indications of such excitement (spontaneous sensations of

stimulation, desire to micturate and so on) are lacking, anxiety is also

absent. The case of ejaculatio praecox and of coitus interruptus can

be explained on the same lines as in men, namely that the libidinal

desire for the psychically unsatisfying act gradually disappears, while

the  excitation  which  has  been  aroused  during  the  act  is  expended

subcortically. The alienation between the somatic and the psychical

sphere is established more readily and is more difficult to remove in

women  than  in  men.  The  cases  of  widowhood  and  of  voluntaryabstinence, and also that of the climacteric, are dealt with in the same

way in both sexes; but where abstinence is concerned there is in the

case of women no doubt the further matter of intentional repression of

the  sexual  circle  of  ideas,  to  which  an  abstinent  woman,  in  her

struggle against temptation, must often make up her mind. The horror

which, at the time of the menopause, an ageing woman feels at her

unduly increased libido may act in a similar sense.

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        347

 

   The two last aetiological conditions on our list seem to fall into place

without difficulty. The tendency to anxiety in masturbators who have

become neurasthenic is explained by the fact that it is very easy for

them  to  pass  into  a  state  of  ‘abstinence’  after  they  have  been

accustomed for so long to discharging even the smallest quantity of

somatic  excitation,  faulty  though  that  discharge  is.  Finally,  the  last

case,  -  the  generation  of  anxiety  neurosis  through  severe  illness,

overwork, exhausting sick-nursing, etc., - finds an easy interpretation

when brought into relation with the effects of coitus interruptus. Here

the psyche, on account of its deflection, would seem to be no longer

capable of mastering the somatic excitation, a task on which, as we

know, it is continuously engaged. We are aware to what a low level

libido  can  sink  under  these  conditions;  and  we  have  here  a  good

example of a neurosis which, although it exhibits no sexual aetiology,

nevertheless exhibits a sexual mechanism.

   The view here developed depicts the symptoms of anxiety neurosis

as being in a sense surrogates of the omitted specific action following

on sexual excitation. In further support of this view, I may point out

that  in  normal  copulation  too  the  excitation  expends  itself,  among

other  things,  in  accelerated  breathing,  palpitation,  sweating,

congestion, and so on. In the corresponding anxiety attacks of our

neurosis  we  have  before  us  the  dyspnoea,  palpitations,  etc.  of

copulation in an isolated and exaggerated form.

   A further question may be asked. Why, under such conditions ofpsychical  insufficiency  in  mastering  sexual  excitation,  does  the

nervous system find itself in the peculiar affective state of anxiety?  An

answer may be suggested as follows. The psyche finds itself in the

affect of anxiety if it feels unable to deal by appropriate reaction with a

task (a danger) approaching from the outside;    it  finds  itself  in  the

neurosis of anxiety if it notices that it is unable to even out the (sexual)

excitation originating from within - that is to say, it behaves as though

it  were  projecting  that  excitation  outwards.  The  affect  and  its

corresponding neurosis are firmly related to each other. The first is a

reaction  to  an  exogenous  excitation,  the  second  a  reaction  to  the

analogous  endogenous  one.  The  affect  is  a  state  which  passes

rapidly,  the  neurosis  is  a  chronic  one;  because,  while  exogenous

excitation operates with a single impact, the endogenous excitation

operates as a constant force. In the neurosis, the nervous system is

reacting against a source of excitation which is internal, whereas in

the corresponding affect it is reacting against an analogous source of

excitation which is external.

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        348

 

                                            IV

 

                            RELATION TO OTHER NEUROSES

 

   There are still a few words to be said about the relations of anxiety

neurosis to the other neuroses as regards their onset and their internal

connections.

   The purest cases of anxiety neurosis are usually the most marked.

They  are  found  in  sexually  potent  youthful  individuals,  with  an

undivided aetiology, and an illness that is not of too long standing.

   More often, however, symptoms of anxiety occur at the same time

as,  and  in  combination  with,  symptoms  of  neurasthenia,  hysteria,

obsessions  or  melancholia.  If  we  were  to  allow  ourselves  to  be

restrained  by  a  clinical  intermixture  like  this  from  acknowledging

anxiety neurosis as an independent entity, we ought, logically, also toabandon  once  more  the  separation  which  has  been  so  laboriously

achieved between hysteria and neurasthenia.

      For  the  purposes  of  analysing  ‘mixed  neuroses’  I  can  state  this

important  truth: Wherever  a  mixed  neurosis  is  present,  it  will  be

possible to discover an intermixture of several specific aetiologies.

   A multiplicity of aetiological factors such as this, which determine a

mixed neurosis, may occur purely fortuitously. For instance, a fresh

noxa may add its effects to those of an already existing one. Thus, a

woman who has always been hysterical may begin at a certain point in

her marriage to experience coitus reservatus; she will then acquire an

anxiety neurosis in addition to her hysteria. Or again, a man who has

hitherto masturbated and has become neurasthenic, may get engaged

and become sexually excited by his fiancée; his neurasthenia will now

be joined by a new anxiety neurosis.

   In other cases the multiplicity of aetiological factors is by no means

fortuitous: one of the factors has brought the other into operation. For

example,  a  woman  with  whom  her  husband  practises  coitus

reservatus  without  regard  to  her  satisfaction  may  find  herself

compelled  to  masturbate  in  order  to  put  an  end  to  the  distressing

excitation that follows such an act; as a result, she will produce, not an

anxiety  neurosis  pure  and  simple,  but  an  anxiety  neurosis

accompanied by symptoms of neurasthenia. Another woman suffering

from  the  same  noxa  may  have  to  fight  against  lascivious  images

against which she tries to defend herself; and in this way she will,

through  the  coitus  interruptus,  acquire  obsessions  as  well  as  an

anxiety  neurosis.  Finally,  as  a  result  of  coitus  interruptus,  a  third

woman may lose her affection for her husband and feel an attraction

for another man, which she carefully keeps secret; in consequence,

she will exhibit a mixture of anxiety neurosis and hysteria.

   In a third category of mixed neuroses the interconnection between

the  symptoms  is  still  more  intimate,  in  that  the  same  aetiological

determinant  regularly  and  simultaneously  provokes  both  neuroses.

Thus, for instance, the sudden sexual enlightenment, which we have

found present in virginal anxiety, always gives rise to hysteria as well;

by far the majority of cases of intentional abstinence become linked

from the beginning with true obsessional ideas; coitus interruptus in

men  never  seems  to  me  to  be  able  to  provoke  a  pure  anxietyneurosis, but always a mixture of it with neurasthenia.

 


      On The Grounds For Detaching A Particular Syndrome From

                                    Neurasthenia

                                                                                        349

 

      From  these  considerations  it  appears  that  we  must  further

distinguish the aetiological conditions for the onset of the neuroses

from their specific aetiological factors. The former - for example, coitus

interruptus,  masturbation  or  abstinence  -  are  still  ambiguous,  and

each of them can produce different neuroses. Only the aetiological

factors  which  can  be  picked  out  in  them,  such  as inadequate

disburdening,  psychical  insufficiency  or  defence  accompanied  by

substitution,  have  an  unambiguous  and  specific  relation  to  the

aetiology of the individual major neuroses.

 

   As regards its intimate nature, anxiety neurosis presents the most

interesting  agreements  with,  and  differences  from,  the  other  major

neuroses,  in  particular  neurasthenia  and  hysteria.  It  shares  with

neurasthenia  one  main  characteristic  -  namely  that  the  source  of

excitation,  the  precipitating  cause  of  the  disturbance,  lies  in  the

somatic field instead of the psychical one, as is the case in hysteria

and obsessional neurosis. In other respects we rather find a kind of

antithesis  between  the  symptoms  of  anxiety  neurosis  and  of

neurasthenia,  which  might  be  brought  out  by  such  labels  as

‘accumulation  of  excitation’  and  ‘impoverishment  of  excitation’.  This

antithesis does not prevent the two neuroses from being intermixed

with each other; but it nevertheless shows itself in the fact that the

most extreme forms of each are in both cases also the purest.

   The symptomatology of hysteria and anxiety neurosis show many

points  in  common  which  have  not  yet  been  sufficiently  considered.

The appearance of symptoms either in a chronic form or in attacks,

the  paraesthesias,  grouped  like  aurae,  the  hyperaesthesias  and

pressure-points which are found in certain surrogates of an anxiety

attack  (in  dyspnoea  and  heart-attacks),  the  intensification,  through

conversion,  of  pains  which  perhaps  have  an  organic  justification  -these  and  other  features  which  the  two  illnesses  have  in  common

even  allow  of  a  suspicion  that  not  a  little  of  what  is  attributed  to

hysteria  might  with  more  justice  be  put  to  the  account  of  anxiety

neurosis. If one goes into the mechanism of the two neuroses, so far

as it has been possible to discover it hitherto, aspects come to light

which suggest that anxiety neurosis is actually the somatic counterpart

to hysteria. In the latter just as in the former there is an accumulation

of  excitation  (which  is  perhaps  the  basis  for  the  similarity  between

their symptoms we have mentioned). In the latter just as in the former

we find a psychical insufficiency, as a consequence of which abnormal

somatic processes arise. In the latter just as in the former, too, instead

of a psychical working-over of the excitation, a deflection of it occurs

into the somatic field; the difference is merely that in anxiety neurosis

the excitation, in whose displacement the neurosis expresses itself, is

purely somatic (somatic sexual excitation), whereas in hysteria it is

psychical (provoked by conflict). Thus it is not to be wondered at that

hysteria and anxiety neurosis regularly combine with each other, as is

seen  in  ‘virginal  anxiety’  or  in  ‘sexual  hysteria’,  and  that  hysteria

simply borrows a number of its symptoms from anxiety neurosis, and

so  on.  These  intimate  relations  which  anxiety  neurosis  has  with

hysteria  provide  a  fresh  argument,  moreover,  for  insisting  on  the

detachment  of  anxiety  neurosis  from  neurasthenia;  for  if  this

detachment  is  not  granted,  we  shall  also  be  unable  any  longer  to

maintain the distinction which has been acquired with so much labour

and which is so indispensable for the theory of the neuroses, between

neurasthenia and hysteria.

 

VIENNA, December 1894.

 

                                                                                         350

 

        A REPLY TO CRITICISMS OF MY PAPER ON ANXIETY

                                      NEUROSIS

                                        (1895)

 


                                                                                        351

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                        352

 

        A REPLY TO CRITICISMS OF MY PAPER ON ANXIETY

                                      NEUROSIS

 

In  the  second  number  of  Mendel’s Neurologisches  Zentralblatt  for

1895,  I  published  a  short  paper  in  which  I  ventured  an  attempt  to

detach a number of nervous states from neurasthenia and to establish

them as an independent entity under the name of ‘anxiety neurosis’.¹  I

was led to do so by the presence of a constant conjunction of certain

clinical  features  with  certain  aetiological  ones  -  a  thing  which,  in

general, should permit us to make a separation of this kind. I found -

and  in  this  Hecker  (1893)  had  anticipated  me  -  that  the  neurotic

symptoms  in  question  could  all  be  classed  together  as  constituting

expressions  of  anxiety;  and,  from  my  study  of  the  aetiology  of  the

neuroses, I was able to add that these portions of the complex of the

‘anxiety neurosis’  exhibit special aetiological preconditions which are

almost the opposite of the aetiology of neurasthenia. My observations

had shown me that in the aetiology of the neuroses (at all events of

acquire–d  cases  and acquirable  forms)  sexual  factors  play  a

predominant part and one which has been given far too little weight;

so that a statement such as that ‘the aetiology of the neuroses lies in

sexuality’,  with  all  its  unavoidable  incorrectness per  excessum  et

defectum, nevertheless comes nearer to the truth than do the other

doctrines, which hold the field at the present time. A further assertionwhich my observations forced me to make was to the effect that the

various sexual noxae are not to be found in the aetiology of every

neurosis indifferently, but that unmistakable special relationships hold

between  particular  noxae  and  particular  neuroses.  Thus  I  could

assume  that  I  had  discovered  the specific  causes  of  the  various

neuroses. I then sought to formulate shortly the special character of

the sexual noxae which constitute the aetiology of anxiety neurosis,

and, on the basis of my view of the sexual process (p. 108), I arrived

at  the  proposition:  anxiety  neurosis  is  created  by  everything  which

keeps somatic sexual tension away from the psychical sphere, which

interferes with its being worked over psychically. If we go back to the

concrete  circumstances  in  which  this  factor  becomes  operative,  we

are  led  to  assert  that  abstinence,  whether  voluntary  or  involuntary,

sexual  intercourse  with  incomplete  satisfaction,  coitus  interruptus,

deflection of psychical interest from sexuality, and similar things, are

the specific aetiological factors of the states to which I have given the

name of anxiety neurosis.

 

   ¹ ‘On  the  Grounds  for  Detaching  a  Particular  Syndrome  from  Neurasthenia  under  the

Description "Anxiety Neurosis"' (1895b).
 


          A Reply To Criticisms Of My Paper On Anxiety Neurosis

                                                                                        353

 

      When  I  published  the  paper  I  have  mentioned,  I  was  under  no

illusion as to its power to carry conviction. In the first place, I was

aware that the account I had given was only a brief and incomplete

one and even in places hard to understand - just enough, perhaps, to

arouse the reader’s expectations. Then, too, I had scarcely brought

forward any examples and given no figures. Nor had I touched on the

technique  of  collecting  anamneses  or  done  anything  to  prevent

misunderstandings. I had not given consideration to any but the most

obvious objections; and, as regards the theory itself, I had laid stress

only on its main proposition and not on its qualifications. Accordingly,

each reader was in fact at liberty to form his own opinion as to the

binding force of the whole hypothesis. I could, moreover, reckon upon

another difficulty in the way of its acceptance. I know very well that inputting forward my ‘sexual aetiology’ of the neuroses, I have brought

up  nothing  new,  and  that  undercurrents  in  medical  literature  taking

these facts into account have never been absent. I know, too, that

official academic medicine has in fact also been aware of them. But it

has acted as if it knew nothing about the matter. It has made no use of

its knowledge and has drawn no inferences from it. Such behaviour

must  have  a  deep-seated  cause,  originating  perhaps  in  a  kind  of

reluctance to look squarely at sexual matters r in a reaction against

older attempts at an explanation, which are regarded as obsolete. At

all events, one had to be prepared to meet with resistance in venturing

upon an attempt to make something credible to other people which

they could without any trouble have discovered for themselves.

 


          A Reply To Criticisms Of My Paper On Anxiety Neurosis

                                                                                        354

 

 

   In such circumstances it would perhaps be more expedient not to

answer critical objections until I had myself expressed my views on

this complicated subject in greater detail and had made them more

intelligible. Nevertheless, I cannot resist the motives which prompt me

to make an immediate answer to a criticism of my theory of anxiety

neurosis  which  has  appeared  in  recent  days.  I  do  so  because  its

author, L. Löwenfeld of Munich, the author of Pathologie und Therapie

der  Neurasthenia,  is  a  man  whose  judgement  undoubtedly  carries

great  weight  with  the  medical  public;  because  of  a  mistaken  view

which Löwenfeld’s account imputes to me; and finally because I wish

to  combat  at  the  very  start  the  impression  that  my  theory  can  be

refuted quite so easily by the first objections that come to hand.

   With an unerring eye Löwenfeld (1895) detects the essential feature

of my paper - namely, my assertion that anxiety-symptoms have a

specific and uniform aetiology of a sexual nature. If this cannot be

established  as  a  fact,  then  the  main  reason  for  detaching  an

independent anxiety neurosis from neurasthenia disappears as well.

There remains, it is true, one difficulty to which I called attention - the

fact  that  anxiety-symptoms  also  have  such  very  unmistakableconnections  with  hysteria,  so  that  a  decision  on  Löwenfeld’s  lines

would  prejudice  the  separation  between  hysteria  and  neurasthenia.

This  difficulty,  however,  is  met  by  a  recourse  to  heredity  as  the

common cause of all these neuroses (a view which I will go into later).

   What arguments, then, does Löwenfeld use to support his objection

to my theory?

 

   (1) I emphasized as a point essential to an understanding of anxiety

neurosis that the anxiety appearing in it does not admit of a psychical

derivation  -  that  is  to  say  that  the  preparedness  for  anxiety,  which

constitutes the nucleus of the neurosis, cannot be acquired by a single

or repeated affect of psychically justified fright. Fright, I maintained,

might result in hysteria or a traumatic neurosis, but not in an anxiety

neurosis.  This  denial,  it  is  easy  to  see,  is  nothing  else  than  the

counterpart  to  my  contention,  on  the  positive  side,  that  the  anxiety

appearing  in  my  neurosis  corresponds  to  a  somatic  sexual  tension

which has been deflected from the psychical field - a tension which

would otherwise have made itself felt as libido.

 


          A Reply To Criticisms Of My Paper On Anxiety Neurosis

                                                                                        355

 

   Against this, Löwenfeld insists on the fact that in a number of cases

‘states  of  anxiety  appear  immediately  or  shortly  after  a  psychical

shock (fright alone, or accidents which were accompanied by fright),

and  in  such  situations  there  are  sometimes  circumstances  which

make  the  simultaneous  operation  of  sexual  noxae  of  the  kind

mentioned extremely improbable.’ He gives, shortly, as a particularly

pregnant example, one clinical observation (to serve instead of many).

This example concerns a woman of thirty, with a hereditary taint, who

had  been  married  for  four  years  and  who  had  had  a  first,  difficult,

confinement a year before. A few weeks after this event her husband

had an attack of illness which frightened her, and in her agitation she

ran about the cold room in her chemise. From that time on she was ill.

First she had states of anxiety and palpitations in the evening, then

came attacks of convulsive trembling, and after that phobias, and soon.  It  was  the  picture  of  a  fully-developed  anxiety  neurosis.  ‘Here,’

concludes  Löwenfeld,  ‘the  anxiety  states  are  obviously  of  psychical

origin, brought about by the single fright.’

   I do not doubt that my respected critic can produce many similar

cases. I myself can supply a long list of analogous examples. Anyone

who has not seen such cases - and they are extremely common - of

an outbreak of anxiety neurosis after a psychical shock, ought not to

regard himself as qualified to take part in discussions about anxiety

neurosis. I will only remark in this connection that neither fright nor

anxious expectation need always be found in the aetiology of such

cases; any other emotion will do as well. If I hastily recall a few cases

from my memory, I think of a man of forty-five who had his first attack

of anxiety (with cardiac collapse) at the news of the death of his father,

who was an old man; from that time on he developed a complete and

typical anxiety neurosis with agoraphobia. Again, I think of a young

man  who  was  overtaken  by  the  same  neurosis  on  account  of  his

agitation  about  the  disagreements  between  his  young  wife  and  his

mother  and  who  had  a  fresh  onset  of  agoraphobia  after  every

domestic quarrel. Then, there was a student, something of an idler,

who produced his first anxiety attacks during a period in which, under

the  spur  of  his  father’s  displeasure,  he  was  working  hard  for  an

examination. I recall, too, a woman, herself childless, who fell ill as a

result of anxiety about the health of a small niece. And other similar

instances. About the facts themselves, which Löwenfeld uses against

me, there is not the slightest doubt.

 


          A Reply To Criticisms Of My Paper On Anxiety Neurosis

                                                                                        356

 

   But there is doubt about their interpretation. Are we to accept the

post  hoc  ergo  propter  hoc  conclusion  straight  away  and  spare

ourselves  any  critical  consideration  of  the  raw  material?  There  are

examples enough in which the final, releasing cause has not, in the

face of critical analysis, maintained its position as the causa efficiens.

One has only to think, for instance, of the relationship between trauma

and gout. The role of a trauma in provoking an attack of gout in theinjured  limb  is  probably  no  different  from  the  role  it  plays  in  the

aetiology of tabes and general paralysis of the insane; only in the case

of gout it is clear to the meanest capacity that it is absurd to suppose

that  the  trauma  has  ‘caused’  the  gout  instead  of  having  merely

provoked it. It is bound to make us thoughtful when we come across

aetiological factors of this sort - ‘stock’ factors, as I should like to call

them - in the aetiology of the most varied forms of illness. Emotion,

fright, is also a stock factor of this kind. Fright can provoke chorea,

apoplexy, paralysis agitans and many other things just as well as it

can provoke anxiety neurosis. I must not go on to argue, of course,

that,  because  of  their  ubiquity,  the  stock  causes  do  not  satisfy  our

requirements and that there must be specific causes as well; to do so

would be to beg the question in favour of the proposition I want to

prove.  But  I  am  justified  in  drawing  the  following  conclusion:  if  the

same specific cause can be shown to exist in the aetiology of all, or

the great majority, of cases of anxiety neurosis, our view of the matter

need not be shaken by the fact that the illness does not break out until

one or other stock factor, such as emotion, has come into operation.

 


          A Reply To Criticisms Of My Paper On Anxiety Neurosis

                                                                                        357

 

   So it was with my cases of anxiety neurosis. Let us take the man

who,  after  receiving  the  news  of  his  father’s  death,  fell  ill  so

inexplicably.(I  add  ‘inexplicably’  because  the  death  was  not

unexpected and did not occur in unusual or shattering circumstances.)

This man had carried out coitus interruptus for eleven years with his

wife, whom he tried for the most part to satisfy. Again, the young man

who was not equal to the quarrels between his wife and his mother,

had practised withdrawal with his young wife from the first, in order to

spare himself the burden of children. Then we have the student who

acquired an anxiety neurosis from overwork, instead of the cerebral

neurasthenia  that  was  to  be  expected:  he  had  maintained  a

relationship for three years with a girl whom it was not permissible for

him to make pregnant. Again, there was the woman who, childless

herself, was overtaken by an anxiety neurosis about a niece’s illness:she was married to an impotent man and had never been sexually

satisfied. And so on. Not all these cases are equally clear or equally

good  evidence  for  my  thesis;  but  when  I  add  them  to  the  very

considerable number of cases in which the aetiology shows nothing

but the specific factor, they fit without contradiction into the theory I

have put forward and they allow of an extension of our aetiological

understanding beyond the boundaries hitherto in force.

   If anyone wants to prove to me that in these remarks I have unduly

neglected the significance of the stock aetiological factors, he must

confront me with observations in which my specific factor is missing -

that  is,  with  cases  in  which  anxiety  neurosis  has  arisen  after  a

psychical shock although the subject has (on the whole) led a normal

vita sexualis.  Let  us  see  now  whether  Löwenfeld’s  case  fulfils  this

condition. My respected opponent has evidently not been clear about

this necessity in his own mind, otherwise he would not have left us so

completely in the dark about his patient’s vita sexualis. I will leave on

one  side  the  fact  that  this  case  of  a  lady  of  thirty  is  obviously

complicated by a hysteria as to the psychical origin of which I have not

the least doubt; and I naturally admit without raising any objection the

presence of an anxiety neurosis alongside of this hysteria. But before I

turn a case to account for or against the theory of the sexual aetiology

of  the  neuroses,  I  must  first  have  studied  the  patient’s  sexual

behaviour more closely than Löwenfeld has done here. I should not be

content to conclude that, because the time at which the lady received

her psychical shock was shortly after a confinement, coitus interruptus

could  not  have  played  a  part  during  the  previous  year,  and  that

therefore sexual noxae are ruled out. I know cases of women who

were made pregnant every year, and who yet had anxiety neurosis,

because  -  incredible  as  it  may  seem  -  all  sexual  relations  were

stopped after the first fertilizing coition, so that in spite of having many

children they suffered from sexual privation through all these years.

No  doctor  is  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  women  conceive  from  men

whose  potency  is  very  slight  and  who  are  not  able  to  give  them

satisfaction. Finally (and this is a consideration which should be taken

into  account  precisely  by  the  upholders  of  a  hereditary  aetiology),

there are plenty of women who are afflicted with congenital anxiety

neurosis  -  that  is  to  say,  who  inherit,  or  who  develop  without  anydemonstrable disturbance from outside, a vita sexualis which is the

same  as  the  one  usually  acquired  through  coitus  interruptus  and

similar noxae. In a number of these women we are able to discover a

hysterical  illness  in  their  youth,  since  which  their vita sexualis  has

been disturbed and a deflection of sexual tension from the psychical

sphere has been established. Women with this kind of sexuality are

incapable of obtaining real satisfaction even from normal coitus, and

they  develop  anxiety  neurosis  either  spontaneously  or  after  further

operative factors have supervened. Which of all these elements were

present in Löwenfeld’s case? I do not know. But I repeat: this case is

evidence against me only if the lady who responded to a single fright

with  an  anxiety  neurosis  had  before  then  enjoyed  a  normal vita

sexualis.

      It  is  impossible  to  pursue  an  aetiological  investigation  based  on

anamneses  if  we  accept  those  anamneses  as  the  patients  present

them,  or  are  content  with  what  they  are  willing  to  volunteer.  If

syphilidologists still depended on the statements of their patients for

tracing back an initial infection of the genitals to sexual intercourse,

they would be able to attribute an imposing number of chancres in

allegedly virginal persons to catching a chill; and gynaecologists would

have  little  difficulty  in  confirming  the  miracle  of  parthenogenesis

among their unmarried lady clients. I hope that one day the idea will

prevail  that  neuropathologists,  too,  in  collecting  the  anamneses  of

major neuroses, may proceed upon aetiological prejudices of a similar

kind.

 


          A Reply To Criticisms Of My Paper On Anxiety Neurosis

                                                                                        358

 

 

      (2)  Löwenfeld  says  further  that  he  has  repeatedly  seen  anxiety

states appear and disappear where a change in the subject’s sexual

life had certainly not taken place but where other factors were in play.

   I, too, have made exactly the same observation, without, however,

being misled by it. I myself have caused anxiety attacks to disappear

by means of psychical treatment, improvement of the patient’s generalhealth, and so on; but I have naturally not concluded from this that

what had caused the anxiety attack was a lack of treatment. Not that I

should like to foist a conclusion of this sort upon Löwenfeld. My joking

remark is only intended to show that the state of affairs may easily be

complicated  enough  to  render  Löwenfeld’s  objection  quite  invalid.  I

have not found it difficult to reconcile the fact brought forward here

with my assertion that anxiety neurosis has a specific aetiology. It will

readily be granted that there are aetiological factors which, in order to

exercise their effect, must operate with a certain intensity (or quantity)

and  over  a  certain  period  of  time  -  which,  that  is  to  say,  become

summated. The effects of alcohol are a standard example of causation

like this through summation. It follows that there must be a period of

time in which the specific aetiology is at work but in which its effect is

not yet manifest. During this time the subject is not ill as yet, but he is

predisposed to a particular illness - in our case, to anxiety neurosis -

and now the addition of a stock noxa will be able to set the neurosis

off,  just  as  would  a  further  intensification  of  the  operation  of  the

specific noxa. The situation may also be expressed as follows: it is not

enough  for  the  specific  noxa  to  be  present;  it  must  also  reach  a

definite amount; and, in the process of reaching that limit, a quantity of

specific noxa can be replaced by a quota of stock noxa. If the latter is

removed once more, we find ourselves below a certain threshold and

the clinical symptoms depart once more. The whole therapy of the

neuroses  rests  upon  the  fact  that  the  total  load  upon  the  nervous

system,  to  which  it  has  succumbed,  can  be  brought  below  this

threshold by influencing the aetiological mixture in a great variety of

ways. From these circumstances we can draw no conclusion as to the

existence  or  non-existence  of  a  specific  aetiology.  These

considerations are surely indisputable and assured. But anyone who

does  not  think  them  sufficient  may  be  influenced  by  the  following

argument. According to the views of Löwenfeld and very many others,

the aetiology of anxiety states is to be found in heredity. Now heredity

is certainly immune to alteration; thus if anxiety neurosis is curable by

treatment,  we  should  have  to  conclude  according  to  Löwenfeld’s

argument that its aetiology cannot reside in heredity.

           A Reply To Criticisms Of My Paper On Anxiety Neurosis

                                                                                        359

 

   For the rest, I might have been spared having to defend myself

against these two objections of Löwenfeld’s, if my respected opponent

had  paid  greater  attention  to  my  paper  itself.  In  it,  both  these

objections  are  anticipated  and  answered.  I  have  only  been  able  to

repeat here what I said there; and I have even purposely analysed the

same cases over again. Moreover the aetiological formulas on which I

have just laid weight are contained in the text of my paper. I will repeat

them once more. I maintain that there  exists  a  specific  aetiological

factor for anxiety neurosis which can be replaced in its operation by

stock noxae in a QUANTITATIVE sense, but not in a QUALITATIVE one; I

furthermore maintain that this specific factor determines above all the

FORM of the neurosis; whether a neurotic illness occurs at all depends

on the total load upon the nervous system (in proportion to its capacity

to carry the load). As a rule the neuroses are overdetermined; that is

to say, several factors operate together in their aetiology.

 

   (3) I need not concern myself so much about refuting Löwenfeld’s

next comments, since on the one hand they damage my theory very

little  and  on  the  other  they  raise  difficulties  whose  existence  I

acknowledge.  Löwenfeld  writes:  ‘The  Freudian  theory  is  totally

insufficient to explain the appearance or non-appearance of anxiety

attacks  in  individual  instances.  If  anxiety-states  -  i.  e.  the  clinical

symptoms of anxiety neurosis - occurred solely through a subcortical

storing-up of somatic sexual excitation and an abnormal employment

of it, then every person who is afflicted with anxiety-states ought, so

long as no changes take place in his sexual life, to have an anxiety

attack from time to time,just as an epileptic has his attack of grand and

petit mal. But this, as everyday experience shows, is by no means so.

The anxiety attacks happen in the great majority of instances only on

definite occasions; if the patient avoids these occasions or is able to

paralyse  their  influence  by  taking  some  precaution,  he  remains

exempt from anxiety attacks, whether he is consistently given over to

coitus  interruptus  or  to  abstinence,  or  whether  he  enjoys  a  normal

sexual life.’ 


          A Reply To Criticisms Of My Paper On Anxiety Neurosis

                                                                                        360

 

      There  is  a  great  deal  to  be  said  about  this.  In  the  first  place,

Löwenfeld forces upon my theory an inference which it is not bound to

accept. To suppose that in the storing-up of somatic sexual excitation

the  same  thing  must  be  happening  as  in  the  accumulation  of  the

stimulus which leads to an epileptic convulsion, is to make a far too

detailed hypothesis, and I have given no occasion for it; nor is it the

only  one  that  presents  itself.  I  need  only  assume  that  the  nervous

system has the power to master a certain amount of somatic sexual

excitation  even  where  the  latter  is  deflected  from  its  aim,  and  that

disturbances only occur when that quantum of excitation receives a

sudden  increment,  and  Löwenfeld’s  claim  would  be  disposed  of.  I

have  not  ventured  to  extend  my  theory  in  that  direction,  chiefly

because I did not expect to find any solid points of support along that

path. I should merely like to indicate that we ought not to think of the

production of sexual tension independently of its distribution; that in

normal sexual life this production, when it is stimulated by a sexual

object, takes on a substantially different form from what it does in a

state of psychical quiescence; and so on.

      It  must  be  admitted  that  the  condition  of  affairs  here  is  in  all

probability  different  from  what  prevails  in  the  tendency  to  epileptic

convulsions, and that it cannot yet be consistently derived from the

theory of the accumulation of somatic sexual excitation.

 


          A Reply To Criticisms Of My Paper On Anxiety Neurosis

                                                                                        361

 

      Against  Löwenfeld’s  further  assertion  -  that  anxiety-states  only

appear  under  certain  conditions  and  fail  to  appear  when  those

conditions are avoided, regardless of what the subject’s vita sexualis

may be - it must be pointed out that he clearly has in mind here only

the anxiety of phobias, as, indeed, is shown by the examples attached

to  the  passage  I  have  quoted.  He  says  nothing  at  all  about  thespontaneous  anxiety  attacks  which  take  the  form  of  vertigo,

palpitation, dyspnoea, trembling, sweating, and so on. My theory, on

the  contrary,  seems  by  no  means  unequal  to  explaining  the

emergence or non-emergence of these attacks of anxiety. For in a

whole number of such cases of anxiety neurosis there does in fact

appear to be a periodicity in the emergence of the states of anxiety,

similar to what has been observed in epilepsy, except that in the latter

the  mechanism  of  the  periodicity  is  more  transparent.  On  closer

examination  we  discover  the  presence,  with  great  regularity,  of  an

excitatory sexual process (that is, a process which is able to generate

somatic sexual tension), and which, after the lapse of a definite and

often constant interval of time, is followed by the anxiety attack. This

role  is  played,  in  abstinent  women,  by  menstrual  excitation;  it  is

played,  too,  by  nocturnal  pollutions,  which  also  recur  periodically.

Above  all,  it  is  played  by  sexual  intercourse  itself  (harmful  from  its

being incomplete), which carries over its own periodicity to the effects

it  brings  about,  viz.  to  the  anxiety  attacks.  If  anxiety  attacks  occur

which break through the usual periodicity, it is generally possible to

trace  them  back  to  an  incidental  cause  of  rare  and  irregular

occurrence - to a single sexual experience, something read or seen,

and the like. The interval I have mentioned varies from a few hours to

two days; it is the same as that which elapses in other people between

the occurrence of the same causes and the onset of the well-known

sexual  migraine,  which  has  well-established  connections  with  the

syndrome of anxiety neurosis.

   Besides this, there are plenty of cases in which a single anxiety-

state  is  provoked  by  the  extra  addition  of  a  stock  factor,  by  an

excitement of some kind or other. The same holds good, therefore, for

the aetiology of the individual anxiety attack as for the causation of the

whole neurosis. It is not very strange that the anxiety of the phobias

should  obey  different  conditions;  they  have  a  more  complicated

structure than purely somatic anxiety attacks. In phobias the anxiety is

linked to a definite ideational or perceptual content, and the arousal of

this psychical content is the chief condition for the emergence of the

anxiety. When this happens, anxiety is ‘generated’, just as for instance

sexual  tension  is  generated  by  the  arousal  of  libidinal  ideas.  The

connection  of  this  process,  however,  with  the  theory  of  anxietyneurosis has not yet been elucidated.

 


          A Reply To Criticisms Of My Paper On Anxiety Neurosis

                                                                                        362

 

   I see no reason why I should try to hide the gaps and weaknesses in

my theory. The main thing about the problem of the phobias seems to

me  to  be  that when  the  vita  sexualis  is  normal  -  then  the  specific

condition, a disturbance of sexual life in the sense of a deflection of

the somatic from the psychical, is not fulfilled - phobias do not appear

at all. However much else may be obscure about the mechanism of

phobias,  my  theory  can  only  be  refuted  when  I  have  been  shown

phobias  where  sexual  life  is  normal  or  even  where  there  is  a

disturbance of it of a non-specific sort.

 

   (4) I now pass on to a remark by my esteemed critic which I cannot

leave uncontradicted. In my paper on anxiety neurosis I had written:

      ‘In  some  cases  of  anxiety  neurosis  no  aetiology  at  all  is  to  be

discovered. It is worth noting that in such cases there is seldom any

difficulty in establishing evidence of a grave hereditary taint.

      ‘But  where  there  are  grounds  for  regarding  the  neurosis  as  an

acquired one, careful enquiry directed to that end reveals that a set of

noxae  and  influences  from sexual  life   .  .  .’  Löwenfeld  quotes  this

passage and adds the following gloss: ‘From this it appears that Freud

always regards a neurosis as "acquired" whenever incidental causes

are to be found for it.’

   If this meaning follows naturally from my text, then the latter gives a

very distorted expression to my thoughts. Let me point out that in the

preceding pages I have shown myself far stricter than Löwenfeld in my

evaluation  of  incidental  causes.  If  I  were  myself  to  elucidate  the

meaning of the passage I wrote I should add, after the subordinate

clause ‘But where there are grounds for regarding the neurosis as an

acquired one . . .’, the words ‘because evidence (referred to in the

previous sentence) of a hereditary taint is not forthcoming . . .’  What

this means is that I hold the case to be an acquired one, since no

heredity  is  to  be  discovered  in  it.  In  doing  so  I  am  behaving  likeeveryone  else,  perhaps  with  the  slight  difference  that  others  may

declare the case to be determined by heredity even when there is no

heredity,  so  that  they  overlook  the  whole  category  of  acquired

neuroses. But this difference runs in my favour. I admit, however, that

I am myself to blame for this misunderstanding, on account of the way

in which I expressed myself in the first sentence: ‘no aetiology at all is

to  be  discovered’.  I  shall  certainly  be  taken  to  task  from  other

directions as well and be told that I have created useless trouble for

myself by searching for the specific causes of neuroses. Some will say

that the true aetiology of anxiety neurosis, as of neuroses in general,

is known: it is heredity. And two real causes cannot exist side by side.

I have not, they will say, denied the aetiological role of heredity; but if

so, all other aetiologies are merely incidental causes and equal to one

an other in value or want of value.

   I do not share this view of the role of heredity; and since in my short

paper on anxiety neurosis it is precisely to this theme that I have paid

least  attention,  I  will  now  try  to  make  good  some  of  what  I  have

omitted in it and to remove the impression that in writing my paper I

had not attended to all the relevant problems.

 


          A Reply To Criticisms Of My Paper On Anxiety Neurosis

                                                                                        363

 

 

   I think we can arrive at a picture of the probably very complicated

aetiological situation which prevails in the pathology of the neuroses if

we postulate the following concepts:

   (a) Precondition, (b) Specific Cause, (c) Concurrent Causes, and, as

a term which is not equivalent to the foregoing ones, (d) Precipitating

or Releasing Cause.

   In order to meet every possibility, let us assume that the aetiological

factors we are concerned with are capable of a quantitative change -

that is of increase or decrease.

   If we accept the idea of an aetiological equation of several terms

which must be satisfied if the effect is to take place, then we may

characterize  as  the precipitating  or  releasing  cause  the  one  whichmakes  its  appearance  last  in  the  equation,  so  that  it  immediately

precedes the emergence of the effect. It is this chronological factor

alone which constitutes the essential nature of a precipitating cause.

Any of the other causes, too, can in a particular case play the role of

precipitating  cause;  and  this  role  can  change  within  the  same

aetiological combination.

   The factors which may be described as preconditions are those in

whose  absence  the  effect  would  never  come  about,  but  which  are

incapable of producing the effect by themselves alone, no matter in

what  amount  they  may  be  present.  For  the  specific  cause  is  still

lacking.

   The specific cause is the one which is never missing in any case in

which the effect takes place, and which moreover suffices, if present

in  the  required  quantity  or  intensity,  to  achieve  the  effect,  provided

only that the preconditions are also fulfilled.

      As concurrent  causes  we  may  regard  such  factors  as  are  not

necessarily present every time, nor able, whatever their amount, to

produce the effect by themselves alone, but which operate alongside

of  the  preconditions  and  the  specific  cause  in  satisfying  the

aetiological equation.

      The  distinctive  character  of  the  concurrent,  or  auxiliary,  causes

seems clear; but how do we distinguish between a precondition and a

specific cause, since both are indispensable and yet neither suffices

alone to act as a cause?

      The  following  considerations  seem  to  allow  us  to  arrive  at  a

decision.  Among  the  ‘necessary  causes  '  we  find  several  which

reappear in the aetiological equations concerned in many other effects

and thus exhibit no special relationship to any one particular effect.

One of these causes, however, stands out in contrast to the rest from

the fact that it is found in no other aetiological equation, or in very few;

and this one has a right to be called the specific cause of the effect

concerned.  Furthermore,  preconditions  and  specific  causes  are

especially  distinct  from  each  other  in  those  cases  in  which  the

preconditions  have  the  characteristic  of  being  long-standing  states

that are little susceptible to alteration, while the specific cause is a

factor which has recently come into play.

           A Reply To Criticisms Of My Paper On Anxiety Neurosis

                                                                                        364

 

   I will try to give an example of this complete aetiological schematic

picture:

   Effect: Phthisis pulmonum.

     Precondition:  Disposition,  for  the  most  part  laid  down  through

heredity, by the organic constitution.

   Specific Cause: Bacillus Kochii.

   Auxilliary Causes: Anything that diminishes the powers - emotions

as well as suppurations or colds.

   The schematic picture for the aetiology of anxiety neurosis seems to

me to be on the same lines:

   Precondition: Heredity.

   Specific Cause:  A  sexual  factor,  in  the  sense  of  a  deflection  of

sexual tension away from the psychical field.

     Auxiliary  Causes:  Any  stock  noxae  -  emotion,  fright,  and  also

physical exhaustion through illness or over-exertion.

   If I consider this aetiological formula for anxiety neurosis in detail, I

am  able  to  add  the  following  remarks.  Whether  a  special  personal

constitution (which need not be produced by heredity) is absolutely

necessary for the production of an anxiety neurosis, or whether any

normal  person  can  be  made  to  have  an  anxiety  neurosis  by  some

given quantitative increase of the specific factor - this I am not able to

decide  with  certainty;  but  I  incline  strongly  to  the  latter  view.  -

Hereditary disposition is the most important precondition for anxiety

neurosis; but it is not an indispensable one, since it is absent in a

class of borderline cases. -The presence of the specific sexual factor

can, in the majority of cases, be demonstrated with certainty. In one

series of cases (congenital ones) this factor is not separated from the

precondition of heredity, but is fulfilled with the help of it. That is to

say, in some patients this peculiarity of the vita sexualis - psychical

inadequacy in mastering somatic sexual tension - is innate in the form

of a stigma whereas ordinarily it is via that peculiarity that they acquire

the neurosis. In another class of borderline cases the specific cause is

contained  in  a  contributory  one.  This  is  when  the  psychical

inadequacy  which  I  have  just  mentioned  is  brought  about  byexhaustion and such causes. All these cases fall into classes which

melt into one another and do not form separate categories. In all of

them, moreover, we find that the sexual tension undergoes the same

vicissitudes;  and  for  most  of  them  the  distinction  between

precondition,  specific  and  auxiliary  cause  holds  good,  in  conformity

with the solution of the aetiological equation which I have given above.

 


          A Reply To Criticisms Of My Paper On Anxiety Neurosis

                                                                                        365

 

   When I consult my experience on this point, I cannot find that there

is  any  antithetic  relation  as  regards  anxiety  neurosis  between

hereditary disposition and the specific sexual factor. On the contrary,

the two aetiological factors support and supplement each other. The

sexual factor is usually only operative in those who have an innate

hereditary taint as well;  heredity alone is usually not able to produce

an  anxiety  neurosis,  but  waits  for  the  occurrence  of  a  sufficient

amount of the specific sexual noxa. The discovery of the hereditary

element does not, therefore, exempt us from searching for a specific

factor. On its discovery, incidentally, all our therapeutic interest as well

depends. For what can we do therapeutically about heredity as an

aetiological element?  It has always been there in the patient and will

continue to be there until the end of his life. Taken by itself, it cannot

help  us  to  understand  the  episodic  onset  of  a  neurosis  or  the

cessation of a neurosis as a result of treatment. It is nothing but a

precondition of the neurosis - an inexpressibly important precondition,

it is true, but nevertheless one which has been over-estimated, to the

detriment of therapy and theoretical comprehension. To be convinced

by the contrasting state of affairs, one has only to think of the cases of

nervous  diseases  that  run  in  families  (such  as  chorea  chronica,

Thomsen’s disease, and so on), in which heredity unites in itself all the

aetiological preconditions.

   In conclusion, I should like to repeat the few statements in which I

am accustomed, as a first approximation to the truth, to express the

mutual relationships between the various aetiological factors:

      (1)  Whether  a  neurotic  illness occurs  at  all  depends  upon  aquantitative  factor  -  upon  the  total  load  on  the  nervous  system  as

compared with the latter’s capacity for resistance. Everything which

can keep this quantitative factor below a certain threshold-value, or

can bring it back to that level, has a therapeutic effect, since by so

doing it keeps the aetiological equation unsatisfied.

   What is to be understood by the ‘total load’ and by the ‘capacity for

resistance’  of  the  nervous  system,  could  no  doubt  be  more  clearly

explained on the basis of certain hypotheses regarding the function of

the nerves.

      (2)    What dimensions  the  neurosis  attains  depends  in  the  first

instance on the amount of the hereditary taint. Heredity acts like a

multiplier  introduced  into  an  electric  circuit,  which  increases  the

deviation of the needle many times over.

      (3)  But  what form  the  neurosis  assumes  -  what  direction  the

deviation takes - is solely determined by the specific aetiological factor

arising from sexual life.

 

   Although I am aware of the many still unsolved difficulties of the

subject,  I  hope  that,  on  the  whole,  my  hypothesis  of  an  anxiety

neurosis will prove more fruitful for an understanding of the neuroses

than Löwenfeld’s attempt to account for the same facts by postulating

‘a combination of neurasthenic and hysterical symptoms in the form of

an attack.’

 

VIENNA, beginning of May 1895.

                                                                                         366

 

          HEREDITY AND THE AETIOLOGY OF THE NEUROSES

                                        (1896)

 


                                                                                        367

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                        368
 

          HEREDITY AND THE AETIOLOGY OF THE NEUROSES

 

I am addressing in particular the disciples of J.-M. Charcot, in order to

put forward some objections to the aetiological theory of the neuroses

which was handed on to us by our teacher.

   The role attributed in that theory to nervous heredity is well known: it

is the sole true and indispensable cause of neurotic affections, and the

other aetiological influences can aspire only to the name of agents

provocateurs.  Such  was  the  opinion  laid  down  by  the  great  man

himself and by his pupils, M M. Guinon, Gilles de la Tourette, Janet

and others, in regard to the major neurosis, hysteria; and I believe the

same view is held in France and in most other places in regard to the

other neuroses, though, where these states analogous to hysteria are

concerned, it has not been promulgated in so solemn and decided a

manner.

   I have long entertained doubts on this subject, but I have had to wait

to  find  corroborative  facts  in  my  daily  experience  as  a  doctor.  My

objections  are  now  of  a  double  order:  factual  arguments  and

arguments  derived  from  speculation.  I  will  begin  with  the  former,

arranging them according to the importance I ascribe to them.

 

                                            I

 

   (a)  Affections which are fairly often remote from the domain ofneuropathology, and which do not necessarily depend on a disease of

the nervous system, have sometimes been regarded as nervous and

as showing the presence of a hereditary neuropathic tendency. This

has  been  so  with  true  facial  neuralgias  and  with  many  headaches

which were thought to be nervous but which arose rather from post-

infectious  pathological  changes  and  suppuration  in  the  pharyngo-

nasal cavities. I feel convinced that the patients would benefit if we

were more often to hand over the treatment of these affections to the

rhinological surgeons.

 


                  Heredity And The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        369 

 

   (b) All the nervous affections found in a patient’s family, without

consideration of their frequence or severity, have been accepted as a

basis for charging him with a hereditary nervous taint. Does not this

way of looking at things imply drawing a sharp line between families

which are clear of all nervous predisposition and families which are

subject to them to an unlimited extent? And do not the facts argue in

favour of the contrary view that there are transitions and degrees in

nervous disposition and that no family escapes it altogether?

      (c)  Our  opinion  of  the  aetiological  role  of  heredity  in  nervous

illnesses  ought  decidedly  to  be  based  on  an  impartial  statistical

examination and not on a petitio principi. Until such an examination

has been made we ought to believe that the existence of acquired

nervous disorders is just as possible as that of hereditary ones. But if

there can be nervous disorders that are acquired by people without a

predisposition, it can no longer be denied that the nervous affections

met with in our patient’s relatives may partly have arisen in that way. It

will then no longer be possible to quote them as conclusive evidence

of the hereditary disposition imputed to the patient by reason of his

family  history,  for  a  retrospective  diagnosis  of  the  illnesses  of

ancestors  or  absent  members  of  a  family  can  only  very  rarely  be

successfully made.

   (d) Those who are adherents of M. Fournier and M. Erb in the matter

of the part played by syphilis in the aetiology of tabes dorsalis andprogressive  paralysis  have  learned  that  powerful  aetiological

influences must be recognized whose collaboration is indispensable

for the pathogenesis of certain illnesses which could not be produced

by heredity alone. Nevertheless M. Charcot remained to the very last

(as I know from a private letter I had from him) strictly opposed to

Fournier’s theory, which is, however, gaining ground every day.

   (e) There is no doubt that certain nervous disorders can develop in

people who are perfectly healthy and whose family is above reproach.

This is a matter of daily observation in cases of Beard’s neurasthenia;

if  neurasthenia  were  restricted  to  people  who  were  predisposed,  it

would never have attained the importance and extent with which we

are familiar.

 


                  Heredity And The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        370

 

   (f) In nervous pathology there is similar heredity and what is known

as dissimilar heredity. No objection can be made to the former; it is in

fact a very remarkable thing that in the disorders which depend on

similar  heredity  (Thomsen’s  disease,  Friedreich’s  disease,  the

myopathies, Huntington’s chorea, etc.) we never come across a trace

of any other accessory aetiological influence. But dissimilar heredity,

which  is  much  more  important  than  the  other,  leaves  gaps  which

would have to be filled before a satisfactory solution of aetiological

problems  could  be  reached.  Dissimilar  heredity  consists  in  the  fact

that the members of the same family are found to be affected by the

most  various  nervous  disorders,  functional  and  organic,  without  its

being possible to discover any law determining the replacement of one

illness  by  another  or  the  order  of  their  succession  through  the

generations. Alongside of the sick members of these families there are

others who remain healthy; and the theory of dissimilar heredity does

not tell us why one person tolerates the same hereditary load without

succumbing to it or why another person, who is sick, should choose

this  particular  nervous  affection  from  among  all  the  illnesses  which

make  up  the  great  family  of  nervous  diseases  instead  of  choosing

another one - hysteria instead of epilepsy or insanity, and so on. Sincethere is no such thing as chance in neurotic pathogenesis any more

than  anywhere  else,  it  must  be  allowed  that  it  is  not  heredity  that

presides over the choice of the particular nervous disorder which is to

develop  in  the  predisposed  member  of  a  family,  but  that  there  are

grounds for suspecting the existence of other aetiological influences,

of a less incomprehensible nature, which would then deserve to be

called the specific aetiology  of  such  and  such  a  nervous  affection.

Without the existence of this special aetiological factor, heredity could

have  done  nothing;  it  would  have  lent  itself  to  the  production  of

another nervous disorder if the specific aetiology in question had been

replaced by some other influence.

 


                  Heredity And The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        371

 

                                            II

 

      There  has  been  too  little  research  into  these  specific  and

determining  causes  of  nervous  disorders,  for  the  attention  of

physicians  has  remained  dazzled  by  the  grandiose  prospect  of  the

aetiological  precondition  of  heredity.  Those  causes  nevertheless

deserve  to  be  made  the  object  of  industrious  study.  Although  their

pathogenic  power  is  in  general  only  accessory  to  that  of  heredity,

great  practical  interest  attaches  to  the  knowledge  of  this  specific

aetiology; it will allow our therapeutic efforts a path of access, whereas

hereditary  disposition,  which  is  something  fixed  in  advance  for  the

patient  from  his  birth,  brings  our  efforts  to  a  halt  with  its

unapproachable power.

   I have been engaged for years in researches into the aetiology of

the major neuroses (functional nervous states analogous to hysteria)

and it is the result of those studies that I propose to describe to you in

the following pages. To avoid any possible misunderstanding I shall

begin by making two remarks on the nosography of the neuroses and

on the aetiology of the neuroses in general.

   I was obliged to begin my work with a nosographic innovation. I

found  reason  to  set  alongside  of  hysteria  the  obsessional  neurosis(Zwangsneurose)  as  a  self-sufficient  and  independent  disorder,

although the majority of the authorities place obsessions among the

syndromes  constituting  mental  degeneracy  or  confuse  them  with

neurasthenia. I for my part, by examining the psychical mechanism of

obsessions,  had  learnt  that  they  are  connected  with  hysteria  more

closely than one might suppose.

   Hysteria and obsessional neurosis form the first group of the major

neuroses studied by me. The second contains Beard’s neurasthenia,

which I have divided up into two functional states separated by their

aetiology as well as by their symptomatic appearance - neurasthenia

proper and the anxiety neurosis (Angstneurose), a name which, I may

say  in  passing,  I  am  not  pleased  with  myself.  I  gave  my  detailed

reasons for making this separation, which I consider necessary, in a

paper published in 1895.

      As  regards  the  aetiology  of  the  neuroses,  I  think  it  should  be

recognized  in  theory  that  aetiological  influences,  differing  among

themselves in their importance and in the manner in which they are

related to the effect they produce, can be grouped in three classes: (1)

Preconditions,  which  are  indispensable  for  producing  the  disorder

concerned but which are of a general nature and are equally met with

in  the  aetiology  of  many  other  disorders;  (2) Concurrent  Causes,

which share the character of preconditions in that they function in the

causation of other disorders as well as in that of the disorder under

consideration, but which are not indispensable for the production of

the latter; and (3) Specific Causes, which are as indispensable as the

preconditions,  but  are  of  a  limited  nature  and  appear  only  in  the

aetiology of the disorder for which they are specific.

   In the pathogenesis of the major neuroses, then, heredity fulfils the

role of a precondition, powerful in every case and even indispensable

in most cases. It could not do without the collaboration of the specific

causes; but the importance of hereditary disposition is proved by the

fact  that  the  same  specific  causes  acting  on  a  healthy  individual

produce  no  manifest  pathological  effect,  whereas  in  a  predisposed

person  their  action  causes  the  neurosis  to  come  to  light,  whose

development will be proportionate in intensity and extent to the degree

of the hereditary precondition.

   Thus the action of heredity is comparable to that of a multiplier in anelectric circuit, which exaggerates the visible deviation of the needle,

but which cannot determine its direction.

   There is yet another thing to be noted in the relations between the

hereditary  precondition  and  the  specific  causes  of  neuroses.

Experience shows - what one might have guessed in advance - that in

these  questions  of  aetiology  one  should  not  neglect  the  relative

quantities, so to speak, of the aetiological influences. But one could

not have guessed the following fact, which seems to arise from my

observations:  namely  that  heredity  and  the  specific  causes  can

replace  each  other  as  regards  quantity,  that  the  same  pathological

effect will be produced by the coincidence of a very serious specific

aetiology with a moderate disposition or of a severely loaded nervous

heredity  with  a  slight  specific  influence.  And  we  shall  simply  be

meeting not unexpected extreme instances in this series if we come

upon  cases  of  neurosis  in  which  we  shall  look  in  vain  for  an

appreciable  degree  of  hereditary  disposition,  provided  that  what  is

lacking is made up for by a powerful specific influence.

 


                  Heredity And The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        372

 

   As concurrent (or auxiliary) causes of neuroses may be enumerated

all  the  stock  agents  met  with  elsewhere:  emotional  disturbance,

physical  exhaustion,  acute  illnesses,  intoxications,  traumatic

accidents, intellectual overwork, etc. I maintain that none of these, not

even the last, enters into the aetiology of the neuroses regularly or

necessarily,  and  I  am  aware  that  to  declare  this  opinion  is  to  put

oneself  in  direct  opposition  to  a  theory  which  is  looked  upon  as

universally  accepted  and  irreproachable.  Since  Beard  declared  that

neurasthenia was the fruit of our modern civilization, he has only met

with believers; but I find it impossible to accept this view. A laborious

study of the neuroses has taught me that the specific aetiology of the

neuroses has escaped Beard’s notice.

   I have no desire to depreciate the aetiological importance of these

stock agents. Since they are very various, occur very frequently and

are  most  often  named  by  patients  themselves,  they  become  moreprominent  than  the  specific  causes  of  the  neuroses  -  an  aetiology

which  is  either  hidden  or  unknown.  Fairly  frequently  they  fulfil  the

function of agents provocateurs which render manifest a neurosis that

has previously been latent; and a practical interest attaches to them,

for a consideration of these stock causes may offer lines of approach

to a therapy which does not aim at a radical cure and is content with

repressing the illness to its former state of latency.

   But it is not possible to establish any constant and close relation

between one of these stock causes and one or other form of nervous

affection. Emotional disturbance, for instance, is found equally in the

aetiology of hysteria, obsessions and neurasthenia, as well as in that

of epilepsy, Parkinson’s disease, diabetes and many others.

 


                  Heredity And The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        373

 

      Stock  concurrent  causes  can  replace  the  specific  aetiology  in

respect of quantity, but can never take its place entirely. There are

numerous  cases  in  which  all  the  aetiological  influences  are

represented  by  the  hereditary  precondition  and  the  specific  cause,

stock  causes  being  absent.  In  the  other  cases  indispensable

aetiological factors are not in themselves sufficient in quantity to bring

about  an  outbreak  of  neurosis;  a  state  of  apparent  health  may  be

maintained  for  a  long  time,  though  it  is  in  reality  a  state  of

predisposition to neurosis. It is then enough for a stock cause to come

into action as well, and the neurosis becomes manifest. But it must be

clearly pointed out that under these conditions the nature of the stock

cause  which  supervenes  is  a  matter  of  complete  indifference  -

whether it is an emotion, a trauma, an infectious illness or anything

else.  The  pathological  effect  will  not  be  modified  according  to  this

variation; the nature of the neurosis will always be dominated by the

pre-existing specific cause.

 

   What, then are the specific causes of neuroses? Is there a single

one or are there several? And is it possible to establish a constant

aetiological  relation  between  a  particular  cause  and  a  particularneurotic effect, in such a way that each of the major neuroses can be

attributed to a special aetiology?

   On the basis of a laborious examination of the facts, I shall maintain

that this last supposition is quite in agreement with reality, that each of

the major neuroses which I have enumerated has as its immediate

cause  one  particular  disturbance  of  the  economics  of  the  nervous

system, and that these functional pathological modifications have as

their common source the subject’s sexual life, whether they lie in a

disorder of his contemporary sexual life or in important events in his

past life.

      This,  to  tell  the  truth,  is  no  new,  unheard-of  proposition.  Sexual

disorders have always been admitted among the causes of nervous

illness,  but  they  have  been  subordinated  to  heredity  -  and  co-

ordinated  with  the  other agents  provocateurs;  their  aetiological

influence has been restricted to a limited number of observed cases.

Physicians  had  even  fallen  into  the  habit  of  not  investigating  them

unless the patient brought them up himself. What gives its distinctive

character  to  my  line  of  approach  is  that  I  elevate  these  sexual

influences to the rank of specific causes, that I recognize their action

in every case of neurosis, and finally that I trace a regular parallelism,

a  proof  of  a  special  aetiological  relation  between  the  nature  of  the

sexual influence and the pathological species of the neurosis.

 


                  Heredity And The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        374

 

   I am quite sure that this theory will call up a storm of contradictions

from contemporary physicians. But this is not the place in which to

present the documents and the experiences which have forced me to

my convictions, nor to explain the true meaning of the rather vague

expression ‘disorders of the economics of the nervous system’. This

will be done, most fully, I hope, in a work on the subject which I have

in  preparation.  In  the  present  paper  I  limit  myself  to  reporting  my

findings.

 

   Neurasthenia proper, if we detach anxiety neurosis from it, has avery  monotonous  clinical  appearance:  fatigue,  intracranial  pressure,

flatulent  dyspepsia,  constipation,  spinal  paraesthesias,  sexual

weakness, etc. The only specific aetiology it allows of is (immoderate)

masturbation or spontaneous emissions.

      It  is  the  prolonged  and  intense  action  of  this  pernicious  sexual

satisfaction  which  is  enough  on  its  own  account  to  provoke  a

neurasthenic  neurosis  or  which  imposes  on  the  subject  the  special

neurasthenic stamp that is manifested later under the influence of an

incidental  accessory  cause.  I  have  also  come  across  people

presenting  the  indications  of  a  neurasthenic  constitution  in  whom  I

have  not  succeeded  in  bringing  to  light  the  aetiology  I  have

mentioned;  but  I  have  at  least  shown  that  the  sexual  function  has

never developed to its normal level in these patients; they seemed to

have been endowed by heredity with a sexual constitution analogous

to what is brought about in a neurasthenic as a result of masturbation.

      The  anxiety  neurosis  exhibits  a  much  richer  clinical  picture:

irritability,  states  of  anxious  expectation,  phobias,  anxiety  attacks,

complete  or  rudimentary,  attacks  of  fear  and  of  vertigo,  tremors,

sweating, congestion, dyspnoea, tachycardia, etc., chronic diarrhoea,

chronic locomotor vertigo, hyperaesthesia, insomnia, etc.¹ It is easily

revealed as being the specific effect of various disorders of sexual life

which  possess  a  characteristic  common  to  all  of  them.  Enforced

abstinence, unconsummated genital excitation (excitation which is not

relieved  by  a  sexual  act  ),  coition  which  is  imperfect  or  interrupted

(which does not end in gratification), sexual efforts which exceed the

subject’s psychical capacity, etc. - all these agents, which occur only

too  frequently  in  modern  life,  seem  to  agree  in  the  fact  that  they

disturb the equilibrium of the psychical and somatic functions in sexual

acts, and that they prevent the psychical participation necessary in

order to free the nervous economy from sexual tension.

 

   ¹ For the symptomatology as well as for the aetiology of anxiety neurosis, see my paper

referred to above.

 


                  Heredity And The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        375

    These remarks, which perhaps contain the germ of a theoretical

explanation of the functional mechanism of the neurosis in question,

give rise already to a suspicion that a complete and truly scientific

exposition of the subject is not possible at the present time, and that it

would  be  necessary  to  start  off  by  approaching  the  physiological

problem of sexual life from a fresh angle.

   I will say finally that the pathogenesis of neurasthenia and anxiety

neurosis  can  easily  do  without  the  co-operation  of  a  hereditary

disposition. That is the outcome of daily observation. But if heredity is

present,  the  development  of  the  neurosis  will  be  affected  by  its

powerful influence.

 

      As  regards  the  second  class  of  major  neuroses,  hysteria  and

obsessional  neurosis,  the  solution  of  the  aetiological  problem  is  of

surprising simplicity and uniformity. I owe my results to a new method

of psycho-analysis, Josef Breuer’s exploratory procedure; it is a little

intricate, but it is irreplaceable, so fertile has it shown itself to be in

throwing  light  upon  the  obscure  paths  of  unconscious  ideation.  By

means of that procedure - this is not the place in which to describe it ¹

- hysterical symptoms are traced back to their origin, which is always

found in some event of the subject’s sexual life appropriate for the

production  of  a  distressing  emotion.  Travelling  backwards  into  the

patient’s past, step by step, and always guided by the organic train of

symptoms and of memories and thoughts aroused, I finally reached

the starting-point of the pathological process; and I was obliged to see

that at bottom the same thing was present in all the cases submitted

to analysis - the action of an agent which must be accepted as the

specific cause of hysteria.

 

   ¹ See Studies on Hysteria, by Breuer and Freud, 1895.

 


                  Heredity And The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        376

 

   This agent is indeed a memory relating to sexual life; but it is one

which presents two characteristics of the first importance. The event of

which  the  subject  has  retained  an  unconscious  memory  is aprecocious  experience  of  sexual  relations  with  actual  excitement  of

the  genitals,  resulting  from  sexual  abuse  committed  by  another

person; and the period of life at which this fatal event takes place is

earliest youth - the years up to the age of eight to ten, before the child

has reached sexual maturity.

     A  passive  sexual  experience  before  puberty:  this,  then,  is  the

specific aetiology of hysteria.

   I will without delay add some factual details and some commentary

to the result I have announced, in order to combat the scepticism with

which  I  expect  to  meet.  I  have  been  able  to  carry  out  a  complete

psycho-analysis  in  thirteen  cases  of  hysteria,  three  of  that  number

being true combinations of hysteria and obsessional neurosis. (I do

not speak of hysteria with obsessions.) In none of these cases was an

event of the kind defined above missing. It was represented either by

a brutal assault committed by an adult or by a seduction less rapid

and less repulsive, but reaching the same conclusion. In seven out of

the thirteen cases the intercourse was between children on both sides

- sexual relations between a little girl and a boy a little older (most

often  her  brother)    who  had  himself  been  the  victim  of  an  earlier

seduction. These relations sometimes continued for years, until the

little guilty parties reached puberty; the boy would repeat the same

practices with the little girl over and over again and without alteration -

practices  to  which  he  himself  had  been  subjected  by  some  female

servant or governess and which on account of their origin were often

of a disgusting sort. In a few cases there was a combination of an

assault  and  relations  between  children  or  a  repetition  of  a  brutal

abuse.

   The date of this precocious experience varied. In two cases the

series started in the little creature’s second year (?); the commonest

age in my observations is the fourth or fifth year. It may be somewhat

by accident, but I have formed an impression from this that a passive

sexual experience occurring only after the age of from eight to ten is

no longer able to serve as the foundation of the neurosis.

 


                  Heredity And The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        377 

   How is it possible to remain convinced of the reality of these analytic

confessions which claim to be memories preserved from the earliest

childhood? and how is one to arm oneself against the tendency to lies

and the facility of invention which are attributed to hysterical subjects?

I should accuse myself of blame-worthy credulity if I did not possess

more conclusive evidence. But the fact is that these patients never

repeat these stories spontaneously, nor do they ever in the course of

a  treatment  suddenly  present  the  physician  with  the  complete

recollection of a scene of this kind. One only succeeds in awakening

the  psychical  trace  of  a  precocious  sexual  event  under  the  most

energetic  pressure  of  the  analytic  procedure,  and  against  an

enormous resistance. Moreover, the memory must be extracted from

them  piece  by  piece,  and  while  it  is  being  awakened  in  their

consciousness they become the prey to an emotion which it would be

hard to counterfeit.

      Conviction  will  follow  in  the  end,  if  one  is  not  influenced  by  the

patients’ behaviour, provided that one can follow in detail the report of

a psycho-analysis of a case of hysteria.

   The precocious event has left an indelible imprint on the history of

the case; it is represented in it by a host of symptoms and of special

features  which  could  be  accounted  for  in  no  other  way;  it  is

peremptorily called for by the subtle but solid interconnections of the

intrinsic  structure  of  the  neurosis;    the  therapeutic  effect  of  the

analysis lags behind if one has not penetrated so far; and one is then

left with no choice but to reject or to believe the whole.

 


                  Heredity And The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        378

 

   Is it understandable that a precocious sexual experience of this kind,

undergone  by  an  individual  whose  sex  is  barely  differentiated,  can

become  the  source  of  a  persistent  psychical  abnormality  like

hysteria?  And how would this supposition fit in with our present ideas

on the psychical mechanism of that neurosis? A satisfactory reply can

be given to the first of these questions. It is precisely because thesubject is in his infancy that the precocious sexual excitation produces

little or no effect at the time; but its psychical trace is preserved. Later,

when at puberty the reactions of the sexual organs have developed to

a level incommensurable with their infantile condition, it comes about

in  one  way  or  another  that  this  unconscious  psychical  trace  is

awakened.  Thanks  to  the  change  due  to  puberty,  the  memory  will

display a power which was completely lacking from the event itself.

The  memory  will  operate  as  though  it  were  a  contemporary  event.

What happens is, as it were, a posthumous action by a sexual trauma.

      So  far  as  I  can  see,  this  awakening  of  a  sexual  memory  after

puberty, when the event itself has happened at a time long before that

period,  forms  the  only  psychological  instance  of  the  effect  of  a

memory surpassing that of an actual event. But the constellation is an

abnormal one, which touches a weak side of the psychical mechanism

and is bound to produce a pathological psychical effect.

   I believe I can see that this inverse relation between the psychical

effect  of  the  memory  and  of  the  event  contains  the  reason  for the

memory remaining unconscious.

   In this way we arrive at a very complex psychical problem, but one

which,  properly  appreciated,  promises  to  throw  a  vivid  light  on  the

most delicate questions of psychical life.

   The ideas put forward here, which have as their starting point the

finding of psycho-analysis to the effect that a memory of a precocious

sexual experience is always found as the specific cause of hysteria,

are not in harmony with the psychological theory of neuroses held by

M. Janet, nor with any other; but they agree perfectly with my own

speculations  on  the  ‘Abwehrneurosen’,  as  I  have  developed  them

elsewhere.

 


                  Heredity And The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        379

 

   All the events subsequent to puberty to which an influence must be

attributed upon the development of the hysterical neurosis and upon

the  formation  of  its  symptoms  are  in  fact  only  concurrent  causes  -

‘agents  provocateurs’  as  Charcot  used  to  say,  although  for  himnervous heredity occupied the place which I claim for the precocious

sexual  experience.  These  accessory  agents  are  not  subject  to  the

strict  conditions  imposed  on  the  specific  causes;  analysis

demonstrates in an irrefutable fashion that they enjoy a pathogenic

influence  for  hysteria  only  owing  to  their  faculty  for  awakening  the

unconscious psychical trace of the childhood event. It is also thanks to

their connection with the primary pathogenic impression, and inspired

by it, that their memories will become unconscious in their turn and will

be able to assist in the growth of a psychical activity withdrawn from

the power of the conscious functions.

   The obsessional neurosis (Zwangsneurose) arises from a specific

cause  very  analogous  to  that  of  hysteria.  Here  too  we  find  a

precocious  sexual  event,  occurring  before  puberty,  the  memory  of

which  becomes  active  during  or  after  that  period;  and  the  same

remarks  and  arguments  which  I  put  forward  in  connection  with

hysteria will apply to my observations of the other neurosis (six cases,

three of which were pure ones). There is only one difference which

seems capital. At the basis of the aetiology of hysteria we found an

event  of  passive  sexuality,  an  experience  submitted  to  with

indifference  or  with  a  small  degree  of  annoyance  or  fright.  In

obsessional neurosis it is a question on the other hand, of an event

which has given pleasure, of an act of aggression inspired by desire

(in  the  case  of  a  boy)  or  of  a  participation  in  sexual  relations

accompanied  by  enjoyment  (in  the  case  of  a  little  girl).  The

obsessional ideas, when their intimate meaning has been recognized

by  analysis,  when  they  have  been  reduced,  as  it  were,  to  their

simplest expression, are nothing other than reproaches addressed by

the subject himself on account of this anticipated sexual enjoyment,

but  reproaches  distorted  by  an  unconscious  psychical  work  of

transformation and substitution.

   The very fact of sexual aggressions of this kind taking place at such

a tender age seems to reveal the influence of a previous seduction of

which the precocity of sexual desire would be the consequence. In the

cases analysed by me analysis confirms this suspicion. In this way an

interesting fact is explained which is always found in these cases of

obsessions: the regular complication of the framework of symptoms by

a certain number of symptoms which are simply hysterical. 


                  Heredity And The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        380

 

   The importance of the active element in sexual life as a cause of

obsessions, and of sexual passivity for the pathogenesis of hysteria,

even seems to unveil the reason for the more intimate connection of

hysteria  with  the  female  sex  and  the  preference  of  men  for

obsessional neurosis. One sometimes comes across a pair of neurotic

patients who were a pair of little lovers in their earliest childhood - the

man suffering from obsessions and the woman from hysteria. If they

are a brother and sister, one might mistake for a result of nervous

heredity  what  is  in  fact  the  consequence  of  precocious  sexual

experiences.

      There  are  no  doubt  pure  and  isolated  cases  of  hysteria  or

obsessions, independent of neurasthenia or anxiety neurosis; but this

is not the rule. A psychoneurosis appears more often as an accessory

to a neurasthenic neurosis, provoked by it and following its decline.

This is because the specific causes of the latter, the contemporary

disorders of sexual life, operate at the same time as auxiliary causes

of  the  psychoneuroses,  whose  specific  cause,  the  memory  of  the

precocious sexual experience, they awaken and revive.

   As regards nervous heredity, I am far from being able to estimate

correctly its influence in the aetiology of the psychoneuroses. I admit

that  its  presence  is  indispensable  for  severe  cases;  I  doubt  if  it  is

necessary for slight ones; but I am convinced that nervous heredity by

itself is unable to produce psychoneuroses if their specific aetiology,

precocious  sexual  excitation,  is  missing.  I  even  believe  that  the

decision  as  to  which  of  the  neuroses,  hysteria  or  obsessions,  will

develop  in  a  given  case,  is  not  decided  by  heredity  but  a  special

characteristic of the sexual event in earliest childhood.

                                                                                         381

 

        FURTHER REMARKS ON THE NEURO-PSYCHOSES OF

                                      DEFENCE

                                        (1896)

 


                                                                                        382

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                        383

 

        FURTHER REMARKS ON THE NEURO-PSYCHOSES OF

                                      DEFENCE

 

In  a  short  paper  published  in  1894,  I  grouped  together  hysteria,

obsessions and certain cases of acute hallucinatory confusion under

the name of ‘neuro-psychoses of defence’, because those affections

turned  out  to  have  one  aspect  in  common.  This  was  that  their

symptoms arose through the psychical mechanism of (unconscious)

defence - that is, in an attempt to repress an incompatible idea which

had  come  into  distressing  opposition  to  the  patient’s  ego.  In  some

passages in a book which has since appeared by Dr. J. Breuer and

myself (Studies on Hysteria)  I  have  been  able  to  elucidate,  and  to

illustrate from clinical observations, the sense in which this psychical

process of ‘defence’ or ‘repression’ is to be understood. There, too,

some information is to be found about the laborious but completely

reliable  method  of  psycho-analysis  used  by  me  in  making  those

investigations  -  investigations  which  also  constitute  a  therapeutic

procedure.

      My  observations  during  my  last  two  years  of  work  have

strengthened me in the inclination to look on defence as the nuclear

point in the psychical mechanism of the neuroses in question; and

they have also enabled me to give this psychological theory a clinical

foundation.  To  my  own  surprise,  I  have  come  upon  a  few  simple,though narrowly circumscribed, solutions of the problems of neurosis,

and in the following pages I shall give a preliminary and brief account

of  them.  In  this  kind  of  communication  it  is  not  possible  to  bring

forward the evidence needful to support my assertions, but I hope to

be able to fulfil this obligation later in a detailed presentation.

 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        384

 

                                            I

 

                      THE ‘SPECIFIC’ AETIOLOGY OF HYSTERIA

 

   In earlier publications, Breuer and I have already expressed the

opinion that the symptoms of hysteria can only be understood if traced

back to experiences which have a ‘traumatic’ effect, and that these

psychical traumas refer to the patient’s sexual life. What I have to add

here,  as  a  uniform  outcome  of  the  analyses  carried  out  by  me  on

thirteen cases of hysteria, concerns on the one hand the nature of

those sexual traumas, and, on the other, the period of life in which

they  occur.  In  order  to  cause  hysteria,  it  is  not  enough  that  there

should  occur  at  some  period  of  the  subject’s  life  an  event  which

touches  his  sexual  existence  and  becomes  pathogenic  through  the

release and suppression of a distressing affect. On the contrary, these

sexual  traumas  must  have  occurred  in  early  childhood  (before

puberty), and their content must consist of an actual irritation of the

genitals (of processes resembling copulation).

   I have found this specific determinant of hysteria - sexual passivity

during the pre-sexual period - in every case of hysteria (including two

male  cases)  which  I  have  analysed.  How  greatly  the  claims  of

hereditary disposition are diminished by the establishment in this way

of accidental aetiological factors as a determinant needs no more than

a mention. Furthermore, a path is laid open to an understanding of

why hysteria is far and away more frequent in members of the female

sex;  for  even  in  childhood  they  are  more  liable  to  provoke  sexual

attacks.

           Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        385

 

   The most immediate objections to this conclusion will probably be

that sexual assaults on small children happen too often for them to

have any aetiological importance, or that these sorts of experiences

are bound to be without effect precisely because they happen to a

person  who  is  sexually  undeveloped;  and  further,  that  one  must

beware of forcing on patients supposed reminiscences of this kind by

questioning  them,  or  of  believing  in  the  romances  which  they

themselves invent. In reply to the latter objections we may ask that no

one should form too certain judgements in this obscure field until he

has  made  use  of  the  only  method  which  can  throw  light  on  it  -  of

psycho-analysis for the purpose of making conscious what has so far

been unconscious.¹ What is essential in the first objections can be

disposed of by pointing out that it is not the experiences themselves

which act traumatically their revival as a memory after the subject has

entered on sexual maturity.

   My thirteen cases were without exception of a severe kind; in all of

them the illness was of many years’ duration, and a few came to me

after lengthy and unsuccessful institutional treatment. The childhood

traumas which analysis uncovered in these severe cases had all to be

classed  as  grave  sexual  injuries;  some  of  them  were  positively

revolting. Foremost among those guilty of abuses like these, with their

momentous  consequences,  are  nursemaids,  governesses  and

domestic servants, to whose care children are only too thoughtlessly

entrusted;  teachers,  moreover,  figure  with  regrettable  frequency.  In

seven  out  of  these  thirteen  cases,  however,  it  turned  out  that

blameless children were the assailants; these were mostly brothers

who for years on end had carried on sexual relations with sisters a

little younger than themselves. No doubt the course of events was in

every instance similar to what it was possible to trace with certainty in

a few individual cases: the boy, that is to say, had been abused by

someone  of  the  female  sex,  so  that  his  libido  was  prematurely

aroused,  and  then,  a  few  years  later,  he  had  committed  an  act  of

sexual aggression against his sister, in which he repeated precisely

the same procedures to which he himself had been subjected. 

   ¹ I  myself  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  stories  of  being  assaulted  which  hysterics  so

frequently  invent  may  be  obsessional  fictions  which  arise  from  the  memory-trace  of  a
childhood trauma.
 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        386

 

   Active masturbation must be excluded from my list of the sexual

noxae in early childhood which are pathogenic for hysteria. Although it

is found so very often side by side with hysteria, this is due to the

circumstance  that  masturbation  itself  is  a  much  more  frequent

consequence of abuse or seduction than is supposed.

   It is not at all rare for both of the two children to fall ill later on of a

defence  neurosis  -  the  brother  with  obsessions  and  the  sister  with

hysteria.  This  naturally  gives  the  appearance  of  a  familial  neurotic

disposition. Occasionally, however, this pseudo-heredity is resolved in

a surprising fashion. In one of my cases a brother, a sister, and a

somewhat older male cousin were all of them ill. From the analysis

which I carried out on the brother, I learnt that he was suffering from

self-reproaches for being the cause of his sister’s illness. He himself

had been seduced by his cousin, and the latter, it was known in the

family, had been the victim of his nursemaid.

   I cannot say for certain what the upper age-limit is below which

sexual  injury  plays  a  part  in  the  aetiology  of  hysteria;  but  I  doubt

whether sexual passivity can bring on repression later than between

the eighth and tenth years, unless it is enabled to do so by previous

experiences. The lower limit extends as far back as memory itself -

that is, therefore, to the tender age of one and a half or two years! (I

have  had  two  cases  of  this.)  In  a  number  of  my  cases  the  sexual

trauma (or series of traumas) occurred in the third and fourth years of

life. I should not lend credence to these extraordinary findings myself if

their complete reliability were not proved by the development of the

subsequent  neurosis.  In  every  case  a  number  of  pathological

symptoms, habits and phobias are only to be accounted for by going

back to these experiences in childhood, and the logical structure of the

neurotic manifestations makes it impossible to reject these faithfullypreserved memories which emerge from childhood life. True, it would

be useless to try to elicit these childhood traumas from a hysteric by

questioning  him  outside  psycho-analysis;  their  traces  are  never

present in conscious memory, only in the symptoms of the illness.

 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        387

 

   All the experiences and excitations which, in the period of life after

puberty, prepare the way for, or precipitate, the outbreak of hysteria,

demonstrably have their effect only because they arouse the memory-

trace of these traumas in childhood, which do not thereupon become

conscious but lead to a release of affect and to repression. This role of

the later traumas tallies well with the fact that they are not subject to

the strict conditions which govern the traumas in childhood but that

they can vary in their intensity and nature, from actual sexual violation

to  mere  sexual  overtures  or  the  witnessing  of  sexual  acts  in  other

people, or receiving information about sexual processes.¹

      In  my  first  paper  on  the  neuroses  of  defence  there  was  no

explanation of how the efforts of the subject, who had hitherto been

healthy, to forget a traumatic experience of this sort could have the

result of actually effecting the intended repression and thus opening

the door to the defence neurosis. It could not lie in the nature of the

experiences,  since  other  people  remained  healthy  in  spite  of  being

exposed to the same precipitating causes. Hysteria, therefore, could

not  be  fully  explained  from  the  effect  of  the  trauma:  it  had  to  be

acknowledged  that  the  susceptibility  to  a  hysterical  reaction  had

already existed before the trauma.

   The place of this indefinite hysterical disposition can now be taken,

wholly or in part, by the posthumous operation of a sexual trauma in

childhood.  ’Repression’  of  the  memory  of  a  distressing  sexual

experience which occurs in maturer years is only possible for those in

whom that experience can activate the memory-trace of a trauma in

childhood.

 

   ¹ In a paper on the anxiety neurosis, I remarked that ‘anxiety neurosis can be produced in

girls who are approaching maturity by their first encounter with the problem of sex. . . . Suchan anxiety neurosis is combined with hysteria in an almost typical fashion.’ I know now that
the  occasion  on  which  this  ‘virginal  anxiety’  breaks  out  in  young  girls  does  not  actually
represent their first encounter with sexuality, but that an experience of sexual passivity had
previously  occurred  in  their  childhood,  the  memory  of  which  is  aroused  by  this  ‘first
encounter’.

   ² A psychological theory of repression ought also to throw light on the question of why it is

only ideas with a sexual content that can be repressed. Such an explanation might start out
from the following indications. It is known that having ideas with a sexual content produces
excitatory processes in the genitals which are similar to those produced by sexual experience
itself. We may assume that this somatic excitation becomes transposed into the psychical
sphere. As a rule the effect in question is much stronger in the case of the experience than in
the  case  of  the  memory.  But  if  the  sexual  experience  occurs  during  the  period  of  sexual
immaturity and the memory of it is aroused during or after maturity, then the memory will have
a far stronger excitatory effect than the experience did at the time it happened; and this is
because  in  the  meantime  puberty  has  immensely  increased  the  capacity  of  the  sexual
apparatus for reaction. An inverted relation of this sort between real experience and memory
seems to contain the psychological precondition for the occurrence of a repression. Sexual life
affords - through the retardation of pubertal maturity as compared with the psychical functions
- the only possibility that occurs for this inversion of relative effectiveness. The traumas of
childhood operate in a deferred fashion as though they were fresh experiences; but they do so
unconsciously. I must postpone entering into any more far-reaching psychological discussion
till another occasion. Let me add, however, that the period of ‘sexual maturity’ which is in
question here does not coincide with puberty but falls earlier (from the eighth to the tenth
year).
 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        388

 

   Obsessions similarly presuppose a sexual experience in childhood

(though  one  of  a  different  nature  from  that  found  in  hysteria).  The

aetiology of the two neuro-psychoses of defence is related as follows

to the aetiology of the two simple neuroses, neurasthenia and anxiety

neurosis.  Both  the  latter  disorders  are  direct  effects  of  the  sexual

noxae themselves, as I have shown in my paper on anxiety neurosis

(1895b);  both  the  defence  neuroses  are  indirect  consequences  of

sexual  noxae  which  have  occurred  before  the  advent  of  sexual

maturity - are consequences, that is, of the psychical memory-traces

of those noxae. The current causes which produce neurasthenia and

anxiety  neurosis  often  at  the  same  time  play  the  part  of  exciting

causes of the neuroses of defence; on the other hand, the specific

causes of a defence-neurosis - the traumas of childhood - can at the

same  time  lay  the  foundations  for  a  later  development  of

neurasthenia.  Finally,  it  not  infrequently  happens,  too,  thatneurasthenia or anxiety neurosis is maintained, not by current sexual

noxae,  but,  instead,  solely  by  the  persisting  effect  of  a  memory  of

childhood traumas.¹

 

                                            II

 

            THE NATURE AND MECHANISM OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS

 

   Sexual experiences of early childhood have the same significance in

the aetiology of obsessional neurosis as they have in that of hysteria.

Here, however, it is no longer a question of sexual passivity, but of

acts  of  aggression  carried  out  with  pleasure  and  of  pleasurable

participation  in  sexual  acts  -  that  is  to  say,  of  sexual activity.  This

difference in the aetiological circumstances is bound up with the fact

that obsessional neurosis shows a visible preference for the male sex.

 

    ¹ (Footnote added  1924:)  This  section  is  dominated  by  an  error  which  I  have  since

repeatedly acknowledged and corrected. At that time I was not yet able to distinguish between
my patients’ phantasies about their childhood years and their real recollections. As a result, I
attributed to the aetiological factor of seduction a significance and universality which it does
not possess. When this error had been overcome, it became possible to obtain an insight into
the spontaneous manifestations of the sexuality of children which I described in my Three
Essays  on  the  Theory  of  Sexuality (1905d).  Nevertheless,  we  need  not  reject  everything
written in the text above. Seduction retains a certain aetiological importance, and even to-day
I think some of these psychological comments are to the point.
 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        389

 

   In all my cases of obsessional neurosis, moreover, I have found a

substratum of hysterical symptoms which could be traced back to a

scene  of  sexual  passivity  that  preceded  the  pleasurable  action.  I

suspect that this coincidence is no fortuitous one, and that precocious

sexual  aggressivity  always  implies  a  previous  experience  of  being

seduced.  However,  I  can  as  yet  give  no  definitive  account  of  the

aetiology of obsessional neurosis; I only have an impression that the

decision as to whether hysteria or obsessional neurosis will arise on

the  basis  of  traumas  in  childhood  depends  on chronological

circumstances in the development of the libido.   The nature of obsessional neurosis can be expressed in a simple

formula. Obsessional ideas are invariably transformed self-reproaches

which have re-emerged from repression and which always relate to

some sexual act that was performed with pleasure in childhood. In

order to elucidate this statement it is necessary to describe the typical

course taken by an obsessional neurosis.

   In a first period - the period of childhood immorality - the events

occur  which  contain  the  germ  of  the  later  neurosis.  First  of  all,  in

earliest childhood, we have the experiences of sexual seduction that

will  later  on  make  repression  possible;  and  then  come  the  acts  of

sexual aggression against the other sex, which will later appear in the

form of acts involving self-reproach.

      This  period  is  brought  to  a  close  by  the  advent  of  sexual

‘maturation’, often itself unduly early. A self-reproach now be comes

attached  to  the  memory  of  these  pleasurable  actions;  and  the

connection with the initial experience of passivity makes it possible -

often only after conscious and remembered efforts - to repress them

and  to  replace  them  by  a primary  symptom  of  defence.

Conscientiousness, shame and self-distrust are symptoms of this kind,

with which the third period begins - the period of apparent health, but

actually, of successful defence.

 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        390

 

   The next period, that of the illness, is characterized by return of the

repressed memories - that is, therefore, by the failure of the defence.

It  is  not  certain  whether  the  awakening  of  those  memories  occurs

more often accidentally and spontaneously or as a result of current

sexual disturbances, as a kind of by-product of them. The re-activated

memories, however, and the self reproaches formed from them never

re-emerge into consciousness unchanged: what become conscious as

obsessional ideas and affects, and take the place of the pathogenic

memories so far as conscious life is concerned, are structures in the

nature  of  a compromise  between  the  repressed  ideas  and  the

repressing ones.      In  order  to  describe  clearly  and  with  probable  accuracy  the

processes of repression, the return of the repressed and the formation

of pathological compromise-ideas, one would have to make up one’s

mind to quite definite assumptions about the substratum of psychical

events and of consciousness. So long as one seeks to avoid this, one

must be content with the following remarks which are intended more

or  less  figuratively.  There  are  two  forms  of  obsessional  neurosis,

according to whether what forces an entrance into consciousness is

solely  the mnemic  content  of  the  act  involving  self-reproach,  or

whether the self-reproachful affect connected with the act does so as

well.

   The first form includes the typical obsessional ideas, in which the

content engages the patient’s attention and, as an affect, he merely

feels an indefinite unpleasure, whereas the only affect which would be

suitable to the obsessional idea would be one of self-reproach. The

content of the obsessional idea is distorted in two ways in relation to

the obsessional act of childhood. First, something contemporary is put

in  the  place  of  something  past;  and  secondly,  something  sexual  is

replaced by something analogous to it that is not sexual. These two

alterations  are  the  effect  of  the  inclination  to  repress,  still  in  force,

which we will ascribe to the ‘ego’. The influence of the re-activated

pathogenic  memory  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  content  of  the

obsessional idea is still in part identical with what has been repressed

or follows from it by a logical train of thought. If, with the help of the

psycho-analytic  method,  we  reconstruct  the  origin  of  an  individual

obsessional idea, we find that from a single current impression two

different trains of thought have been set going. The one which has

passed by way of the repressed memory proves to be as correctly

logical in its structure as the other, although it is incapable of being

conscious and insusceptible to correction. If the products of the two

psychical operations do not tally, what takes place is not some sort of

logical  adjustment  of  the  contradiction  between  them;  instead,

alongside  of  the normal  intellectual  outcome,  there  comes  into

consciousness,  as  a  compromise  between  the  resistance  and  the

pathological intellectual product, an obsessional idea which appears

absurd. If the two trains of thought lead to the same conclusion, they

reinforce  each  other,  so  that  an  intellectual  product  that  has  beenarrived at normally now behaves, psychologically, like an obsessional

idea. Wherever  a  neurotic  obsession  emerges  in  the  psychological

sphere, it comes from repression. Obsessional ideas have, as it were,

a  compulsive  psychical  currency,  not  on  account  of  their  intrinsic

value, but on account of the source from which they derive or which

has added a contribution to their value.

 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        391

 

   A second form of obsessional neurosis comes about if what has

forced its way to representation in conscious psychical life is not the

repressed mnemic content but the likewise repressed self-reproach.

The affect of self-reproach can, by means of some mental addition, be

transformed  into  any  other  unpleasurable  affect.  When  this  has

happened there is no longer anything to prevent the substituted affect

from becoming conscious. Thus self-reproach (for having carried out

the sexual act in childhood) can easily turn into shame (in case some

one else should find out about it), into hypochondriacal anxiety (fear of

the physical injuries resulting from the act involving the self-reproach),

into social anxiety (fear of being punished by society for the misdeed),

into religious anxiety, into delusions of being noticed (fear of betraying

the act to other people), or into fear of temptation (a justified mistrust

of one’s own moral powers of resistance), and so on. In addition, the

mnemic content of the act involving self-reproach may be represented

in  consciousness  as  well,  or  it  may  remain  completely  in  the

background - which makes diagnosis much more difficult. Many cases

which,  on  a  superficial  examination,  seem  to  be  common

(neurasthenic)  hypochondria,  belong  to  this  group  of obsessional

affects;  what  is  known  as  ‘periodic  neurasthenia’  or  ‘periodic

melancholia’  seems  in  particular  to  resolve  itself  with  unexpected

frequency into obsessional affects and obsessional ideas - a discovery

which is not a matter of indifference therapeutically.

 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        392 

   Besides these compromise symptoms, which signify the return of

the repressed and consequently a collapse of the defence that had

been originally achieved, the obsessional neurosis constructs a set of

further symptoms, whose origin is quite different. For the ego seeks to

fend off the derivatives of the initially repressed memory, and in this

defensive  struggle  it  creates  symptoms  which  might  be  classed

together  as  ‘secondary  defence’.  These  are  all  of  them  ‘protective

measures’, which have already done good service in the fight against

obsessional  ideas  and  obsessional  affects.  If  these  aids  in  the

defensive  struggle genuinely  succeed  in  once  more  repressing  the

symptoms of the return which have forced themselves on the ego,

then  the  obsession  is  transferred  to  the  protective  measures

themselves  and  creates  a  third  form  of  ‘obsessional  neurosis’-

obsessional  actions.  These  actions  are  never  primary;  they  never

contain anything but a defence - never an aggression. A psychical

analysis  of  them  shows  that,  in  spite  of  their  peculiarity,  they  can

always  be  fully  explained  by  being  traced  back  to  the  obsessional

memories which they are fighting against.¹

 

   ¹ To  take  a  single  example  only.  An  eleven-year-old  boy  had  in  an  obsessional  way

instituted the following ceremonial before going to bed. He did not go to sleep until he had told
his mother in the minutest detail all the experiences he had had during the day; there must be
no bits of paper or other rubbish on the carpet in his bedroom in the evening; his bed had to
be pushed right up against the wall, three chairs had to be placed in front of it, and the pillows
had to lie in a particular way. In order to go to sleep he was obliged first to kick both his legs
out a certain number of times and then lie on his side. This was explained in the following
manner.  Years  before,  a  servant-girl  who  put  the  nice  looking  boy  to  bed  had  taken  the
opportunity of lying down on him and abusing him sexually. When, later on, this memory was
aroused  in  him  by  a  recent  experience,  it  manifested  itself  in  his  consciousness  in  a
compulsion  to  perform  the  ceremonial  I  have  described  above.  The  meaning  of  the
ceremonial was easy to guess and was established point by point by psycho-analysis. The
chairs were placed in front of the bed and the bed pushed against the wall in order that
nobody else should be able to get at the bed; the pillows were arranged in a particular way so
that they should be differently arranged from how they were on that evening; the movements
with his legs were to kick away the person who was lying on him; sleeping on his side was
because in the scene he had been lying on his back; his circumstantial confession to his
mother was because, in obedience to a prohibition by his seductress, he had been silent to
his mother about this and other sexual experiences; and, finally, the reason for his keeping his
bedroom floor clean was that neglect to do so had been the chief reproach that he had so far
had to hear from his mother.
           Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        393

 

   Secondary defence against the obsessional ideas may be effected

by a forcible diversion on to other thoughts with a content as contrary

as possible. This is why obsessional brooding, if it succeeds, regularly

deals with abstract and suprasensual things; because the ideas that

have been repressed are always concerned with sensuality. Or else

the patient tries to make himself master of each of his obsessional

ideas singly by logical work and by having recourse to his conscious

memories. This leads to obsessional thinking, to a compulsion to test

things and to doubting mania. The advantage which perception has

over  memory  in  such  tests  at  first  causes  the  patient,  and  later

compels him, to collect and store up all the objects with which he has

come  into  contact.  Secondary  defence  against  obsessional affects

leads to a still wider set of protective measures which are capable of

being  transformed  into  obsessional  acts.  These  may  be  grouped

according  to  their  purpose: penitential  measures  (burdensome

ceremonials,  the  observation  of  numbers), precautionary  measures

(all sorts of phobias, superstition, pedantry, increase of the primary

symptom of conscientiousness); measures to do with fear of betrayal

(collecting  scraps  of  paper,  seclusiveness),  or  to  ensure numbing

(dipsomania).  Among  these  obsessional  acts  and  obsessional

impulses,  phobias,  since  they  circumscribe  the  patient’s  existence,

play the greatest part.

   There are cases in which one can observe how the obsession is

transferred  from  the  idea  or  from  the  affect  on  to  the  protective

measure;  others  in  which  the  obsession  oscillates  periodically

between the symptom of the return of the repressed and the symptom

of  the  secondary  defence;  and  yet  other  cases  in  which  no

obsessional  idea  is  constructed  at  all,  but,  instead,  the  repressed

memory  is  at  once  represented  by  what  is  apparently  a  primary

measure of defence. Here we reach at one bound the stage which

elsewhere only completes the course run by the obsessional neurosis

after  the  defensive  struggle  has  taken  place.  Severe  cases  of  this

disorder  end  in  the  ceremonial  actions  becoming  fixated,  or  in  a

general state of doubting mania, or in a life of eccentricity conditionedby phobias.

 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        394

 

   The fact that the obsessional ideas and everything derived from

them meet with no belief is no doubt because at their first repression

the defensive symptom of conscientiousness  has  been  formed  and

that that symptom, too, acquires an obsessional force. The subject’s

certainty of having lived a moral life throughout the whole period of his

successful defence makes it impossible for him to believe the self-

reproach which his obsessional idea involves. Only transitorily, too, on

the  appearance  of  a  new  obsessional  idea  and  occasionally  in

melancholic  states  of  exhaustion  of  the  ego,  do  the  pathological

symptoms  of  the  return  of  the  repressed  compel  belief.  The

‘obsessional’  character  of  the  psychical  formations  which  I  have

described here has quite generally nothing to do with attaching belief

to them. Nor is it to be confused with the factor which is described as

the  ‘strength’  or  ‘intensity’  of  an  idea.  Its  essence  is  rather

indissolubility by psychical activity that is capable of being conscious;

and this attribute undergoes no change, whether the idea to which the

obsession attaches is stronger or weaker, or less or more intensely

‘illuminated’, or ‘cathected with energy’ and so on.

      The  cause  of  this  invulnerability  of  the  obsessional  idea  and  its

derivatives  is,  however,  nothing  more  than  its  connection  with  the

repressed  memory  from  early  childhood.  For  if  we  can  succeed  in

making that connection conscious - and psychotherapeutic methods

already appear able to do so - the obsession, too, is resolved.

 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        395

 

                                            III

 

                    ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF CHRONIC PARANOIA ¹

    For a considerable time I have harboured a suspicion that paranoia,

too - or classes of cases which fall under the heading of paranoia - is

a  psychosis  of  defence;  that  is  to  say,  that,  like  hysteria  and

obsessions, it proceeds from the repression of distressing memories

and that its symptoms are determined in their form by the content of

what has been repressed. Paranoia must, however, have a special

method or mechanism of repression which is peculiar to it, in the same

way as hysteria effects repression by the method of conversion into

somatic  innervation,  and  obsessional  neurosis  by  the  method  of

substitution (viz. by displacement along the lines of certain categories

of  associations).  I  had  observed  several  cases  which  favoured  this

interpretation, but had found none which proved it; until, a few months

ago, I had an opportunity, through the kindness of Dr. Josef Breuer, of

undertaking  the  psycho-analysis  for  therapeutic  purposes  of  an

intelligent woman of thirty-two, in whose case a diagnosis of chronic

paranoia  could  not  be  questioned.  I  am  reporting  in  these  pages,

without waiting further, some of the information I have been able to

obtain from this piece of work, because I have no prospect of studying

paranoia  except  in  very  isolated  instances,  and  because  I  think  it

possible that my remarks may encourage a psychiatrist better placed

than  I  am  in  this  matter  to  give  its  rightful  place  to  the  factor  of

‘defence’ in the discussion as to the nature and psychical mechanism

of paranoia which is being carried on so actively just now. I have, of

course,  on  the  strength  of  the  following  single  observation,  no

intention of saying more than: ‘This case is a psychosis of defence

and there are most probably others in the class of "paranoia" which

are equally so.’

 

   ¹ (Footnote added 1924:) More correctly, no doubt, dementia paranoides.

 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        396

 

 

   Frau P., thirty-two years of age, has been married for three years

and is the mother of a child of two. Her parents were not neurotic; buther brother and sister are to my knowledge, like her, neurotic. It is

doubtful  whether  she  may  not,  at  one  time  in  her  middle  twenties,

have become temporarily depressed and confused in her judgement.

In recent years she was healthy and capable, until, six months after

the birth of her child, she showed the first signs if her present illness.

She  became  uncommunicative  and  distrustful,  showed  aversion  to

meeting her husband’s brothers and sisters and complained that the

neighbours  in  the  small  town  in  which  she  lived  were  behaving

differently towards her from how they did before and were rude and

inconsiderate  to  her.  By  degrees  these  complaints  increased  in

intensity,  although  not  in  definiteness.  She  thought  people  had

something against her, though she had no idea what; but there was no

doubt that everyone - relatives and friends - had ceased to respect her

and were doing all they could to slight her. She had racked her brains,

she said, to find the reason for this, but had no idea. A little time later

she complained that she was being watched and that people were

reading her thoughts and knew everything that was going on in her

house. One afternoon she suddenly had the idea that she was being

watched while she was undressing in the evening. From that time on

she took the most precautionary measures when she undressed; she

got into bed in the dark and did not begin to take off her things till she

was under the bedclothes. Since she avoided all contact with other

people,  ate  poorly  and  was  very  depressed,  she  was  sent  in  the

summer  of  1895  to  a  hydropathic  establishment.  There,  fresh

symptoms appeared and those she already had increased in strength.

Already in the spring of that year, when she was alone one day with

her  housemaid,  she  had  suddenly  had  a  sensation  in  her  lower

abdomen, and had thought to herself that the girl had at that moment

had an improper idea. This sensation grew more frequent during the

summer and became almost continual. She felt her genitals ‘as one

feels a heavy hand’. Then she began to see images which horrified

her - hallucinations of naked women, especially of the lower part of a

woman’s abdomen with pubic hairs, and occasionally of male genitals

as  well.  The  image  of  the  abdomen  with  hair  and  the  physical

sensation in her own abdomen usually occurred together. The images

became very tormenting, for they happened regularly when she was in

the company of a woman, and it made her think that she was seeingthe woman in an indecent state of nakedness, but that simultaneously

the woman was having the same picture of her (!). At the same time

as  these  visual  hallucinations  -  which  vanished  again  for  several

months after their first appearance in the hydropathic establishment -

she began to be pestered by voices which she did not recognize and

which she could not account for. When she was in the street, they

said: ‘That’s Frau P.- There she goes! Where’s she going to?’ Every

one of her movements and actions was commented on; and at times

she heard threats and reproaches. All these symptoms became worse

when  she  was  in  company  or  in  the  street.  For  that  reason  she

refused to go out; she said that eating disgusted her; and her state of

health rapidly deteriorated.

 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        397

 

   I gathered all this from her when she came to Vienna for treatment

with me in the winter of 1895. I have set it out at length because I want

to convey the impression that what we are dealing with here really is a

quite frequent form of chronic paranoia - a conclusion with which the

details of her symptoms and behaviour which I have still to describe

will be found to tally. At that time she concealed from me the delusions

which served to interpret her hallucinations, or else the delusions had

in fact not yet occurred to her. Her intelligence was undiminished; the

only  unusual  thing  I  learnt  was  that  she  had  repeatedly  made

appointments  with  her  brother,  who  lived  in  the  neighbourhood,  in

order to confide something important to him, but had never told him

anything. She never spoke about her hallucinations, and towards the

end she no longer said much either about the slights and persecutions

of which she was subjected.

   What I have to report about this patient concerns the aetiology of the

case  and  the  mechanism  of  the  hallucinations.  I  discovered  the

aetiology  when  I  applied  Breuer’s  method,  exactly  as  in  a  case  of

hysteria - in the first instance for the investigation and removal of the

hallucinations. In doing so, I started out from the assumption that in

this case of paranoia, just as in the two other defence neuroses withwhich  I  was  familiar,  there  must  be  unconscious  thoughts  and

repressed memories which could be brought into consciousness in the

same way as they were in those neuroses, by overcoming a certain

resistance.  The  patient  at  once  confirmed  my  expectation,  for  she

behaved in analysis exactly like, for instance, a hysterical patient; with

her  attention  on  the  pressure  of  my  hand,¹  she  produced  thoughts

which she could not remember having had, which at first she did not

understand  and  which  were  contrary  to  her  expectations.  The

presence of significant unconscious ideas was thus demonstrated in a

case of paranoia as well, and I was able to hope that I might trace the

compulsion of paranoia, too, to repression. The only peculiarity was

that the thoughts which arose from the unconscious were for the most

part heard inwardly or hallucinated by the patient, in the same way as

her voices.

 

   ¹ Cf. my Studies on Hysteria.

 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        398

 

   Concerning the origin of the visual hallucinations, or at least of the

vivid images, I learned the following. The image of the lower part of a

woman’s  abdomen  almost  always  coincided  with  the  physical

sensation in her own abdomen; but the latter was much more constant

and often occurred without the image. The first images of a woman’s

abdomen had appeared in the hydropathic establishment a few hours

after she had in fact seen a number of naked women at the baths; so

they turned out to be simple reproductions of a real impression. It was

therefore to be presumed that these impressions had been repeated

only because great interest was attached to them. She told me that

she  had  felt  ashamed  for  these  women;  she  herself  had  been

ashamed to be seen naked for as long as she could remember. Since

I  was  obliged  to  regard  the  shame  as  something  obsessional,  I

concluded,  in  accordance  with  the  mechanism  of  defence,  that  an

experience must have been repressed here about which she had not

felt ashamed. So I requested her to let the memories emerge which

belonged to the theme of feeling ashamed. She promptly reproduceda  series  of  scenes  going  back  from  her  seventeenth  to  her  eighth

year, in which she had felt ashamed of being naked in her bath in front

of her mother, her sister and the doctor; but the series ended in a

scene at the age of six, in which she was undressing in the nursery

before going to bed, without feeling any shame in front of her brother

who was there. On my questioning her, it transpired that scenes like

this had occurred often and that the brother and sister had for years

been in the habit of showing themselves to one another naked before

going to bed. I now understood the meaning of her sudden idea that

she was being watched as she was going to bed. It was an unaltered

piece of the old memory which involved self-reproach, and she was

now making up for the shame which she had omitted to feel as a child.

 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        399

 

   My conjecture that we had to do with an affair between children, as

is so often found in the aetiology of hysteria, was strengthened by the

further  progress  of  the  analysis,  which  at  the  same  time  yielded

solutions  of  individual  details  that  frequently  recurred  in  the  clinical

picture of the paranoia. The patient’s depression began at the time of

a quarrel between her husband and her brother, as a result of which

the latter no longer came to the house. She had always been very

fond  of  this  brother  and  she  missed  him  very  much  at  that  time.

Besides this she spoke of a certain moment in her illness at which for

the first time ‘everything became clear to her’ - that is, at which she

became convinced of the truth of her suspicion that she was despised

by  everyone  and  deliberately  slighted.  This  certainty  came  to  her

during a visit from her sister-in law who, in the course of conversation,

let fall the words: ‘If anything of that sort happens to me, I treat it in a

light vein.’ At first Frau P. took this remark unsuspectingly; but later,

after the visitor had left, it seemed to her that the words had contained

a reproach, as if she was in the habit of taking serious things lightly;

and from that moment on she was certain that she was the victim of

general  slander.  When  I  questioned  her  as  to  what  made  her  feel

justified in applying the words to herself, she answered that it was thetone of voice in which her sister-in-law had spoken that had (although,

it is true, only subsequently) convinced her of it. This is a detail which

is characteristic of paranoia. I now obliged her to remember what her

sister-in-law had been saying before the remark she complained of,

and it emerged that the sister-in-law had related how in her parents’

home there had been all sorts of difficulties with her brothers, and had

added the wise comment: ‘In every family all sorts of things happen

that one would like to draw a veil over. But if anything of the kind

happens to me, I take it lightly.’ Frau P. now had to admit that her

depression was attached to the statements made by her sister-in-law

before her last remark. Since she had repressed both the statements

which  might  have  awakened  a  memory  of  her  relations  with  her

brother, and had only retained the insignificant last one, it was with it

that she was obliged to connect her feeling that her sister-in-law was

making a reproach against her; and since its content offered no basis

for this, she turned from the content to the tone in which the words

had been spoken. This is probably a typical piece of evidence that the

misinterpretations of paranoia are based on a repression.

 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        400

 

   My patient’s singular conduct, too, in making appointments with her

brother, and then having nothing to tell him, was solved in a surprising

fashion. Her explanation was that she had thought that if she could

only  look  at  him  he  would  be  bound  to  understand  her  sufferings,

since he knew the cause of them. Now, as this brother was in fact the

only person who could know about the aetiology of her illness, it was

clear that she had been acting in accordance with a motive which,

although she herself did not understand it consciously, could be seen

to be perfectly justified as soon as it was supplied with a meaning

derived from the unconscious.

   I then succeeded in getting her to reproduce the various scenes in

which  her  sexual  relationship  with  her  brother  (which  had  certainly

lasted at least from her sixth to her tenth year) had culminated. During

this  work  of  reproduction,  the  physical  sensation  in  her  abdomen‘joined  in  the  conversation’  as  it  were,  as  is  regularly  observed  to

happen in the analysis of hysterical mnemic residues. The image of

the  lower  part  of  a  woman’s  naked  abdomen  (but  now  reduced  to

childish  proportions  and  without  hair  on  it)  appeared  with  the

sensation or stayed away, according as the scene in question had

occurred in full light or in the dark. Her disgust at eating, too, found an

explanation in a repulsive detail of these proceedings. After we had

gone through this series of scenes, the hallucinatory sensations and

images had disappeared, and (up to the present, at any rate) they

have not returned.¹

 

   ¹ Later on, when an exacerbation of her illness undid the successful results of the treatment

- which were in any case meagre - the patient no longer saw the offensive images of other
people’s genitals but had the idea that other people saw her genitals whenever they were
behind her.
(Added 1922) The fragmentary account of this analysis in the text above was written while the
patient was still undergoing treatment. Very shortly after, her condition became so much more
serious that the treatment had to be broken off. She was transferred to an institution and there
went through a period of severe hallucinations which had all the signs of dementia praecox.
Contrary to expectation, however, she recovered and returned home, had another child which
was quite healthy, and was able for a long period (12 to 15 years) to carry out all her duties in
a satisfactory manner. The only sign of her earlier psychosis was said to be that she avoided
the company of all relatives, whether of her own family or of her husband’s. At the end of this
period, affected by very adverse changes in her circumstances, she again became ill. Her
husband  had  become  unable  to  work  and  the  relatives  she  had  avoided  were  obliged  to
support  the  family.  She  was  again  sent  to  an  institution,  and  died  there  soon  after,  of  a
pneumonia which rapidly supervened.
 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        401

 

   I had found, therefore, that these hallucinations were nothing else

than  parts  of  the  content  of  repressed  childhood  experiences,

symptoms of the return of the repressed.

   I now turned to the analysis of the voices. First and foremost what

had  to  be  explained  was  why  such  an  indifferent  content  as  ‘Here

comes Frau P.’, ‘She’s looking for a house now’, and so on, could

have been so distressing to her; next, how it was that precisely these

innocent  phrases  had  managed  to  be  marked  out  by  hallucinatory

reinforcement. From the first it was clear that the ‘voices’ could not bememories that were being produced in a hallucinatory way, like the

images and sensations, but were rather thoughts that were being ‘said

aloud’.

      The  first  time  she  heard  the  voices  was  in  the  following

circumstances. She had been reading Otto Ludwig’s fine story, Die

Heiterethei, with eager interest, and she noticed that while she was

reading,  thoughts  were  emerging  which  claimed  her  attention.

Immediately  afterwards,  she  went  for  a  walk  along  a  country  road,

and,  as  she  was  passing  a  small  peasant’s  house,  the  voices

suddenly said to her ‘That’s what the Heiterethei’s cottage looked like!

There’s the spring and there are the bushes! How happy she was in

spite  of  all  her  poverty!’  The  voices  then  repeated  to  her  whole

paragraphs  from  what  she  had  just  been  reading.  But  it  remained

unintelligible  why  the  Heiterethei’s  cottage  and  bushes  and  spring,

and  precisely  the  most  trivial  and  irrelevant  passages  of  the  story,

should be forced on her attention with pathological strength. However,

the solution of the puzzle was not difficult. Her analysis showed that

while she was reading, she had had other thoughts as well and that

she had been excited by quite different passages in the book. Against

this material - analogies between the couple in the story and herself

and her husband, memories of intimacies in her married life, and of

family  secrets  -  against  all  this  a  repressing  resistance  had  arisen

because it was connected, by easily demonstrable trains of thought,

with her aversion to sexuality and thus ultimately went back to the

awakening of her old childhood experience. In consequence of this

censorship  exercised  by  the  repression,  the  innocuous  and  idyllic

passages, which were connected with the proscribed ones by contrast

and  also  by  propinquity,  acquired  the  additional  strength  in  their

relation  to  consciousness  which  made  it  possible  for  them  to  be

spoken aloud. The first of the repressed ideas, for instance, related to

the slander to which the heroine, who lived alone, was exposed from

her neighbours. My patient easily discovered the analogy with her own

self. She, too, lived in a small place, met no one, and thought she was

despised by her neighbours. This distrust of her neighbours had a real

foundation. She had been obliged at first to be content with a small

apartment, and the bedroom wall against which the young couple’s

double bed stood adjoined a room belonging to their neighbours. Withthe  beginning  of  her  marriage  -  obviously  through  an  unconscious

awakening of her childhood affair, in which she and her brother had

played at husband and wife - she had developed a great aversion to

sexuality. She was constantly worried in case her neighbours might

hear words and noises through the party wall, and this shame turned

into suspiciousness towards the neighbours.

 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        402

 

      Thus  the  voices  owed  their  origin  to  the  repression  of  thoughts

which,  in  the  last  analysis,  were  in  fact  self-reproaches  about

experiences that were analogous to her childhood trauma. The voices

were accordingly symptoms of the return of the repressed. But they

were at the same time consequences of a compromise between the

resistance of the ego and the power of the returning repressed - a

compromise which in this instance had brought about a distortion that

went beyond recognition. In other instances in which I had occasion to

analyse Frau P.’s voices, the distortion was less great. Nevertheless,

the words she heard always had a quality of diplomatic indefiniteness:

the  insulting  allusion  was  generally  deeply  hidden;  the  connection

between the separate sentences was disguised by a strange mode of

expression, unusual forms of speech and so on - characteristics which

are common to the auditory hallucinations of paranoics in general and

in  which  I  see  the  traces  of  distortion  through  compromise.  For

instance, the remark, ’there goes Frau P.; she’s looking for a house in

the  street’,  meant  a  threat  that  she  would  never  recover;  for  I  had

promised her that after her treatment she would be able to go back to

the small town in which her husband worked.(She had provisionally

taken rooms in Vienna for a few months.)

   In isolated instances Frau P. also received more definite threats - for

example, in regard to her husband’s relatives; yet there was still a

contrast between the reserved manner in which they were expressed

and the torment which the voices caused her. In view of what is known

of paranoia apart from this, I am inclined to suppose that there is a

gradual  impairment  of  the  resistances  which  weaken  the  self-reproaches; so that finally the defence fails altogether and the original

self-reproach, the actual term of abuse, from which the subject was

trying to spare himself, returns in its unaltered form. I do not know,

however, whether this course of events is a constant one, or whether

the censorship of the words involving the self-reproach may be absent

from the beginning or may persist to the end.

 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        403

 

 

   It only remains for me now to employ what has been learned from

this case of paranoia for making a comparison between paranoia and

obsessional neurosis. In each of them, repression has been shown to

be the nucleus of the psychical mechanism, and in each what has

been repressed is a sexual experience in childhood. In this case of

paranoia, too, every obsession sprang from repression; the symptoms

of  paranoia  allow  of  a  classification  similar  to  the  one  which  has

proved justified for obsessional neurosis. Part of the symptoms, once

again, arise from primary defence - namely, all the delusional ideas

which  are  characterized  by  distrust  and  suspicion  and  which  are

concerned with ideas of being persecuted by others. In obsessional

neurosis the initial self-reproach has been repressed by the formation

of the primary symptom of defence: self-distrust. With this, the self-

reproach is acknowledged as justified; and, to weigh against this, the

conscientiousness which the subject has acquired during his healthy

interval now protects him from giving credence to the self-reproaches

which return in the form of obsessional ideas. In paranoia, the self-

reproach  is  repressed  in  a  manner  which  may  be  described  as

projection.  It  is  repressed  by  erecting  the  defensive  symptom  of

distrust  of  other  people.  In  this  way  the  subject  withdraws  his

acknowledgement of the self-reproach; and, as if to make up for this,

he is deprived of a protection against the self-reproaches which return

in his delusional ideas.

   Other symptoms of my case of paranoia are to be described as

symptoms of the return of the repressed, and they, too, like those ofobsessional neurosis, bear the traces of the compromise which alone

allows  them  to  enter  consciousness.  Such  are,  for  instance,  my

patient’s delusional idea of being watched while she was undressing,

her  visual  hallucinations,  her  hallucinations  of  sensation  and  her

hearing of voices. In the delusional idea which I have just mentioned

there  is  a  mnemic  content  which  is  almost  unaltered  and  has  only

been made indefinite through omission. The return of the repressed in

visual  images  approaches  the  character  of  hysteria  rather  than  of

obsessional  neurosis;  but  hysteria  is  in  the  habit  of  repeating  its

mnemic symbols without modification, whereas mnemic hallucinations

in  paranoia  undergo  a  distortion  similar  to  that  in  obsessional

neurosis:  an  analogous  modern  image  takes  the  place  of  the

repressed  one.  (E.  g.,  the  abdomen  of  an  adult  woman  appears

instead of a child’s, and an abdomen on which the hairs are especially

distinct, because they were absent in the original impression.) A thing

which is quite peculiar to paranoia and on which no further light can be

shed by this comparison, is that the repressed self-reproaches return

in the form of thoughts spoken aloud. In the course of this process,

they are obliged to submit to twofold distortion: they are subjected to a

censorship, which leads to their being replaced by other, associated,

thoughts  or  to  their  being  concealed  by  an  indefinite  mode  of

expression, and they are referred to recent experiences which are no

more than analogous to the old ones.

 


          Further Remarks On The Neuro-Psychoses Of Defence

                                                                                        404

 

   The third group of symptoms that are found in obsessional neurosis,

the symptoms of secondary defence, cannot be present as such in

paranoia,  because  no  defence  can  avail  against  the  returning

symptoms to which, as we know, belief is attached. In place of this, we

find in paranoia another source for the formation of symptoms. The

delusional ideas which have arrived in consciousness by means of a

compromise  (the  symptoms  of  the  return)  make  demands  on  the

thought-activity  of  the  ego  until  they  can  be  accepted  without

contradiction. Since they are not themselves open to influence, theego must adapt itself to them; and thus what corresponds here to the

symptoms  of  secondary  defence  in  obsessional  neurosis  is  a

combinatory delusional formation - interpretative delusions which end

in an alteration of the ego. In this respect, the case under discussion

was not complete; at that time my patient did not as yet exhibit any

signs of the attempts at interpretation which appeared later. But I have

no doubt that if we apply psycho-analysis to this stage of paranoia as

well, we shall be able to arrive at a further important result. It should

then turn out that the so-called weakness of memory of paranoics is

also a tendentious one - that is to say, that it is based on repression

and  serves  the  ends  of  repression.  A  subsequent  repression  and

replacement  takes  place  of  memories  which  are  not  in  the  least

pathogenic, but which are in contradiction to the alteration of the ego

which  the  symptoms  of  the  return  of  the  repressed  so  insistently

demand.

                                                                                         405

 

                        THE AETIOLOGY OF HYSTERIA

                                        (1896)

 


                                                                                        406

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                        407

 

                        THE AETIOLOGY OF HYSTERIA

 

GENTLEMEN, - When we set out to form an opinion about the causation

of  a  pathological  state  such  as  hysteria,  we  begin  by  adopting  the

method of anamnestic investigation: we question the patient or those

about  him  in  order  to  find  out  to  what  harmful  influences  they

themselves attribute his having fallen ill and developed these neurotic

symptoms. What we discover in this way is, of course, falsified by all

the factors which commonly hide the knowledge of his own state from

a  patient  -  by  his  lack  of  scientific  understanding  of  aetiological

influences, by the fallacy of post hoc, propter hoc, by his reluctance to

think about or mention certain noxae and traumas. Thus in making an

anamnestic investigation of this sort, we keep to the principle of not

adopting the patients’ belief without a thorough critical examination, of

not  allowing  them  to  lay  down  our  scientific  opinion  for  us  on  the

aetiology  of  the  neurosis.  Although  we  do,  on  the  one  hand,

acknowledge the truth of certain constantly repeated assertions, such

as  that  the  hysterical  state  is  a  long-persisting  after-effect  of  an

emotion  experienced  in  the  past,  we  have,  on  the  other  hand,

introduced  into  the  aetiology  of  hysteria  a  factor  which  the  patient

himself  never  brings  forward  and  whose  validity  he  only  reluctantly

admits  -  namely,  the  hereditary  disposition  derived  from  his

progenitors.  As  you  know,  in  the  view  of  the  influential  school  of

Charcot heredity alone deserves to be recognized as the true cause ofhysteria, while all other noxae of the most various nature and intensity

only play the part of incidental causes, of ‘agents provocateurs’.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        408

 

   You will readily admit that it would be a good thing to have a second

method of arriving at the aetiology of hysteria, one in which we should

feel less dependent on the assertions of the patients themselves. A

dermatologist, for instance, is able to recognize a sore as luetic from

the character of its margins, or the crust on it and of its shape, without

being  misled  by  the  protestations  of  his  patient,  who  denies  any

source of infection for it; and a forensic physician can arrive at the

cause of an injury, even if he has to do without any information from

the injured person. In hysteria, too, there exists a similar possibility of

penetrating from the symptoms to a knowledge of their causes. But in

order to explain the relationship between the method which we have

to  employ  for  this  purpose  and  the  older  method  of  anamnestic

enquiry, I should like to bring before you an analogy taken from an

advance that has in fact been made in another field of work.

   Imagine that an explorer arrives in a little-known region where his

interest  is  aroused  by  an  expanse  of  ruins,  with  remains  of  walls,

fragments of columns, and tablets with half effaced and unreadable

inscriptions. He may content himself with inspecting what lies exposed

to  view,  with  questioning  the  inhabitants  -  perhaps  semi-barbaric

people - who live in the vicinity, about what tradition tells them of the

history and meaning of these archaeological remains, and with noting

down what they tell him - and he may then proceed on his journey. But

he  may  act  differently.  He  may  have  brought  picks,  shovels  and

spades with him, and he may set the inhabitants to work with these

implements. Together with them he may start upon the ruins, clear

away the rubbish, and, beginning from the visible remains, uncover

what is buried. If his work is crowned with success, the discoveries are

self-explanatory; the ruined walls are part of the ramparts of a palace

or a treasure house; the fragments of columns can be filled out into a

temple;  the  numerous  inscriptions,  which,  by  good  luck,  may  bebilingual, reveal an alphabet and a language, and, when they have

been deciphered and translated, yield undreamed-of information about

the events of the remote past, to commemorate which the monuments

were built. Saxa loquuntur!

   If we try, in an approximately similar way, to induce the symptoms of

a hysteria to make themselves heard as witnesses to the history of the

origin  of  the  illness,  we  must  take  our  start  from  Josef  Breuer’s

momentous  discovery: the  symptoms  of  hysteria  (apart  from  the

stigmata) are determined by certain experiences of the patient’s which

have operated in a traumatic fashion and which are being reproduced

in his psychical life in the form of mnemic symbols. What we have to

do is to apply Breuer’s method - or one which is essentially the same -

so as to lead the patient’s attention back from his symptom to the

scene in which and through which that symptom arose; and, having

thus located the scene, we remove the symptom by bringing about,

during  the  reproduction  of  the  traumatic  scene,  a  subsequent

correction of the psychical course of events which took place at the

time.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        409

 

   It is no part of my intention to-day to discuss the difficult technique of

this  therapeutic  procedure  or  the  psychological  discoveries  which

have been obtained by its means. I have been obliged to start from

this  point  only  because  the  analyses  conducted  on  Breuer’s  lines

seem at the same time to open up the path to the causes of hysteria.

If we subject a fairly large number of symptoms in a great number of

subjects  to  such  an  analysis,  we  shall,  of  course,  arrive  at  a

knowledge  of  a  correspondingly  large  number  of  traumatically

operative scenes. It was in these experiences that the efficient causes

of hysteria came into action. Hence we may hope to discover from the

study  of  these  traumatic  scenes  what  the  influences  are  which

produce hysterical symptoms and in what way they do so.

   This expectation proves true; and it cannot fail to, since Breuer’s

theses, when put to the test in a considerable number of cases, haveturned out to be correct. But the path from the symptoms of hysteria to

its aetiology is far more laborious and leads through other connections

than one would have imagined.

   For let us be clear on this point. Tracing a hysterical symptom back

to  a  traumatic  scene  assists  our  understanding  only  if  the  scene

satisfies two conditions; if it possesses the relevant suitability to serve

as  a  determinant  and  if  it  recognizably  possesses  the  necessary

traumatic force. Instead of a verbal explanation, here is an example.

Let  us  suppose  that  the  symptom  under  consideration  is  hysterical

vomiting;    in  that  case  we  shall  feel  that  we  have  been  able  to

understand its causation (except for a certain residue) if the analysis

traces the symptom back to an experience which justifiably produced

a high amount of disgust - for instance, the sight of a decomposing

dead  body.  But  if,  instead  of  this,  the  analysis  shows  us  that  the

vomiting arose from a great fright, e.g. from a railway accident, we

shall feel dissatisfied and will have to ask ourselves how it is that the

fright has led to the particular symptom of vomiting. This derivation

lacks suitability as a determinant. We shall have another instance of

an insufficient explanation if the vomiting is supposed to have arisen

from, let us say, eating a fruit which had partly gone bad. Here, it is

true, the vomiting is determined by disgust, but we cannot understand

how, in this instance, the disgust could have become so powerful as to

be  perpetuated  in  a  hysterical  symptom;  the  experience  lacks

traumatic force.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        410

 

   Let us now consider how far the traumatic scenes of hysteria which

are uncovered by analysis fulfil, in a fairly large number of symptoms

and cases, the two requirements which I have named. Here we meet

with our first great disappointment. It is true, indeed, that the traumatic

scene  in  which  the  symptom  originated  does  in  fact  occasionally

possess both the qualities - suitability as a determinant and traumatic

force - which we require for an understanding of the symptom. But far

more  frequently,  incomparably  more  frequently,  we  find  one  of  thethree  other  possibilities  realized,  which  are  so  unfavourable  to  an

understanding. Either the scene to which we are led by analysis and in

which  the  symptom  first  appeared  seems  to  us  unsuited  for

determining the symptom, in that its content bears no relation to the

nature of the symptom; or the allegedly traumatic experience, though

it does have a relation to the symptom, proves to be an impression

which is normally innocuous and incapable as a rule of producing any

effect; or, lastly, the ‘traumatic scene’ leaves us in the lurch in both

respects, appearing at once innocuous and unrelated to the character

of the hysterical symptom.

   (Here I may remark in passing that Breuer’s view of the origin of

hysterical  symptoms  is  not  shaken  by  the  discovery  of  traumatic

scenes  which  correspond  to  experiences  that  are  insignificant  in

themselves. For Breuer assumed - following Charcot - that even an

innocuous  experience  can  be  heightened  into  a  trauma  and  can

develop determining force if it happens to the subject when he is in a

special psychical condition - in what is described as a hypnoid state. I

find,  however,  that  there  are  often  no  grounds  whatever  for

presupposing  the  presence  of  such  hypnoid  states.  What  remains

decisive is that the theory of hypnoid states contributes nothing to the

solution of the other difficulties, namely that the traumatic scenes so

often lack suitability as determinants.)

      Moreover,  Gentlemen,  this  first  disappointment  we  meet  with  in

following Breuer’s method is immediately succeeded by another, and

one  that  must  be  especially  painful  to  us  as  physicians.  When  our

procedure leads, as in the cases described above, to findings which

are insufficient as an explanation both in respect to their suitability as

determinants  and  to  their  traumatic  effectiveness,  we  also  fail  to

secure  any  therapeutic  gain;  the  patient  retains  his  symptoms

unaltered, in spite of the initial result yielded by the analysis. You can

understand how great the temptation is at this point to proceed no

further with what is in any case a laborious piece of work.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        411

    But perhaps all we need is a new idea in order to help us out of our

dilemma and lead to valuable results. The idea is this. As we know

from  Breuer,  hysterical  symptoms  can  be  resolved  if,  starting  from

them, we are able to find the path back to the memory of a traumatic

experience. If the memory which we have uncovered does not answer

our expectations, it may be that we ought to pursue the same path a

little further; perhaps behind the first traumatic scene there may be

concealed the memory of a second, which satisfies our requirements

better and whose reproduction has a greater therapeutic effect; so that

the  scene  that  was  first  discovered  only  has  the  significance  of  a

connecting link in the chain of associations. And perhaps this situation

may repeat itself; inoperative scenes may be interpolated more than

once, as necessary transitions in the process of reproduction, until we

finally make our way from the hysterical symptom to the scene which

is  really  operative  traumatically  and  which  is  satisfactory  in  every

respect,  both  therapeutically  and  analytically.  Well,  Gentlemen,  this

supposition is correct. If the first-discovered scene is unsatisfactory,

we  tell  our  patient  that  this  experience  explains  nothing,  but  that

behind it there must be hidden a more significant, earlier, experience;

and we direct his attention by the same technique to the associative

thread  which  connects  the  two  memories  -  the  one  that  has  been

discovered and the one that has still to be discovered.¹ A continuation

of the analysis then leads in every instance to the reproduction of new

scenes  of  the  character  we  expect.  For  example,  let  us  take  once

again the case of hysterical vomiting which I selected before, and in

which the analysis first led back to a fright from a railway accident - a

scene  which  lacked  suitability  as  a  determinant.  Further  analysis

showed that this accident had aroused in the patient the memory of

another,  earlier  accident,  which,  it  is  true,  he  had  not  himself

experienced but which had been the occasion of his having a ghastly

and  revolting  sight  of  a  dead  body.  It  is  as  though  the  combined

operation  of  the  two  scenes  made  the  fulfilment  of  our  postulates

possible, the one experience supplying, through fright, the traumatic

force and the other, from its content, the determining effect. The other

case, in which the vomiting was traced back to eating an apple which

had partly gone bad, was amplified by the analysis somewhat in the

following  way.  The  bad  apple  reminded  the  patient  of  an  earlierexperience: while he was picking up windfalls in an orchard he had

accidentally come upon a dead animal in a revolting state.

   I shall not return any further to these examples, for I have to confess

that  they  are  not  derived  from  any  case  in  my  experience  but  are

inventions of mine. Most probably, too, they are bad inventions. I even

regard such solutions of hysterical symptoms as impossible. But I was

obliged  to  make  up  fictitious  examples  for  several  reasons,  one  of

which I can state at once. The real examples are all incomparably

more  complicated:  to  relate  a  single  one  of  them  in  detail  would

occupy  the  whole  period  of  this  lecture.  The  chain  of  associations

always has more than two links; and the traumatic scenes do not form

a simple row, like a string of pearls, but ramify and are interconnected

like genealogical trees, so that in any new experience two or more

earlier  ones  come  into  operation  as  memories.  In  short,  giving  an

account of the resolution of a single symptom would in fact amount to

the task of relating an entire case history.

 

   ¹ I purposely leave out of this discussion the question of what the category is to which the

association between the two memories belong, (whether it is an association by simultaneity,
or by causal connections or by similarity of content), and of what psychological character is to
be attributed to the various ‘memories’ (conscious or unconscious).

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        412

 

   But we must not fail to lay special emphasis on one conclusion to

which analytic work along these chains of memory has unexpectedly

led. We have learned that no hysterical experience can arise from a

real experience alone, but that in every case the memory of earlier

experiences awakened in association to it plays a part in causing the

symptom.  If  -  as  I  believe  -  this  proposition  holds  good without

exception, it furthermore shows us the basis on which a psychological

theory of hysteria must be built.

   You might suppose that the rare instances in which analysis is able

to  trace  the  symptom  back  direct  to  a  traumatic  scene  that  is

thoroughly suitable as a determinant and possesses traumatic force,

and is able, by thus tracing it back, at the same time to remove it (inthe way described in Breuer’s case history of Anna O.) - you might

suppose  that  such  instances  must,  after  all,  constitute  powerful

objections  to  the  general  validity  of  the  proposition  I  have  just  put

forward. It certainly looks so. But I must assure you that I have the

best grounds for assuming that even in such instances there exists a

chain of operative memories which stretches far back behind the first

traumatic scene, even though the reproduction of the latter alone may

have the result of removing the symptom.

   It seems to me really astonishing that hysterical symptoms can only

arise with the co-operation of memories, especially when we reflect

that, according to the unanimous accounts of the patients themselves,

these memories did not come into their consciousness at the moment

when the symptom first made its appearance. Here is much food for

thought; but these problems must not distract us at this point from our

discussion of the aetiology of hysteria. We must rather ask ourselves:

where shall we get to if we follow the chains of associated memories

which the analysis has uncovered? How far do they extend!  Do they

come  anywhere  to  a  natural  end?  Do  they  perhaps  lead  to

experiences which are in some way alike, either in their content or the

time  of  life  at  which  they  occur,  so  that  we  may  discern  in  these

universally similar factors the aetiology of hysteria of which we are in

search?

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        413

 

   The knowledge I have so far gained already enables me to answer

these questions. If we take a case which presents several symptoms,

we arrive by means of the analysis, starting from each symptom, at a

series of experiences the memories of which are linked together in

association. To begin with, the chains of memories lead backwards

separately from one another; but, as I have said, they ramify. From a

single scene two or more memories are reached at the same time,

and from these again side-chains proceed whose individual links may

once more be associatively connected with links belonging to the main

chain.  Indeed,  a  comparison  with  the  genealogical  tree  of  a  familywhose members have also intermarried, is not at all a bad one. Other

complications in the linkage of the chains arise from the circumstance

that a single scene may be called up several times in the same chain,

so that it has multiple relationships to a later scene, and exhibits both

a  direct  connection  with  it  and  a  connection  established  through

intermediate  links.  In  short,  the  concatenation  is  far  from  being  a

simple one; and the fact that the scenes are uncovered in a reversed

chronological order (a fact which justifies our comparison of the work

with  the  excavation  of  a  stratified  ruined  site)  certainly  contributes

nothing to a more rapid understanding of what has taken place.

      If  the  analysis  is  carried  further,  new  complications  arise.  The

associative chains belonging to the different symptoms begin to enter

into  relation  with  one  another;  the  genealogical  trees  become

intertwined. Thus a particular symptom in, for instance, the chain of

memories relating to the symptom of vomiting, calls up not only the

earlier links in its own chain but also a memory from another chain,

relating to another symptom, such as a headache. This experience

accordingly  belongs  to  both  series,  and  in  this  way  it  constitutes  a

nodal  point.  Several  such  nodal  points  are  to  be  found  in  every

analysis. Their correlate in the clinical picture may perhaps be that

from a certain time onwards both symptoms have appeared together,

symbiotically, without in fact having any internal dependence on each

other.  Going  still  further  back,  we  come  upon  nodal  points  of  a

different kind. Here the separate associative chains converge. We find

experiences from which two or more symptoms have proceeded; one

chain has attached itself to one detail of the scene, the second chain

to another detail.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        414

 

   But the most important finding that is arrived at if an analysis is thus

consistently pursued is this. Whatever case and whatever symptom

we take as our point of departure, in the end we infallibly come to the

field of sexual experience. So here for the first time we seem to have

discovered an aetiological precondition.   From previous experience I can foresee that it is precisely against

this assertion or against its universal validity that your contradiction,

Gentlemen, will be directed. Perhaps it would be better to say, your

inclination to contradict; for none of you, no doubt, have as yet any

investigations  at  your  disposal  which,  based  upon  the  same

procedure,  might  have  yielded  a  different  result.  As  regards  the

controversial matter itself, I will only remark that the singling out of the

sexual  factor  in  the  aetiology  of  hysteria  springs  at  least  from  no

preconceived opinion of my part. The two investigators as whose pupil

I began my studies of hysteria, Charcot and Breuer, were far from

having  any  such  presupposition;  in  fact  they  had  a  personal

disinclination to it which I originally shared. Only the most laborious

and  detailed  investigations  have  converted  me,  and  that  slowly

enough, to the view I hold to-day. If you submit my assertion that the

aetiology of hysteria lies in sexual life to the strictest examination, you

will find that it is supported by the fact that in some eighteen cases of

hysteria I have been able to discover this connection in every single

symptom,  and,  where  the  circumstances  allowed,  to  confirm  it  by

therapeutic success. No doubt you may raise the objection that the

nineteenth or the twentieth analysis will perhaps show that hysterical

symptoms are derived from other sources as well, and thus reduce the

universal validity of the sexual aetiology to one of eighty percent. By

all means let us wait and see; but, since these eighteen cases are at

the same time all the cases on which I have been able to carry out the

work of analysis and since they were not picked out by anyone for my

convenience, you will find it understandable that I do not share such

an  expectation  but  am  prepared  to  let  my  belief  run  ahead  of  the

evidential force of the observations I have so far made. Besides, I am

influenced  by  another  motive  as  well,  which  for  the  moment  is  of

merely  subjective  value.  In  the  sole  attempt  to  explain  the

physiological and psychical mechanism of hysteria which I have been

able to make in order to correlate my observations, I have come to

regard the participation of sexual motive forces as an indispensable

premiss.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria                                                                                        415

 

   Eventually, then, after the chains of memories have converged, we

come to the field of sexuality and to a small number of experiences

which occur for the most part at the same period of life - namely, at

puberty. It is in these experiences, it seems, that we are to look for the

aetiology  of  hysteria,  and  through  them  that  we  are  to  learn  to

understand the origin of hysterical symptoms. But here we meet with a

fresh  disappointment  and  a  very  serious  one.  It  is  true  that  these

experiences, which have been discovered with so much trouble and

extracted out of all the mnemic material, and which seemed to be the

ultimate  traumatic  experiences,  have  in  common  the  two

characteristics  of  being  sexual  and  of  occurring  at  puberty;  but  in

every other respect they are very different from each other both in kind

and in importance. In some cases, no doubt, we are concerned with

experiences  which  must  be  regarded  as  severe  traumas  -  an

attempted rape, perhaps, which reveals to the immature girl at a blow

all the brutality of sexual desire, or the involuntary witnessing of sexual

acts  between  parents,  which  at  one  and  the  same  time  uncovers

unsuspected  ugliness  and  wounds  childish  and  moral  sensibilities

alike, and so on. But in other cases the experiences are astonishingly

trivial. In one of my women patients it turned out that her neurosis was

based on the experience of a boy of her acquaintance stroking her

hand  tenderly  and,  at  another  time,  pressing  his  knee  against  her

dress as they sat side by side at table, while his expression let her see

that  he  was  doing  something  forbidden.  For  another  young  lady,

simply hearing a riddle which suggested an obscene answer had been

enough  to  provoke  the  first  anxiety  attack  and  with  it  to  start  the

illness. Such findings are clearly not favourable to an understanding of

the  causation  of  hysterical  symptoms.  If  serious  and  trifling  events

alike, and if not only experiences affecting the subject’s own body but

visual impressions too and information received through the ears are

to be recognized as the ultimate traumas of hysteria, then we may be

tempted  to  hazard  the  explanation  that  hysterics  are  peculiarly

constituted  creatures  -  probably  on  account  of  some  hereditary

disposition  or  degenerative  atrophy  -  in  whom  a  shrinking  from

sexuality, which normally plays some part at puberty, is raised to apathological  pitch  and  is  permanently  retained;  that  they  are,  as  it

were, people who are psychically inadequate to meeting the demands

of  sexuality.  This  view,  of  course,  leaves  hysteria  in  men  out  of

account. But even without blatant objections such as that, we should

scarcely be tempted to be satisfied with this solution. We are only too

distinctly  conscious  of  an  intellectual  sense  of  something  half-

understood, unclear and insufficient.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        416

 

   Luckily for our explanation, some of these sexual experiences at

puberty exhibit a further inadequacy, which is calculated to stimulate

us into continuing our analytic work. For it sometimes happens that

they, too, lack suitability as determinants although this is much more

rarely so than with the traumatic scenes belonging to later life. Thus,

for instance, let us take the two women patients whom I have just

spoken of as cases in which the experiences at puberty were actually

innocent  ones.  As  a  result  of  those  experiences  the  patients  had

become subject to peculiar painful sensations in the genitals which

had established themselves as the main symptoms of the neurosis. I

was unable to find indications that they had been determined either by

the scenes at puberty or by later scenes; but they were certainly not

normal organic sensations nor signs of sexual excitement. It seemed

an obvious thing, then, to say to ourselves that we must look for the

determinants  of  these  symptoms  in  yet  other  experiences,  in

experiences which went still further back - and that we must, for the

second time, follow the saving notion which had earlier led us from the

first traumatic scenes to the chains of memories behind them. In doing

so, to be sure, we arrive at the period of earliest childhood, a period

before the development of sexual life; and this would seem to involve

the abandonment of a sexual aetiology. But have we not a right to

assume that even the age of childhood is not wanting in slight sexual

excitations, that later sexual development may perhaps be decisively

influenced by childhood experiences?  Injuries sustained by an organ

which  is  as  yet  immature,  or  by  a  function  which  is  in  process  ofdeveloping,  often  cause  more  severe  and  lasting  effects  than  they

could do in maturer years. Perhaps the abnormal reaction to sexual

impressions which surprises us in hysterical subjects at the age of

puberty is quite generally based on sexual experiences of this sort in

childhood,  in  which  case  those  experiences  must  be  of  a  similar

nature to one another, and must be of an important kind. If this is so,

the prospect is opened up that what has hitherto had to be laid at the

door of a still unexplained hereditary predisposition may be accounted

for  as  having  been  acquired  at  an  early  age.  And  since  infantile

experiences with a sexual content could after all only exert a psychical

effect through their memory-traces, would not this view be a welcome

amplification  of  the  finding  of  psycho-analysis  which  tells  us  that

hysterical  symptoms  can  only  arise  with  the  co-operation  of

memories?

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        417

 

 

                                            II

 

   You will no doubt have guessed, Gentlemen, that I should not have

carried this last line of thought so far if I had not wanted to prepare

you for the idea that it is this line alone which, after so many delays,

will  lead  us  to  our  goal.  For  now  we  are  really  at  the  end  of  our

wearisome and laborious analytic work, and here we find the fulfilment

of all the claims and expectations upon which we have so far insisted.

If we have the perseverance to press on with the analysis into early

childhood, as far back as a human memory is capable of reaching, we

invariably  bring  the  patient  to  reproduce  experiences  which,  on

account  both  of  their  peculiar  features  and  of  their  relations  to  the

symptoms of his later illness, must be regarded as the aetiology of his

neurosis for which we have been looking. These infantile experiences

are once more sexual in content, but they are of a far more uniform

kind than the scenes at puberty that had been discovered earlier. It is

now no longer a question of sexual topics having been aroused bysome sense impression or other, but of sexual experiences affecting

the subject’s own body - of sexual intercourse (in the wider sense).

You will admit that the importance of such scenes needs no further

proof; to this may now be added that, in every instance, you will be

able to discover in the details of the scenes the determining factors

which you may have found lacking in the other scenes - the scenes

which occurred later and were reproduced earlier.

   I therefore put forward the thesis that at the bottom of every case of

hysteria  there  are one  or  more  occurrences  of  premature  sexual

experience,  occurrences  which  belong  to  the  earliest  years  of

childhood but which can be reproduced through the work of psycho-

analysis in spite of the intervening decades. I believe that this is an

important finding, the discovery of a caput Nili in neuropathology; but I

hardly know what to take as a starting-point for a continuation of my

discussion of this subject. Shall I put before you the actual material I

have obtained from my analyses? Or shall I rather try first to meet the

mass  of  objections  and  doubts  which,  as  I  am  surely  correct  in

supposing,  have  now  taken  possession  of  your  attention?  I  shall

choose the latter course; perhaps we shall then be able to go over the

facts more calmly.

 

   (a) No one who is altogether opposed to a psychological view of

hysteria, who is unwilling to give up the hope that some day it will be

possible to trace back its symptoms to ‘finer anatomical changes’  and

who has rejected the view that the material foundations of hysterical

changes are bound to be of the same kind as those of our normal

mental processes - no one who adopts this attitude will, of course, put

any  faith  in  the  results  of  our  analyses;  however,  the  difference  in

principle  between  his  premisses  and  ours  absolves  us  from  the

obligation of convincing him on individual points.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        418

 

      But  other  people,  too,  although  they  may  be  less  averse  to

psychological theories of hysteria, will be tempted, when consideringour analytic findings, to ask what degree of certainty the application of

psycho-analysis offers. Is it not very possible either that the physician

forces  such  scenes  upon  his  docile  patients,  alleging  that  they  are

memories, or else that the patients tell the physician things which they

have  deliberately  invented  or  have  imagined  and  that  he  accepts

those things as true?  Well, my answer to this is that the general doubt

about the reliability of the psycho-analytic method can be appraised

and removed only when a complete presentation of its technique and

results  is  available.  Doubts  about  the  genuineness  of  the  infantile

sexual scenes can, however, be deprived of their force here and now

by  more  than  one  argument.  In  the  first  place,  the  behaviour  of

patients while they are reproducing these infantile experiences is in

every respect incompatible with the assumption that the scenes are

anything  else  than  a  reality  which  is  being  felt  with  distress  and

reproduced  with  the  greatest  reluctance.  Before  they  come  for

analysis  the  patients  know  nothing  about  these  scenes.  They  are

indignant as a rule if we warn them that such scenes are going to

emerge. Only the strongest compulsion of the treatment can induce

them to embark on a reproduction of them. While they are recalling

these  infantile  experiences  to  consciousness,  they  suffer  under  the

most violent sensations, of which they are ashamed and which they

try  to  conceal;  and,  even  after  they  have  gone  through  them  once

more in such a convincing manner, they still attempt to withhold belief

from them, by emphasizing the fact that, unlike what happens in the

case of other forgotten material, they have no feeling of remembering

the scenes.¹

   This latter piece of behaviour seems to provide conclusive proof.

Why should patients assure me so emphatically of their unbelief, if

what they want to discredit is something which - from whatever motive

- they themselves have invented?

   It is less easy to refute the idea that the doctor forces reminiscences

of this sort on the patient, that he influences him by suggestion to

imagine and reproduce them. Nevertheless it appears to me equally

untenable. I have never yet succeeded in forcing on a patient a scene

I was expecting to find, in such a way that he seemed to be living

through  it  with  all  the  appropriate  feelings.  Perhaps  others  may  be

more successful in this. 

   ¹ (Footnote added 1924:) All this is true; but it must be remembered that at the time I wrote

it I had not yet freed myself from my overvaluation of reality and my low valuation of phantasy.
 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        419

 

   There are, however, a whole number of other things that vouch for

the  reality  of  infantile  sexual  scenes.  In  the  first  place  there  is  the

uniformity which they exhibit in certain details, which is a necessary

consequence if the preconditions of these experiences are always of

the same kind, but which would otherwise lead us to believe that there

were  secret  understandings  between  the  various  patients.  In  the

second place, patients sometimes describe as harmless events whose

significance they obviously do not understand, since they would be

bound  otherwise  to  be  horrified  by  them.  Or  again,  they  mention

details,  without  laying  any  stress  on  them,  which  only  someone  of

experience in life can understand and appreciate as subtle traits of

reality.

   Events of this sort strengthen our impression that the patients must

really have experienced what they reproduce under the compulsion of

analysis  as  scenes  from  their  childhood.  But  another  and  stronger

proof of this is furnished by the relationship of the infantile scenes to

the content of the whole of the rest of the case history. It is exactly like

putting  together  a  child’s  picture-puzzle:  after  many  attempts,  we

become  absolutely  certain  in  the  end  which  piece  belongs  in  the

empty gap; for only that one piece fills out the picture and at the same

time allows its irregular edges to be fitted into the edges of the other

pieces in such a manner as to leave no free space and to entail no

overlapping. In the same way, the contents of the infantile scenes turn

out  to  be  indispensable  supplements  to  the  associative  and  logical

framework  of  the  neurosis,  whose  insertion  makes  its  course  of

development for the first time evident, or even, as we might often say,

self-evident.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria                                                                                        420

 

   Without wishing to lay special stress on the point, I will add that in a

number  of  cases  therapeutic  evidence  of  the  genuineness  of  the

infantile  scenes  can  also  be  brought  forward.  There  are  cases  in

which a complete or partial cure can be obtained without our having to

go as deep as the infantile experiences. And there are others in which

no success at all is obtained until the analysis has come to its natural

end with the uncovering of the earliest traumas. In the former cases

we are not, I believe, secure against relapses; and my expectation is

that a complete psycho-analysis implies a radical cure of the hysteria.

We  must  not,  however,  be  led  into  forestalling  the  lessons  of

observation.

   There would be one other proof, and a really unassailable one, of

the  genuineness  of  childhood  sexual  experiences  namely,  if  the

statements of someone who is being analysed were to be confirmed

by someone else, whether under treatment or not. These two people

will  have  had  to  have  taken  part  in  the  same  experience  in  their

childhood - perhaps to have stood in some sexual relationship to each

other.  Such  relations  between  children  are,  as  you  will  hear  in  a

moment, by no means rare. Moreover, it quite often happens that both

of those concerned subsequently fall ill of neuroses; yet I regard it as

a fortunate accident that, out of eighteen cases, I have been able to

obtain an objective confirmation of this sort in two. In one instance, it

was  the  brother  (who  had  remained  well)  who  of  his  own  accord

confirmed - not, it is true, his earliest sexual experiences with his sister

(who  was  the  patient)  -  but  at  least  scenes  of  that  kind  from  later

childhood, and the fact that there had been sexual relations dating

further back. In the other instance, it happened that two women whom

I was treating had as children had sexual relations with the same man,

in  the  course  of  which  certain  scenes  had  taken  place à  trois.  A

particular symptom, which was derived from these childhood events,

had  developed  in  both  women,  as  evidence  of  what  they  had

experienced in common.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        421 

 

   (b)  Sexual experiences in childhood consisting in stimulation of the

genitals, coitus-like acts, and so on, must therefore be recognized, in

the  last  analysis,  as  being  the  traumas  which  lead  to  a  hysterical

reaction  to  events  at  puberty  and  to  the  development  of  hysterical

symptoms. This statement is certain to be met from different directions

by two mutually contradictory objections. Some people will say that

sexual  abuses  of  this  kind,  whether  practised  upon  children  or

between them, happen too seldom for it to be possible to regard them

as the determinant of such a common neurosis as hysteria. Others will

perhaps  argue  that,  on  the  contrary,  such  experiences  are  very

frequent-much too frequent for us to be able to attribute an aetiological

significance to the fact of their occurrence. They will further maintain

that  it  is  easy,  by  making  a  few  enquiries,  to  find  people  who

remember  scenes  of  sexual  seduction  and  sexual  abuse  in  their

childhood years, and yet who have never been hysterical. Finally we

shall be told, as a weighty argument, that in the lower strata of the

population hysteria is certainly no more common than in the highest

ones,  whereas  everything  goes  to  show  that  the  injunction  for  the

sexual safeguarding of childhood is far more frequently transgressed

in the case of the children of the proletariat.

   Let us begin our defence with the easier part of the task. It seems to

me  certain  that  our  children  are  far  more  often  exposed  to  sexual

assaults than the few precautions taken by parents in this connection

would lead us to expect. When I first made enquiries about what was

known on the subject, I learnt from colleagues that there are several

publications  by  paediatricians  which  stigmatize  the  frequency  of

sexual practices by nurses and nursery maids, carried out even on

infants  in  arms;  and  in  the  last  few  weeks  I  have  come  across  a

discussion of ‘Coitus in Childhood’ by Dr. Stekel (1895) in Vienna. I

have not had time to collect other published evidence; but even if it

were only scanty, it is to be expected that increased attention to the

subject  will  very  soon  confirm  the  great  frequency  of  sexual

experiences and sexual activity in childhood.

                               The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        422

 

   Lastly, the findings of my analysis are in a position to speak for

themselves.  In  all  eighteen  cases  (cases  of  pure  hysteria  and  of

hysteria  combined  with  obsessions,  and  comprising  six  men  and

twelve  women)  I  have,  as  I  have  said,  come  to  learn  of  sexual

experiences of this kind in childhood. I can divide my cases into three

groups, according to the origin of the sexual stimulation. In the first

group it is a question of assaults - of single, or at any rate isolated,

instances  of  abuse,  mostly  practised  on  female  children,  by  adults

who  were  strangers,  and  who,  incidentally,  knew  how  to  avoid

inflicting  gross,  mechanical  injury.  In  these  assaults  there  was  no

question of the child’s consent, and the first effect of the experience

was preponderantly one of fright. The second group consists of cases

in  which  some  adult  looking  after  the  child  -  a  nursery  maid  or

governess or tutor, or, unhappily all too often, a close relative - has

initiated the child into sexual intercourse and has maintained a regular

love relationship with it - a love relationship, moreover, with its mental

side developed - which has often lasted for years. The third group,

finally, contains child-relationships proper - sexual relations between

two children of different sexes, mostly a brother and sister, which are

often prolonged beyond puberty and which have the most far-reaching

consequences for the pair. In most of my cases I found that two or

more  of  these  aetiologies  were  in  operation  together;  in  a  few

instances  the  accumulation  of  sexual  experiences  coming  from

different quarters was truly amazing. You will easily understand this

peculiar feature of my observations, however, when you consider that

the patients I was treating were all cases of severe neurotic illness

which threatened to make life impossible.

      Where  there  had  been  a  relation  between  two  children  I  was

sometimes able to prove that the boy-who, here too, played the part of

the  aggressor  -  had  previously  been  seduced  by  an  adult  of  the

female sex, and that afterwards, under the pressure of his prematurely

awakened libido and compelled by his memory, he tried to repeat with

the little girl exactly the same practices that he had learned from the

adult  woman,  without  making  any  modification  of  his  own  in  thecharacter of the sexual activity.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        423

 

   In view of this, I am inclined to suppose that children cannot find

their way to acts of sexual aggression unless they have been seduced

previously. The foundation for a neurosis would accordingly always be

laid in childhood by adults, the children themselves would transfer to

one another the disposition to fall ill of hysteria later. I will ask you to

consider  a  moment  longer  the  special  frequency  with  which  sexual

relations  in  childhood  occur  precisely  between  brothers  and  sisters

and cousins, as a result of their opportunities for being together so

often; supposing, then, ten or fifteen years later several members of

the younger generation of the family are found to be ill, might not this

appearance of a family neurosis naturally lead to the false supposition

that a hereditary disposition is present where there is only a pseudo-

heredity and where in fact what has taken place is a handing-on, an

infection in childhood?

   Now let us turn to the other objection, which is based precisely on

an acknowledgement of the frequency of infantile sexual experiences

and on the observed fact that many people who remember scenes of

that  kind  have not  become  hysterics.  Our  first  reply  is  that  the

excessive frequency of an aetiological factor cannot possibly be used

as  an  objection  to  its  aetiological  significance.  Is  not  the  tubercle

bacillus ubiquitous and is it not inhaled by far more people than are

found  to  fall  ill  of  tuberculosis?  And  is  its  aetiological  significance

impaired by the fact that other factors must obviously be at work too

before the tuberculosis, which is its specific effect, can be evoked? In

order to establish the bacillus as the specific aetiology it is enough to

show that tuberculosis cannot possibly occur without its playing a part.

The same doubtless applies to our problem. It does not matter if many

people experience infantile sexual scenes without becoming hysterics,

provided  only  that  all  the  people  who  become  hysterics  have

experienced  scenes  of  that  kind.  The  area  of  occurrence  of  an

aetiological factor may be freely allowed to be wider than that of itseffect,  but  it  must  not  be  narrower.  Not  everyone  who  touches  or

comes  near  a  smallpox  patient  develops  smallpox;  nevertheless

infection from a smallpox patient is almost the only known aetiology of

the disease.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        424

 

   It is true that if infantile sexual activity were an almost universal

occurrence  the  demonstration  of  its  presence  in  every  case  would

carry  no  weight.  But,  to  begin  with,  to  assert  such  a  thing  would

certainly  be  a  gross  exaggeration;  and  secondly,  the  aetiological

pretensions of the infantile scenes rest not only on the regularity of

their appearance in the anamneses of hysterics, but, above all, on the

evidence  of  there  being  associative  and  logical  ties  between  those

scenes and the hysterical symptoms - evidence which, if you were

given the complete history of a case, would be as clear as daylight to

you.

      What  can  the  other  factors  be  which  the  ‘specific  aetiology’  of

hysteria still needs in order actually to produce the neurosis? That,

Gentlemen, is a theme in itself, which I do not propose to enter upon.

To-day I need only indicate the point of contact at which the two parts

of  the  topic  -  the  specific  and  the  auxiliary  aetiology  -  fit  into  one

another. No doubt a considerable quantity of factors will have to be

taken into account. There will be the subject’s inherited and personal

constitution,  the  inherent  importance  of  the  infantile  sexual

experiences, and, above all, their number: a brief relationship with a

strange  boy,  who  afterwards  becomes  indifferent,  will  leave  a  less

powerful effect on a girl than intimate sexual relations of several years’

standing  with  her  own  brother.  In  the  aetiology  of  the  neuroses

quantitative preconditions are as important as qualitative ones: there

are threshold-values which have to be crossed before the illness can

become manifest. Moreover, I do not myself regard this aetiological

series as complete; nor does it solve the riddle of why hysteria is not

more common among the lower classes. (You will remember, by the

way, what a surprisingly large incidence of hysteria was reported byCharcot among working-class men). I may also remind you that a few

years ago I myself pointed out a factor, hitherto little considered, to

which I attribute the leading role in provoking hysteria after puberty. I

then put forward the view that the outbreak of hysteria may almost

invariably  be  traced  to  a psychical  conflict  arising  through  an

incompatible idea setting in action a defence on the part of the ego

and calling up a demand for repression. What the circumstances are

in which a defensive endeavour of this kind has the pathological effect

of actually thrusting the memory which is distressing to the ego into

the unconscious and of creating a hysterical symptom in its place I

was not able to say at that time. But to-day I can repair the omission.

The defence achieves its purpose of thrusting the incompatible idea

out of consciousness if there are infantile sexual scenes present in the

(hitherto normal) subject in the form of unconscious memories, and if

the  idea  that  is  to  be  repressed  can  be  brought  into  logical  or

associative connection with an infantile experience of that kind.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        425

 

   Since the ego’s efforts at defence depend upon the subject’s total

moral and intellectual development, the fact that hysteria is so much

rarer in the lower classes than its specific aetiology would warrant is

no longer entirely incomprehensible.

   Let us return once again, Gentlemen, to the last group of objections,

the answering of which has led us such a long way. We have heard

and have acknowledged that there are numerous people who have a

very  clear  recollection  of  infantile  sexual  experiences  and  who

nevertheless do not suffer from hysteria. This objection has no weight;

but it provides an occasion for making a valuable comment. According

to our understanding of the neurosis, people of this kind ought not to

be hysterical at all, or at any rate, not hysterical as a result of the

scenes  which  they  consciously  remember.  With  our  patients,  those

memories are never conscious; but we cure them of their hysteria by

transforming their unconscious memories of the infantile scenes into

conscious  ones.  There  was  nothing  that  we  could  have  done  orneeded to do about the fact that they have had such experiences.

From this you will perceive that the matter is not merely one of the

existence  of  the  sexual  experiences,  but  that  a  psychological

precondition  enters  in  as  well.  The  scenes  must  he  present  as

unconscious memories; only so long as, and in so far as, they are

unconscious  are  they  able  to  create  and  maintain  hysterical

symptoms.  But  what  decides  whether  those  experiences  produce

conscious or unconscious memories - whether that is conditioned by

the content of the experiences, or by the time at which they occur, or

by later influences - that is a fresh problem, which we shall prudently

avoid. Let me merely remind you that, as its first conclusion, analysis

has arrived at the proposition that hysterical symptoms are derivatives

of memories which are operating unconsciously.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

  426

 

 

      (c)  Our  view  then  is  that  infantile  sexual  experiences  are  the

fundamental precondition for hysteria, are, as it were, the disposition

for it and that it is they which create the hysterical symptoms, but that

they do not do so immediately, but remain without effect to begin with

and  only  exercise  a  pathogenic  action  later,  when  they  have  been

aroused  after  puberty  in  the  form  of  unconscious  memories.  If  we

maintain this view, we shall have to come to terms with the numerous

observations which show that a hysterical illness may already make its

appearance in childhood and before puberty. This difficulty, however,

is cleared up as soon as we examine more closely the data gathered

from analyses concerning the chronology of the infantile experiences.

We  then  learn  that  in  our  severe  cases  the  formation  of  hysterical

symptoms  begins  -  not  in  exceptional  instances,  but,  rather,  as  a

regular thing - at the age of eight, and that the sexual experiences

which show no immediate effect invariably date further back, into the

third  or  fourth,  or  even  the  second  year  of  life.  Since  in  no  single

instance does the chain of effective experiences break off at the age

of eight, I must assume that this time of life, the period of growth inwhich  the  second  dentition  takes  place,  forms  a  boundary  line  for

hysteria, after which the illness cannot be caused. From then on, a

person  who  has  not  had  sexual  experiences  earlier  can  no  longer

become disposed to hysteria; and a person who has had experiences

earlier,  is  already  able  to  develop  hysterical  symptoms.  Isolated

instances  of  the  occurrence  of  hysteria  on  the  other  side  of  this

boundary line (that is, before the age of eight) may be interpreted as a

phenomenon of precocious maturity. The existence of this boundary-

line is very probably connected with developmental processes in the

sexual system. Precocity of somatic sexual development may often be

observed, and it is even possible that it can be promoted by too early

sexual stimulation.

   In this way we obtain an indication that a certain infantile state of the

psychical functions, as well as of the sexual system, is required in

order that a sexual experience occurring during this period shall later

on, in the form of a memory, produce a pathogenic effect. I do not

venture as yet, however, to make any more precise statement on the

nature of this psychical infantilism or on its chronological limits.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        427

 

 

   (d) Another objection might arise from exception being taken to the

supposition that the memory of infantile sexual experiences produces

such an enormous pathogenic effect, while the actual experience itself

has none. And it is true that we are not accustomed to the notion of

powers emanating from a mnemic image which were absent from the

real impression. You will moreover notice the consistency with which

the  proposition  that  symptoms  can  only  proceed  from  memories  is

carried  through  in  hysteria.  None  of  the  later  scenes,  in  which  the

symptoms arise, are the effective ones; and the experiences which

are  effective  have  at  first  no  result.  But  here  we  are  faced  with  a

problem which we may very justifiably keep separate from our theme.

It is true that we feel impelled to make a synthesis, when we survey

the number of striking conditions that we have come to know: the factthat in order to form a hysterical symptom a defensive effort against a

distressing idea must be present, that this idea must exhibit a logical

or associative connection with an unconscious memory through a few

or  many  intermediate  links,  which  themselves,  too,  remain

unconscious at the moment, that this unconscious memory must have

a  sexual  content,  that  its  content  must  be  an  experience  which

occurred  during  a  certain  infantile  period  of  life.  It  is  true  that  we

cannot help asking ourselves how it comes about that this memory of

an  experience  that  was  innocuous  at  the  time  it  happened,  should

posthumously  produce  the  abnormal  effect  of  leading  a  psychical

process  like  defence  to  a  pathological  result,  while  it  itself  remains

unconscious.

   But we shall have to tell ourselves that this is a purely psychological

problem, whose solution may perhaps necessitate certain hypotheses

about normal psychical processes and about the part played in them

by consciousness, but that this problem may be allowed to remain

unsolved for the time being, without detracting from the value of the

insight  we  have  so  far  gained  into  the  aetiology  of  hysterical

phenomena.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        428

 

                                            III

 

      Gentlemen,  the  problem,  the  approaches  to  which  I  have  just

formulated,  concerns  the mechanism  of  the  formation  of  hysterical

symptoms.  We  find  ourselves  obliged,  however,  to  describe  the

causation  of  those  symptoms  without  taking  that  mechanism  into

account,  and  this  involves  an  inevitable  loss  of  completeness  and

clarity  in  our  discussion.  Let  us  go  back  to  the  part  played  by  the

infantile sexual scenes. I am afraid that I may have misled you into

over-estimating their power to form symptoms. Let me, therefore, once

more stress the fact that every case of hysteria exhibits symptoms

which are determined, not by infantile but by later, often by recent,

experiences. Other symptoms, it is true, go back to the very earliestexperiences  and  belong,  so  to  speak,  to  the  most  ancient  nobility.

Among  these  latter  are  above  all  to  be  found  the  numerous  and

diverse sensations and paraesthesias of the genital organs and other

parts  of  the  body,  these  sensations  and  paraesthesias  being

phenomena which simply correspond to the sensory content of the

infantile scenes, reproduced in a hallucinatory fashion, often painfully

intensified.

   Another set of exceedingly common hysterical phenomena - painful

need to urinate, the sensation accompanying defaecation, intestinal

disturbances, choking and vomiting, indigestion and disgust at food -

were also shown in my analyses (and with surprising regularity) to be

derivatives  of  the  same  childhood  experiences  and  were  explained

without  difficulty  by  certain  invariable  peculiarities  of  those

experiences.  For  the  idea  of  these  infantile  sexual  scenes  is  very

repellent to the feelings of a sexually normal individual; they include all

the abuses known to debauched and impotent persons, among whom

the buccal cavity and the rectum are misused for sexual purposes. For

physicians,  astonishment  at  this  soon  gives  way  to  a  complete

understanding.  People  who  have  no  hesitation  in  satisfying  their

sexual desires upon children cannot be expected to jib a finer shades

in the methods of obtaining that satisfaction; and the sexual impotence

which  is  inherent  in  children  inevitably  forces  them  into  the  same

substitutive actions as those to which adults descend if they become

impotent. All the singular conditions under which the ill-matched pair

conduct their love-relations - on the one hand the adult, who cannot

escape his share in the mutual dependence necessarily entailed by a

sexual relationship, and who is yet armed with complete authority and

the right to punish, and can exchange the one role for the other to the

uninhibited satisfaction of his moods, and on the other hand the child,

who in his helplessness is at the mercy of this arbitrary will, who is

prematurely aroused to every kind of sensibility and exposed to every

sort of disappointment, and whose performance of the sexual activities

assigned  to  him  is  often  interrupted  by  his  imperfect  control  of  his

natural needs - all these grotesque and yet tragic incongruities reveal

themselves as stamped upon the later development of the individual

and of his neurosis, in countless permanent effects which deserve to

be traced in the greatest detail. Where the relation is between twochildren, the character of the sexual scenes is none the less of the

same repulsive sort, since every such relationship between children

postulates  a  previous  seduction  of  one  of  them  by  an  adult.  The

psychical  consequences  of  these  child-relations  are  quite

extraordinarily  far-reaching;  the  two  individuals  remain  linked  by  an

invisible bond throughout the whole of their lives.

      Sometimes  it  is  the  accidental  circumstances  of  these  infantile

sexual scenes which in later years acquire a determining power over

the  symptoms  of  the  neurosis.  Thus,  in  one  of  my  cases  the

circumstance that the child was required to stimulate the genitals of a

grown-up  woman  with  his  foot  was  enough  to  fixate  his  neurotic

attention for years on to his legs and to their function, and finally to

produce  a  hysterical  paraplegia.  In  another  case,  a  woman  patient

suffering  from  anxiety  attacks  which  tended  to  come  on  at  certain

hours of the day could not be calmed unless a particular one of her

many sisters stayed by her side all the time. Why this was so would

have remained a riddle if analysis had not shown that the man who

had  committed  the  assaults  on  her  used  to  enquire  at  every  visit

whether  this  sister,  who  he  was  afraid  might  interrupt  him,  was  at

home.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        429

 

   It may happen that the determining power of the infantile scenes is

so much concealed that, in a superficial analysis, it is bound to be

overlooked.  In  such  instances  we  imagine  that  we  have  found  the

explanation of some particular symptom in the content of one of the

later scenes - until, in the course of our work, we come upon the same

content  in  one  of  the infantile  scenes,  so  that  in  the  end  we  are

obliged to recognize that, after all, the later scene only owes its power

of determining symptoms to its agreement with the earlier one. I do

not  wish  because  of  this  to  represent  the  later  scenes  being

unimportant; if it was my task to put before you the rules that govern

the formation of hysterical symptoms, I should have to include as one

of  them  that  the  idea  which  is  selected  for  the  production  of  asymptom is one which has been called up by a combination of several

factors  and  which  has  been  aroused  from  various  directions

simultaneously. I have elsewhere tried to express this in the formula:

hysterical symptoms are overdetermined.

   One thing more, Gentlemen. It is true that earlier I put the relation

between  recent  and  infantile  aetiology  aside  as  a  separate  theme.

Nevertheless,  I  cannot  leave  the  subject  without  overstepping  this

resolution at least with one remark. You will agree with me that there

is one  fact  above  all  which  leads  us  astray  in  the  psychological

understanding of hysterical phenomena, and which seems to warn us

against measuring psychical acts in hysterics and in normal people

with  the  same  yardstick.  That  fact  is  the  discrepancy  between

psychically  exciting  stimuli  and  psychical  reactions  which  we  come

upon in hysterical subjects. We try to account for it by assuming the

presence in them of a general abnormal sensitivity to stimuli, and we

often endeavour to explain it on a physiological basis, as if in such

patients  certain  organs  of  the  brain  which  serve  to  transmit  stimuli

were in a peculiar chemical state (like the spinal centres of a frog,

perhaps,  which  has  been  injected  with  strychnine)  or  as  if  these

cerebral organs had withdrawn from the influence of higher inhibiting

centres  (as  in  animals  being  experimented  on  under  vivisection).

Occasionally one or other of these concepts may be perfectly valid as

an explanation of hysterical phenomena; I do not dispute this. But the

main  part  of  the  phenomenon  -  of  the  abnormal,  exaggerated,

hysterical reaction to psychical stimuli - admits of another explanation,

an explanation which is supported by countless examples from the

analyses of patients. And this is as follows: The reaction of hysterics is

only apparently exaggerated; it is bound to appear exaggerated to us

because we only know a small part of the motives from which it arises.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        430

 

   In reality, this reaction is proportionate to the exciting stimulus; thus

it is normal and psychologically understandable. We see this at once

when the analysis has added to the manifest motives, of which thepatient is conscious, those other motives, which have been operative

without his knowing about them, so that he could not tell us of them.

      I  could  spend  hours  demonstrating  the  validity  of  this  important

assertion for the whole range of psychical activity in hysteria, but I

must confine myself here to a few examples. You will remember the

mental ‘sensitiveness’ which is so frequent among hysterical patients

and which leads them to react to the least sign of being depreciated

as though they had received a deadly insult. What would you think,

now, if you were to observe this high degree of readiness to feel hurt

on the slightest occasion, if you came across it between two normal

people, a husband and wife, perhaps? You would certainly infer that

the conjugal scene you had witnessed was not solely the result of this

latest trifling occasion, but that inflammable material had been piling

up for a long time and that the whole heap of it bad been set alight by

the final provocation.

   I would ask you to carry this line of thought over on to hysterical

patients. It is not the latest slight - which, in itself, is minimal - that

produces the fit of crying, the outburst of despair or the attempt at

suicide, in disregard of the axiom that an effect must be proportionate

to its cause; the small slight of the present moment has aroused and

set working the memories of very many, more intense, earlier slights,

behind all of which there lies in addition the memory of a serious slight

in childhood which has never been overcome. Or again, let us take the

instance of a young girl who blames herself most frightfully for having

allowed a boy to stroke her hand in secret, and who from that time on

has been overtaken by a neurosis. You can, of course, answer the

puzzle by pronouncing her an abnormal, eccentrically disposed and

over-sensitive  person;  but  you  will  think  differently  when  analysis

shows  you  that  the  touching  of  her  hand  reminded  her  of  another,

similar touching, which had happened very early in her childhood and

which  formed  part  of  a  less  innocent  whole,  so  that  her  self-

reproaches were actually reproaches about that old occasion. Finally,

the  problem  of  the  hysterogenic  points  is  of  the  same  kind.  If  you

touch  a  particular  spot,  you  do  something  you  did  not  intend:  you

awaken a memory which may start off a convulsive attack, and since

you  know  nothing  of  this  psychical  intermediate  link  you  refer  the

attack directly to the operation of your touch. The patients are in thesame state of ignorance and therefore fall into similar errors. ie they

too  are  unaware  of  the  re-awakening  of  the  unconscious  memory

They constantly establish ‘false connections’ between the most recent

cause, which they are conscious of, and the effect, which depends on

so many intermediate links. If, however, the physician has been able

to  bring  together  the  conscious  and  unconscious  motives  for  the

purpose  of  explaining  a  hysterical  reaction,  he  is  almost  always

obliged  to  recognize  that  the  seemingly  exaggerated  reaction  is

appropriate and is abnormal only in its form.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        431

 

   You may, however, rightly object to this justification of the hysterical

reaction to psychical stimuli and say that nevertheless the reaction is

not a normal one. For why do healthy people behave differently?  Why

do not all their excitations of long ago come into operation once more

when  a  new,  present-day,  excitation  takes  place?  One  has  an

impression, indeed, that with hysterical patients it is as if all their old

experiences  -  to  which  they  have  already  reacted  so  often  and,

moreover, so violently - had retained their effective power; as if such

people were incapable of disposing of their psychical stimuli. Quite

true, Gentlemen, something of the sort must really be assumed. You

must not forget that in hysterical people when there is a present-day

precipitating  cause,  the  old  experiences  come  into  operation  in  the

form  of unconscious  memories.  It  looks  as  though  the  difficulty  of

disposing of a present impression, the impossibility of transforming it

into a powerless memory, is attached precisely to the character of the

psychical unconscious. You see that the remainder of the problem lies

once more in the field of psychology - and, what is more, a psychology

of a kind for which philosophers have done little to prepare the way for

us.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        432

    To this psychology, which has yet to be created to meet our needs -

to this future psychology of the neuroses - I must also refer you when,

in conclusion, I tell you something which will at first make you afraid

that  it  may  disturb  our  dawning  comprehension  of  the  aetiology  of

hysteria. For I must affirm that the aetiological role of infantile sexual

experience is not confined to hysteria but holds good equally for the

remarkable neurosis of obsessions, and perhaps also, indeed, for the

various forms of chronic paranoia and other functional psychoses. I

express myself on this with less definiteness, because I have as yet

analysed far fewer cases of obsessional neurosis than of hysteria; and

as regards paranoia, I have at my disposal only a single full analysis

and a few fragmentary ones. But what I discovered in these cases

seemed to be reliable and filled me with confident expectations for

other cases. You will perhaps remember that already, at an earlier

date, I recommended that hysteria and obsessions should be grouped

together under the name of ‘neuroses of defence’, even before I had

come to know of their common infantile aetiology. I must now add that

although this need not be expected to happen in general - every one

of  my  cases  of  obsessions  revealed  a  substratum  of  hysterical

symptoms, mostly sensations and pains, which went back precisely to

the earliest childhood experiences. What, then, determines whether

the infantile sexual scenes which have remained unconscious will later

on, when the other pathogenic factors are super-added, give rise to

hysterical  or  to  obsessional  neurosis  or  even  to  paranoia?  This

increase  in  our  knowledge  seems,  as  you  see,  to  prejudice  the

aetiological value of these scenes, since it removes the specificity of

the aetiological relation.

 


                              The Aetiology Of Hysteria

                                                                                        433

 

   I am not yet in a position, Gentlemen, to give a reliable answer to

this  question.  The  number  of  cases  I  have  analysed  is  not  large

enough  nor  have  the  determining  factors  in  them  been  sufficiently

various.  So  far,  I  have  observed  that  obsessions  can  be  regularly

shown by analysis to be disguised and transformed self-reproachesabout acts of sexual aggression in childhood, and are therefore more

often  met  with  in  men  than  in  women,  and  that  men  develop

obsessions more often than hysteria. From this I might conclude that

the character of the infantile scenes - whether they were experienced

with pleasure or only passively - has a determining influence on the

choice of the later neurosis; but I do not want to underestimate the

significance of the age at which these childhood actions occur, and

other factors as well. Only a discussion of further analyses can throw

light  on  these  points.  But  when  it  becomes  clear  which  are  the

decisive factors in the choice between the possible forms of the neuro-

psychoses of defence, the question of what the mechanism is in virtue

of which that particular form takes shape will once again be a purely

psychological problem.

 

   I have now come to the end of what I have to say to-day. Prepared

as I am to meet with contradiction and disbelief, I should like to say

one thing more in support of my position. Whatever you may think

about the conclusions I have come to, I must ask you not to regard

them as the fruit of idle speculation. They are based on a laborious

individual examination of patients which has in most cases taken up a

hundred or more hours of work. What is even more important to me

than the value you put on my results is the attention you give to the

procedure  I  have  employed.  This  procedure  is  new  and  difficult  to

handle,  but  it  is  nevertheless  irreplaceable  for  scientific  and

therapeutic  purposes.  You  will  realize,  I  am  sure,  that  one  cannot

properly  deny  the  findings  which  follow  from  this  modification  of

Breuer’s procedure so long as one puts it aside and uses only the

customary  method  of  questioning  patients.  To  do  so  would  be  like

trying to refute the findings of histological technique by relying upon

macroscopic  examination.  The  new  method  of  research  gives  wide

access to a new element in the psychical field of events, namely, to

processes of thought which have remained unconscious - which, to

use Breuer’s expression, are ‘inadmissible to consciousness’. Thus it

inspires us with the hope of a new and better understanding of all

functional psychical disturbances. I cannot believe that psychiatry will

long hold back from making use of this new pathway to knowledge.

                                                                                         434

 

        ABSTRACTS OF THE SCIENTIFIC WRITINGS OF DR. SIGM.

                                FREUD 1877-1897

                                        (1897)

 


                                                                                        435

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                        436

 

        ABSTRACTS OF THE SCIENTIFIC WRITINGS OF DR. SIGM.

                                        FREUD

                                        1877-1897

 

                                            A

 

                      BEFORE APPOINTMENT AS PRIVATDOZENT

 

                                            I

 

   ‘Observations on the configuration and finer structure of the lobed

organs in eels described as testes.’

 

      Dr.  Syrski  had  recently  recognized  a  paired,  lobulated,  grooved

organ occurring in the abdominal cavity of the eel as the animal’s male

sexual organ which had long been looked for. At Professor Claus’s

suggestion  I  investigated  the  occurrence  and  tissue  components  of

these lobed organs at the zoological station in Trieste.

 

                                            II

 

      ‘On  the  origin  of  the  posterior  nerve-roots  in  the  spinal  cord  of

Ammocoetes (Petromyzon planeri).’   (From the Institute of Physiology of the University of Vienna. With

one plate.)

 

   Investigation of the spinal cord of Ammocoetes showed that the

large nerve-cells described by Reissner as occurring in the posterior

grey matter (posterior cells) give rise to the root fibres of the posterior

roots.-The anterior and posterior spinal roots of the Petromyzon, at all

events in the caudal region, are displaced relatively to each other in

their  origins  and  remain  distinct  from  each  other  in  their  peripheral

course.

 


    Abstracts Of The Scientific Writings Of Dr. Sigm. Freud 1877-1897

                                                                                        437

 

                                            III

 

   ‘On the spinal ganglia and spinal cord of Petromyzon.’

   (From the Institute of Physiology of the University of Vienna. With

four plates and two woodcuts.)

 

   The spinal ganglion cells of fish were long regarded as bipolar, and

those  of  the  higher  animals  were  considered  to  be unipolar.  As

regards  the  latter  elements  Ranvier  had  shown  that  their  single

process branched in a T-shape after a short course. - By the use of a

gold maceration technique it was possible to make a complete survey

of  the  spinal  ganglia  of  Petromyzon;  their  nerve  cells  exhibit  every

transition between bipolarity and unipolarity with T-shaped branching

of  the  fibres;  the  number  of  fibres  of  the  posterior  root  is  regularly

greater than the number of nerve cells in the ganglion; thus there are

‘fibres  of  passage’  and  ‘subsidiary’  nerve  fibres,  of  which  the  latter

merely mingle with the elements of the roots. - A link between the

spinal ganglion cells and the posterior cells in the spinal cord which

have been described is provided in Petromyzon by cellular elements

which  are  exposed  on  the  surface  of  the  spinal  cord  between  the

posterior root and ganglion. These scattered cells indicate the path

taken  by  the  spinal  ganglion  cells  in  the  course  of  evolution.  -  Inrelation to the spinal cord of Petromyzon, the paper further describes

the branching of the fibres in the central pathway of the posterior root

fibres, and the forked ramification of the anterior commissural fibres,

the intercalation of nerve cells in the spinal portions of the anterior

roots,  and  a  very  fine  nerve-net  (which  can  be  stained  by  gold

chloride) in the pia mater.

 

                                            IV

 

   ‘Note upon a method for anatomical preparations of the nervous

system.’

 

   A modification of a method recommended by Reichert. - A mixture of

1 part concentrated nitric acid, 3 parts water, and 1 part concentrated

glycerine,  since  it  destroys  connective  tissue  and  makes  it  easy  to

remove  bones  and  muscles,  is  useful  for  laying  bare  the  central

nervous  system  with  its  peripheral  branches,  particularly  in  small

mammals.

 

                                            V

 

‘On  the  structure  of  the  nerve  fibres  and  nerve  cells  of  the  river

crayfish.’

 

   The nerve fibres of the river crayfish, when the tissues are examined

live,  exhibit  without  exception  a  fibrillary  structure.  The  nerve  cells,

whose survival can be recognized from the granules in their nucleus,

seem to be composed of two substances. One of these is reticular and

is  continued  into  the  fibrils  of  the  nerve  fibres,  and  the  other  is

homogeneous and is continued in their ground substance.

 

                                            VI

 

   ‘The structure of the elements of the nervous system.’

   (Lecture delivered before the Psychiatric Society, 1882.)

 

   Contents as in V. 


    Abstracts Of The Scientific Writings Of Dr. Sigm. Freud 1877-1897

                                                                                        438

 

                                          VII

 

 ‘A new method for the study of nerve-tracts in the central nervous

system.’

 

      If  fine  sections  of  the  central  organ,  hardened  in  chromate  are

treated with gold chloride, a strong solution of soda and a 10 percent

solution of calcium iodide, a red to blue stain is obtained which affects

either the medullary sheaths or only the axis cylinders. The method is

no more reliable than other methods of gold staining.

 

                                          VIIa

 

   ‘A new histological method for the study of nerve-tracts in the brain

and spinal chord.’

 

   Contents as in VII.

 

                                          VIII

 

   ‘A case of cerebral haemorrhage with indirect basal focal symptoms

in a patient suffering from scurvy.’

 

   A report of a case of cerebral haemorrhage in a patient suffering

from scurvy, which ran a rapid course under continuous observation.

The symptoms are explained with reference to Wernicke’s theory of

the indirect effect of focal lesions.

 

                                            IX

 

   ‘On Coca.’

    The alkaloid of the coca plant which was described by Niemann

received  little  attention  for  medical  purposes  at  the  time.  My  work

included botanical and historical notes on the coca plant based on

statements  in  the  literature;  it  confirmed  by  experiments  on  normal

subjects the remarkable stimulating effects of cocaine and its action in

preventing hunger, thirst and sleep; and it endeavoured to lay down

indications for the therapeutic use of the drug.

   Among these indications the reference to the possible employment

of cocaine during withdrawal of morphine became of importance later.

The expectation voiced at the end of the work that the property of

cocaine for producing local anaesthesia would find further applications

was  soon  afterwards  fulfilled  by  K.  Koller’s  experiments  in

anaesthetizing the cornea.

 


    Abstracts Of The Scientific Writings Of Dr. Sigm. Freud 1877-1897

                                                                                        439

 

                                            X

 

   ‘Contribution to our knowledge of the effects of coca.’

 

      Dynamometric  demonstration  of  the  increase  in  motor  strength

during cocaine euphoria, motor strength (measured by the strength of

the  grip)  shows  a  regular  daily  oscillation  (similar  to  that  of  body

temperature).

 

                                            XI

 

   ‘A note upon the inter-olivary tract.’

 

   Short notes on the connections of the roots of the auditory nerve

and  the  connection  between  the  inter-olivary  tract  and  the  crossed

trapezoid  body,  based  upon  incompletely  myelinated  human

preparations.

 

                                          XII 

      ‘A  case  of  muscular  atrophy  with  extensive  disturbances  of

sensibility (syringomyelia).’

 

      The  combination  of  bilateral  muscular  atrophy,  of  bilateral

disturbance  of  sensibility  in  the  nature  of  a  ‘partial’,  dissociated

paralysis  of  sensation,  and  of  trophic  disturbances  in  the  left  hand

(which also exhibited the most intense anaesthesia), taken together

with the restriction of the pathological symptoms to the upper part of

the  body,  permitted  a  diagnosis in  vivo  in  a  36-year-old  man  of

syringomyelia, an affection which at that time was regarded as rare

and hard to recognize.

 


    Abstracts Of The Scientific Writings Of Dr. Sigm. Freud 1877-1897

                                                                                        440

 

                                            B

 

                      AFTER APPOINTMENT AS PRIVATDOZENT

 

                                          XIII

 

   ‘Acute multiple neuritis of the spinal and cranial nerves.’

 

      An  eighteen-year-old  man  fell  ill  without  fever  but  with  general

symptoms and dragging pains in his chest and legs. At first he showed

symptoms  of  endocarditis,  but  later  the  pains  increased  and

sensitiveness  to  pressure  developed  in  the  vertebral  column  and

regionally  in  the  skin,  muscles  and  nerve  trunks  as  the  affection

involved  one  extremity  after  the  other:  heightening  of  the  reflexes,

outbreaks of sweating, local wasting, and lastly diplopia, disturbances

of swallowing, facial paresis, and hoarseness. Finally fever, extreme

acceleration of the pulse and pulmonary affection. The diagnosis of

acute  multiple  neuritis  made  during  the  course  of  the  illness  was

confirmed  by  the  post-mortem  findings,  which  showed  that  all  the

spinal nerves in their sheaths were injected, greyish-red, and, as it

were, bunched up. Similar changes in the cranial nerves. Endocarditis.- According to the pathologist, this was the first post-mortem finding of

polyneuritis to be made in Vienna.

 

                                          XIV

 

   ‘On the relation of the restiform body to the posterior column and its

nucleus with some remarks on two fields of the medulla oblongata.’

   Jointly with Dr. L. Darkschewitsch (Moscow).

 

   By studying preparations with incompletely myelinated medulla the

restiform  body  can  be  divided  into  two  components:  a  ‘nucleus’

(primary restiform body) and a ‘fringe’ (secondary restiform body). The

latter  contains  the  olivary  fibre  system  which  becomes  medullated

later.  The  primary  restiform  body,  which  is  medullated  earlier,  is

divided  into  a  ‘head  portion’  and  a  ‘tail  portion’.  The  head  of  the

primary  restiform  body  arises  from  the  nucleus  of  the  column  of

Burdach  and  thus  represents  a  (for  the  most  part  uncrossed)

continuation  to  the  cerebellum  of  the  centripetal  tract  from  the

extremities.  The  corresponding  continuation  to  the  cerebrum  is

provided by means of the arcuate fibres originating from this same

nucleus.  The  tail  portion  of  the  primary  restiform  body  is  a  direct

continuation of the spinal lateral cerebellar tract. - The lateral field of

the  medulla  oblongata  allows  of  a  uniform  interpretation  of  its

components.  It  contains  four  grey  substances  with  the  systems  of

fibres proceeding from them, which are to be considered homologous

to one another as substances in which the sensory nerves from the

extremities, and the trigeminal, vagal, and auditory nerves have their

origin.


    Abstracts Of The Scientific Writings Of Dr. Sigm. Freud 1877-1897

                                                                                        441

 

                                          XV

 

   ‘On the origin of the auditory nerve.’

 

      A  description  of  the  origin  of  the  auditory  nerve,  based  onpreparations  of  the  human  foetus,  illustrated  by  four  drawings  of

cross-sections  and  a  diagram.  The  auditory  nerve  falls  into  three

portions, of which the lowest (most spinal) terminates in the auditory

ganglion and has continuations through the cornu trapezoides and the

tracts of the superior olivary body; the second can be traced as the

‘ascending’  auditory  root  of  Roller  into  what  is  known  as  Deiters’

nucleus; and the third runs into the inner auditory field of the medulla

oblongata, from which continuations into the cerebellum arise. Details

are given of the further course of these tracts so far as it has been

possible to follow them.

 

                                          XVI

 

   ‘Observation of a severe case of hemi-anaesthesia in a hysterical

male.’

   (The organ of vision was examined by Dr. Konigstein.)

 

   The case history of a 29-year-old engraver with a bad family history,

who  fell  ill  after  a  dispute  with  his  brother.  The  case  afforded  a

demonstration  of  the  symptom  of  sensible  and  sensorial  hemi-

anaesthesia in its classical form. - The disturbance in the field of vision

and in the sense of colour is reported by Dr. Königstein.

 

                                          XVII

 

   ‘Remarks on addiction to cocaine and the fear of cocaine.’

   (With reference to a lecture by W. A. Hammond.)

 

      The  employment  of  cocaine  for  the  relief  of  abstinence  from

morphine resulted in the misuse of cocaine and gave physicians an

opportunity  of  observing  the  new  clinical  picture  of  chronic  cocaine

addiction.  My  essay,  supported  by  a  pronouncement  from  an

American  neuropathologist,  seeks  to  show  that  this  addiction  to

cocaine  comes  about  only  in  addicts  to  other  drugs  (such  as

morphine) and that cocaine itself cannot be blamed for it.

 

                                          XVIII 

   ‘On hemianopsia in earliest childhood.’

 

   An observation of disturbance in one half of the visual field in two

children, aged 26 months and three and a quarter years, an age at

which  the  symptom  had  not  previously  been  medically  recorded.  A

discussion on the lateral inclination of the head and eyes which was to

be  observed  in  one  of  the  cases  and  on  the  localization  of  the

suspected lesion. Both cases are to be classed among the ‘unilateral

cerebral palsies of children’.

 


    Abstracts Of The Scientific Writings Of Dr. Sigm. Freud 1877-1897

                                                                                        442

 

                                          XIX

 

   On the Interpretation of the Aphasias, a critical study.

 

   After a firm basis for the understanding of cerebral disturbances of

speech had been established by the discovery and definite localization

of  a  motor  and  a  sensory  aphasia  (Broca  and  Wernicke),  the

authorities set about tracing the more subtle symptoms of aphasia as

well to factors of localization. In this way they arrived at the hypothesis

of a conduction aphasia, with subcortical and transcortical, and motor

and sensory forms. This critical study is directed against this view of

speech  disorders  and  it  seeks  to  introduce  for  their  explanation

functional  factors  in  place  of  the  topographical  ones.  The  forms

described as subcortical and transcortical are not to be explained by a

particular  localization  of  the  lesion  but  by  conditions  of  reduced

capacity for conduction in the apparatus of speech. In fact there are

no  aphasias  caused  by  subcortical  lesion.  The  justification  for

distinguishing  a  central  aphasia  from  a  conduction  aphasia  is  also

disputed.  The  speech  area  of  the  cortex  is  seen  rather  as  a

continuous region of the cortex inserted between the motor fields of

the cortex and those of the optic and auditory nerves--a region within

which all communication and association subserving speech functiontakes place. The so-called speech-centres revealed by the pathology

of the brain correspond merely to the corners of this field of speech;

they are not distinguished functionally from the interior regions; it is

only on account of their position in relation to the contiguous cortical

centres  that  they  produce  more  obvious  signs  when  they  become

disordered.

   The nature of the subject treated here called at many points for a

closer investigation of the delimitation between the physiological and

the psychological approach. Meynert’s and Wernicke’s views on the

localization of ideas in nervous elements have had to be rejected and

Meynert’s  account  of  a  representation  of  the  body  in  the  cerebral

cortex has required revision. Two facts of cerebral anatomy, namely

(1) that the masses of fibres entering the spinal cord are constantly

diminished  on  passing  upwards,  owing  to  the  interposition  of  grey

matter, and (2) that there are no direct paths from the periphery of the

body to the cortex - these two facts lead to the conclusion that a really

complete representation of the body is present only in the grey matter

of the cord (as a ‘projection’), whereas in the cortex the periphery of

the body is only ‘represented’ in less detail through selected fibres

arranged according to function.

 

                                          XX

 

   Clinical Studies of the Unilateral Cerebral Palsies of Children.

   (In collaboration with Dr. O. Rie.)

   (No. III of Beiträge zur Kinderheilkunde edited by Dr. M. Kassowitz.)

 

   A monograph describing this affection, based on studies of material

in the First Public Institute for Children’s Diseases in Vienna, directed

by Kassowitz. In ten sections it deals with (1) the history and literature

of the cerebral palsies of children;(2) 35 observations of the authors’

own,  which  are  then  summarized  in  tabular  form  and  described

individually; (3) the analysis of the individual symptoms of the clinical

picture;  (4)  the  pathological  anatomy;  (5)  the  relations  of  cerebral

palsy  to  epilepsy  and,  (6)  to  infantile  poliomyelitis;  (7)  differential

diagnosis and (8) therapy. A ‘choreatic paresis’ is described by the

authors for the first time; it is distinguished by peculiar characteristicsin  its  onset  and  course,  and  in  it  the  unilateral  paresis  is  from  the

beginning represented by hemichorea. There is further an account of

the findings of an autopsy (lobar sclerosis as a result of an embolism

of the middle cerebral artery) on a woman patient described in the

Iconographie de la Saltpêtrière. Emphasis is laid on the close relations

between epilepsy and the cerebral palsies of children, in consequence

of  which  some  cases  of  apparent  epilepsy  might  deserve  to  be

described  as  ‘cerebral  palsy  without  palsy’.  In  connection  with  the

much discussed question as to the existence of a polioencephalitis

acuta,  which  is  supposed  to  constitute  the  anatomical  basis  of

unilateral  cerebral  palsy  and  to  offer  a  complete  analogy  with

poliomyelitis infantilis,  the  authors  argue  against  this  hypothesis  of

Strümpell’s; but they hold firmly to the expectation that a modified view

of poliomyelitis  acuta  infantilis  will  allow  of  its  being  equated  with

cerebral  palsy  on  another  basis.  In  the  therapeutic  section  are

collected the hitherto published reports on the intervention by brain

surgeons directed to the cure of genuine or traumatic epilepsy.

 


    Abstracts Of The Scientific Writings Of Dr. Sigm. Freud 1877-1897

                                                                                        443

 

                                          XXI

 

   ‘A case of successful treatment by hypnotism with some remarks on

the origin of hysterical symptoms through "counter will".’

 

   A young woman after the birth of her first child was compelled to

give up breast-feeding it owing to a complex of hysterical symptoms

(loss of appetite, sleeplessness, pains in her breasts, failure of milk-

secretion,  agitation).  When,  after  the  birth  of  a  second  child,  these

obstacles recurred, deep hypnosis on two occasions, accompanied by

counter-suggestions,  succeeded  in  removing  the  obstacles,  so  that

the patient became an excellent nursing mother. The same result was

brought  about  a  year  later  in  similar  circumstances  after  two  more

hypnoses. Some remarks are appended on the fact that it is possible

in hysterical patients for distressing antithetic or anxious ideas to berealized which normal people are able to inhibit; several observations

of tic are traced back to this mechanism of ‘counter-will’.

 

                                          XXII

 

   ‘Charcot.’

 

   An obituary of the master of neuropathology who died in 1893 and

among whose pupils the present writer numbers himself.

 

                                          XXIII

 

      ‘On  a  symptom  which  often  accompanies enuresis  nocturna  in

children.’

 

   In perhaps half the cases of children suffering from enuresis we find

a hypertonia of the lower extremities the significance and implications

of which are unexplained.

 

                                          XXIV

 

   ‘On the psychical mechanism of hysterical phenomena.’

   (Preliminary communication in collaboration with Dr. J. Breuer.)

 

      The  mechanism  to  which  Charcot  traced  back  hystero-traumatic

paralyses, and the assumption of which enabled him to provoke them

deliberately  in  hypnotized  hysterical  patients,  can  also  be  made

responsible  for  numerous  symptoms  of  what  is  described  as  non-

traumatic hysteria. If we put the hysteric under hypnosis and lead his

thoughts  back  to  the  time  at  which  the  symptom  in  question  first

appeared,  a  memory  of  a  psychical  trauma  (or  series  of  traumas)

belonging to that time awakens in him with hallucinatory vividness, the

symptom having persisted as a mnemic symbol of the trauma. Thus

hysterics  suffer  mainly  from  reminiscences.  If  the  traumatic  scene

which  has  been  arrived  at  in  this  way  is  reproduced  vividly,

accompanied  by  a  generation  of  affect,  the  symptom  which  has

hitherto been obstinately maintained disappears. We must thereforesuppose  that  the  forgotten  memory  has  been  acting  like  a  foreign

body in the mind, with the removal of which the irritating phenomena

cease. This discovery, first made by Breuer in 1881, can be made the

basis  of  a  therapy  of  hysterical  phenomena  which  deserves  to  be

described as ‘cathartic’.

   The memories which are revealed as ‘pathogenic’, as the roots of

hysterical  symptoms,  are  regularly  ‘unconscious’  to  the  patient.  It

seems that by thus remaining unconscious they escape the wearing-

away  process  to  which  psychical  material  is  normally  subject.  A

wearing-away  of  this  sort  is  brought  about  by  the  method  of

‘abreaction’.  Pathogenic  memories  avoid  being  dealt  with  by

abreaction either because the experiences concerned have occurred

in special psychical states to which hysterical persons are inherently

inclined, or because those experiences have been accompanied by an

affect  which  brings  about  a  special  psychical  state  in  hysterical

persons. A tendency to a ‘splitting of consciousness’ is accordingly the

basic psychical phenomenon in cases of hysteria.

 


    Abstracts Of The Scientific Writings Of Dr. Sigm. Freud 1877-1897

                                                                                        444

 

                                          XXV

 

   An Account of the Cerebral Diplegias of Childhood (in Connection

with Little’s Disease.)

   (No. III, New Series, of Beiträge zur Kinderheilkunde edited by Dr.

M. Kassowitz.)

 

   A supplement to the Clinical Study of the Unilateral Cerebral Palsies

of  Children  summarized  under  XX  above.The  history,  pathological

anatomy and physiology of the affection are treated here in the same

order as in the earlier monograph, and the relevant clinical pictures

are illustrated by 53 observations made by the author himself. It was,

however, necessary in addition to take into account the range of forms

that must be described as ‘cerebral diplegias’ and to point out their

clinical similarity. In face of the differences of opinion that prevail in theliterature of these disorders, the author has adopted the standpoint of

an earlier authority, Little, and has thus arrived at the erection of four

principal types, which are described as general spasticity, paraplegic

spasticity, general chorea and bilateral athetosis, and bilateral spastic

hemiplegia (spastic diplegia).

   General spasticity includes the forms which are usually referred to

as ‘Little’s disease’. Paraplegic spasticity is the name given to what

was  earlier  regarded  as  a  spinal  affection, tabes spastica infantilis.

The  spastic  diplegias  correspond  most  easily  to  a  doubling  of

unilateral cerebral palsies, but are characterized by a superfluity of

symptoms  which  finds  its  explanation  in  the  bilateral  nature  of  the

cerebral affection. The justification for including general chorea and

bilateral  athetosis  among  these  types  is  provided  by  numerous

characteristics  of  the  clinical  picture  and  by  the  existence  of  many

mixed and transitional forms which link all these types together.

   A discussion follows of the relations of these clinical types to the

aetiological factors which are here assumed to be operative and to the

insufficient number of post-mortem findings that have been reported.

The following conclusions are reached:

   Cerebral diplegias can be divided according to their origin into (a)

those congenitally determined, (b) those arising at the time of birth

and (c) those acquired after birth. But it is extremely rarely that this

distinction can be drawn from the clinical peculiarities of the case, and

not always possible from the anamnesis. All the aetiological factors of

the  diplegias  are  enumerated:  prenatal  (trauma,  illness,  or  shock

affecting the mother, place of the child in the family); operative at the

time of birth (the factors stressed by Little, namely premature birth,

difficult labour, asphyxia); and after birth (infectious diseases, trauma

or  shock  affecting  the  child).  Convulsions  cannot  be  regarded  as

causes but only as symptoms of the affection. The aetiological part

played by inherited syphilis is recognized as important. There is no

exclusive relation between any one of these aetiologies and any one

type of cerebral diplegia, but preferential relations are often apparent.

The view that cerebral diplegias are affections with a single aetiology

is untenable.

   The pathological findings in the diplegias are of many kinds, and in

general the same as in the hemiplegias; for the most part they are inthe nature of end stages, from which it is not invariably possible to

infer  back  to  the  initial  lesions.  They  do  not  as  a  rule  allow  of  a

decision  as  to  the  aetiological  category  to  which  a  case  is  to  be

referred. Nor is it usually possible to deduce the clinical picture from

the  post-mortem  findings;  so  that  the  assumption  that  there  are

intimate and exclusive relations between clinical types and anatomical

changes must also be rejected.

   The pathological physiology of cerebral diplegias has an essential

connection  with  the  two  characteristics  by  which  both  general  and

paraplegic  spasticity  are  distinguished  from  other  manifestations  of

organic  disease  of  the  cerebrum.  For  in  both  these  clinical  forms

contracture predominates over paralysis and the lower extremities are

affected more severely than the upper ones. The discussion in this

paper reaches the conclusion that the more intense affection of the

lower  extremities  in  general  and  paraplegic  spasticity  must  be

connected with the localization of the lesion (meningeal haemorrhage

along the median fissure) and the preponderance of contracture with

the  superficiality  of  the  lesion.  The  strabismus  of  diplegic  children,

which  is  particularly  common  in  paraplegic  spasticity  and  where

premature  birth  is  the  aetiology,  is  traceable  to  the  retinal

haemorrhages in new-born children described by Königstein.

   A special section directs attention to the numerous instances of the

familial and hereditary occurrence of children’s diseases which show a

clinical affinity with cerebral diplegias.

 


    Abstracts Of The Scientific Writings Of Dr. Sigm. Freud 1877-1897

                                                                                        445

 

                                          XXVI

 

   ‘On familial forms of cerebral diplegias.’

 

   An observation of two brothers, one six and a half and the other five

years  old,  whose  parents  were  blood  relations,  and  who  present  a

complicated clinical picture which has gradually developed, in the one

case  since  birth  and  in  the  other  since  the  second  year.  Thesymptoms of this familial disorder (lateral nystagmus, atrophy of the

optic nerve, alternating convergent strabismus, monotonous and, as it

were,  scanning  speech,  intention  tremor  of  the  arms,  spastic

weakness of the legs, accompanied by high intelligence) give grounds

for constructing a new affection which is to be regarded as a spastic

counterpart  to  Friedreich’s  disease.  Emphasis  is  laid  on  the  far-

reaching  similarity  of  these  cases  to  those  described  as  multiple

sclerosis by Pelizaeus in 1885.

 

                                          XXVII

 

   ‘The cerebral diplegias of children.’

 

   A summary of the findings in the monograph abstracted above, No.

XXV.

 

                                        XXVIII

 

      ‘Some  points  for  a  comparative  study  of  organic  and  hysterical

motor paralyses.’

 

   A comparison between organic and hysterical paralyses made under

the influence of Charcot in order to arrive at a line of approach to the

nature  of  hysteria.  Organic  paralysis  is  either  periphero-spinal  or

cerebral.  On  the  basis  of  discussions  in  my  critical  study  on  the

aphasias,  the  former  is  described  as projection  paralysis  and  is

paralysis en  détail,  and  the  latter  is  described  as representation

paralysis and is paralysis en masse. Hysteria imitates only the latter

category of paralyses but has freedom to specialize which makes it

resemble projection paralysis; it can dissociate the areas of paralysis

which regularly occur in cerebral affections. Hysterical paralysis has a

tendency to excessive development; it can be extremely in tense and

yet strictly confined to a small area, while cortical paralysis regularly

increases  its  extent  with  an  increase  in  its  intensity.  Sensibility

behaves in a directly contrary manner in the two kinds of paralysis.

   The special characteristics of cortical paralysis are determined by

the peculiarities of cerebral structure, and allow us to infer back to theanatomy of the brain. Hysterical paralysis on the contrary behaves as

though there were no such thing as cerebral anatomy. Hysteria knows

nothing of the anatomy of the brain. The alteration which underlies

hysterical paralysis can have no resemblance to organic lesions but

must  be  looked  for  in  the  conditions  governing  the  accessibility  of

some particular circle of ideas.

 


    Abstracts Of The Scientific Writings Of Dr. Sigm. Freud 1877-1897

                                                                                        446

 

                                          XXIX

 

   ‘The neuro-psychoses of defence: an attempt at a psychological

theory of acquired hysteria, of many phobias and obsessions and of

certain hallucinatory psychoses.’

 

   The first of a series of short papers which now follow and which are

directed to the task of preparing a general exposition of the neuroses

on a new basis which is now in hand.

      The  splitting  of  consciousness  in  hysteria  is  not  a  primary

characteristic of this neurosis, based on degenerative weakness, as

Janet insists. It is the consequence of a peculiar psychical process

known as ‘defence’ which is shown by some short reports of analyses

to be present not only in hysteria but in numerous other neuroses and

psychoses.  Defence  comes  into  operation  when  an  instance  of

incompatibility arises in ideational life between a particular idea and

the ‘ego’. The process of may be figuratively represented as though

the  quota  of  excitation  were  torn  away  from  the  idea  that  is  to  be

repressed and put to some other use. This can occur in a variety of

ways: in hysteria the liberated sum of excitation is transformed into

somatic innervation (conversion hysteria); in obsessional neurosis it

remains in the psychical field and attaches itself to other ideas which

are not incompatible in themselves and which are thus substitutes for

the repressed idea. The source of the incompatible ideas which are

subjected to defence is solely and exclusively sexual life. An analysis

of  a  case  of  hallucinatory  psychosis  shows  that  this  psychosis  toorepresents a method of achieving defence.

 

                                          XXX

 

   ‘Obsessions and phobias: their psychical mechanism and aetiology.’

 

   Obsessions and phobias are to be distinguished from neurasthenia

as  independent  neurotic  affections.  In  both  it  is  a  question  of  the

linkage between an idea and an affective state. In phobias the latter is

always  the  same,  namely  anxiety;  in  true  obsessions  it  can  be  of

various kinds (self-reproach, sense of guilt, doubt, etc.). The affective

state  emerges  as  the  essential  element  of  the  obsession,  since  it

remains unaltered in the individual case, whereas the idea attached to

it  is  changed.  Psychical  analysis  shows  that  the  affect  of  the

obsession is justified in every instance, but that the idea attached to it

represents a substitute for an idea derived from sexual life which is

more  appropriate  to  the  affect  and  which  has  succumbed  to

repression.  This  state  of  affairs  is  illustrated  by  numerous  short

analyses of cases of folie du doute, washing mania, arithmomania,

etc., in which the reinstatement of the repressed idea was successful

and accompanied by useful therapeutic effects. The phobias in the

strict  sense  are  reserved  for  the  paper  on  anxiety  neurosis  (No.

XXXII).

 


    Abstracts Of The Scientific Writings Of Dr. Sigm. Freud 1877-1897

                                                                                        447

 

                                          XXXI

 

   Studies on Hysteria.

   (In collaboration with Dr. J. Breuer.)

 

   This volume contains the carrying-through of the subject raised in

the ‘Preliminary Communication’ (No. XXIV) dealing with the psychical

mechanism of hysterical phenomena. Although it proceeds from the

joint work of the two authors, it is divided into separate sections, ofwhich four detailed case histories together with discussions and an

attempt  at  a  ‘Psychotherapy  of  Hysteria’  represent  my  share.  The

aetiological part played by the sexual factor is stressed with greater

emphasis in this book than in the ‘Preliminary Communication’, and

the concept of ‘conversion’ is used to throw light on the formation of

hysterical  symptoms.  The  essay  on  psychotherapy  seeks  to  give

some  insight  into  the  technique  of  the  psycho-analytic  procedure,

which  is  alone  able  to  lead  to  the  investigation  of  the  unconscious

content  of  the  mind,  and  the  employment  of  which  may  also  be

expected to lead to important psychological discoveries.

 

                                          XXXII

 

    ‘On  the  grounds  for  detaching  a  particular  syndrome  from

neurasthenia under the description "anxiety neurosis".’

 

      The  concurrence  of  a  constant  grouping  of  symptoms  with  a

particular aetiological determinant makes it possible to pick out from

the composite province of ‘neurasthenia’ a syndrome which deserves

the name of ‘anxiety neurosis’, because all of its constituents arise

from the symptoms of anxiety. These are either to be regarded as

immediate manifestations of anxiety or as rudiments and equivalents

of them (E. Hecker), and they are often in complete opposition to the

symptoms which constitute neurasthenia proper. The aetiology of the

two neuroses also points to an opposition of this kind. Whereas true

neurasthenia  arises  from  spontaneous  emissions  or  is  acquired

through masturbation, the factors belonging to the aetiology of anxiety

neurosis are such as correspond to a holding back of sexual excitation

-  such  as  abstinence  when  libido  is  present,  unconsummated

excitation and, above all, coitus interruptus. In actual life the neuroses

here distinguished usually appear in combination, though pure cases

can  also  be  demonstrated.  When  a  mixed  neurosis  of  this  kind  is

subjected to analysis, it is possible to indicate a mixture of several

specific aetiologies.

      An  attempt  to  arrive  at  a  theory  of  anxiety  neurosis  leads  to  a

formula  to  the  effect  that  its  mechanism  lies  in the  deflection  of

somatic sexual excitation from the psychical field and a consequentabnormal  employment  of  that  excitation. Neurotic  anxiety  is

transformed sexual libido.

 


    Abstracts Of The Scientific Writings Of Dr. Sigm. Freud 1877-1897

                                                                                        448

 

                                        XXXIII

 

   ‘A reply to criticisms of my paper on anxiety neurosis.’

 

   A reply to objections made by Löwenfeld to the content of No. XXXII.

The problem of the aetiology of the pathology of the neuroses is dealt

with here, to justify the division into three categories of the aetiological

factors  that  appear:  (a)  preconditions,  (b)  specific  causes  and  (c)

concurrent or auxiliary causes. What are called preconditions are the

factors which, though they are indispensable for producing the effect,

cannot  by  themselves  produce  it  but  need  in  addition  the  specific

causes. The specific causes are distinguished from the preconditions

by the fact that they figure in only a few aetiological formulas, while

the preconditions play the same part in numerous affections. Auxiliary

causes are such as neither need invariably be present nor are able by

themselves to produce the effect in question. - In the case of neuroses

it is possible that the precondition may be heredity; the specific cause

lies in sexual factors; everything else that is brought up apart from

these as forming the aetiology of the neuroses (overwork, emotion,

physical illness) is an auxiliary cause and can never entirely take the

place  of  the  specific  factor,  though  it  can  no  doubt  serve  as  a

substitute  for  it  in  the  matter  of quantity.  The  form  of  a  neurosis

depends on the nature of the specific sexual cause; whether there

shall  be  a  neurotic  illness at all  is  determined  by  factors  operating

quantitatively; heredity works like a multiplier inserted in an electric

circuit.

 

                                        XXXIV

 

   ‘On Bernhardt’s disturbance of sensibility in the thigh.’ 

      A  self-observation  of  this  harmless  affection,  which  is  probably

traceable to local neuritis; and a report of some other cases, including

bilateral ones.

 


    Abstracts Of The Scientific Writings Of Dr. Sigm. Freud 1877-1897

                                                                                        449

 

                                          XXXV

 

   ‘Further remarks on the neuro-psychoses of defence.’

 

      (1) The  specific  aetiology  of  hysteria.  A  continuation  of  psycho-

analytic work with hysterical subjects has had the uniform result of

showing that the suspected traumatic events (as mnemic symbols of

which  hysterical  symptoms  persist)  occur  in  the  patients’ earliest

childhood and are to be described as sexual abuses in the narrowest

sense.

      (2) The  nature  and  mechanism  of  obsessional  neurosis.

Obsessional ideas are invariably transformed self-reproaches which

have re-emerged from repression and which always relate to some

sexual act that was performed with pleasure in childhood. The course

taken by this return of the repressed is traced, as are the results of a

primary and secondary work of defence.

   (3) Analysis of a case of chronic paranoia. This analysis, which is

reported  in  detail,  indicates  that  the  aetiology  of  paranoia  is  to  be

found in the same sexual experiences of early childhood in which the

aetiology of hysteria and of obsessional neurosis has already been

discovered. The symptoms of this case of paranoia are traced in detail

to the activities of defence.

 

                                        XXXVI

 

   ‘The aetiology of hysteria.’

 

   More detailed reports of the infantile sexual experiences which havebeen shown to constitute the aetiology of the psychoneuroses. In their

content  these  experiences  must  be  described  as  ‘perversions’,  and

those responsible are as a rule to be looked for among the patient’s

nearest  relatives.  A  discussion  of  the  difficulties  which  have  to  be

surmounted  in  uncovering  these  repressed  memories  and  of  the

objections  that  may  be  raised  against  the  results  thus  arrived  at.

Hysterical  symptoms  are  shown  to  be  derivatives  of  memories

operating unconsciously; they appear only in collaboration with such

memories.  The  presence  of  infantile  sexual  experiences  is  an

indispensable condition if the efforts of defence (which occur in normal

people as well) are to result in producing pathogenic effects - that is to

say, neuroses.

 


    Abstracts Of The Scientific Writings Of Dr. Sigm. Freud 1877-1897

                                                                                        450

 

                                        XXXVII

 

   ‘Heredity and the aetiology of the neuroses.’

 

   The findings hitherto arrived at by psycho-analysis on the aetiology

of the neuroses are here employed to criticize the current theories of

the omnipotence of heredity in neuropathology. The part played by

heredity  has  been  overestimated  in  several  directions.  Firstly,  by

including among the inheritable neuropathic illnesses conditions such

as headaches, neuralgias, etc., which are very probably attributable

as  a  rule  to  organic  affections  of  the  cranial  cavities  (the  nose).

Secondly,  by  regarding  every  discoverable  nervous  ailment  among

relatives  as  evidence  of  hereditary  taint  and  by  thus  from  the  first

leaving no room for acquired neuropathic illnesses which can possess

no  similar  evidential  weight.  Thirdly,  the  aetiological  role  of  syphilis

has  been  misunderstood  and  the  nervous  ailments  deriving  from  it

have  been  put  down  to  the  account  of  heredity.  But  in  addition,  a

general objection is permissible against a form of heredity which is

described as ‘dissimilar inheritance’ (or inheritance with a change in

the  form  of  the  illness),  and  to  which  a  far  more  important  part  isallotted than to ‘similar’ inheritance. But when the fact of hereditary

taint  in  a  family  is  demonstrated  in  its  members  being  affected

alternatively  by  every  sort  of  nervous  complaint  -  chorea,  epilepsy,

hysteria, apoplexy, etc. - without any more precise determinants, then

either  we  need  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  according  to  which  these

complaints replace one another or else room is left for the individual

aetiologies which determine precisely the choice of the neuropathic

state  which  in  fact  results  from  them.  If  such  particular  aetiologies

exist,  they  are  the  specific  causes,  so  much  sought  after,  of  the

various different clinical forms, and heredity is pushed back into the

role of a requirement or precondition.

 


    Abstracts Of The Scientific Writings Of Dr. Sigm. Freud 1877-1897

                                                                                        451

 

                                        XXXVIII

 

   Infantile Cerebral Palsies.

 

   This is a summary of the two works on the same theme published in

1891 and 1893, together with the additions and alterations which have

since  become  necessary.  These  affect  the  chapter  on poliomyelitis

acuta,  which  has  meantime  been  recognized  as  a  non-systematic

disease, on encephalitis as an initial process of spastic hemiplegia,

and on the interpretation of cases of paraplegic spasticity, the cerebral

nature of which affection may recently have been placed in doubt. A

special  discussion  is  concerned  with  the  attempts  to  split  up  the

content of the cerebral diplegias into several clearly divided clinical

entities, or at least to separate what is known as ‘Little’s disease’ as a

clinical  individual  from  among  the  medley  of  forms  of  similar

affections. The difficulties which meet such attempts are pointed out,

and it is maintained as the only justifiable view that ‘infantile cerebral

palsy’ shall be retained at present as a collective clinical concept for a

whole number of similar affections with an exogenous aetiology. The

rapid  increase  in  observations  of  familial  and  hereditary  nervous

disorders  of  children,  which  resemble  infantile  cerebral  palsiesclinically at many points, has made it a pressing matter to collect these

new forms and to attempt to draw a fundamental distinction between

them and infantile cerebral palsies.

 


    Abstracts Of The Scientific Writings Of Dr. Sigm. Freud 1877-1897

                                                                                        452

 

                                      APPENDIX

 

                    A. Works written under my influence.

 

E.  Rosenthal, Contribution  à  létude  des  diplégies  cérérebrales  de

l’enfance. Thèse de Lyon. (Médaille d’argent.) (1892.)

L.  Rosenberg, Casuistische  Beiträge  zur  Kenntnis  der  cerebralen

Kinderlähmungen und der Epilepsie. (No. IV, New Series, of Beiträge

zur Kinderheilkunde, edited by Kassowitz.) (1893.)

 

                        B. Translations from the French.

 

J.-M  Charcot, Neue  Vorlesungen  über  die  Krankheiten  des

Nervensystems,  insbesondere  über  Hysterie.  (Toeplitz  &  Deuticke,

Vienna.)

H  Bernheim, Die  Suggestion  und  ihre  Heilwirkung.  (Fr.  Deuticke,

Vienna.) (Second Edition, 1896.)

H  Bernheim, Neue  Studien  über  Hypnotismus,  Suggestion  und

Psychotherapie. (Fr. Deuticke, Vienna.)

J.-M Charcot, Poliklinische Vortrage. Vol. I. (Leçons du Mardi.) With

notes by the translator. (Fr. Deuticke, Vienna.)

                                                                                         453

 

          SEXUALITY IN THE AETIOLOGY OF THE NEUROSES

                                        (1898)

 


                                                                                        454

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                        455

 

          SEXUALITY IN THE AETIOLOGY OF THE NEUROSES

 

Exhaustive  researches  during  the  last  few  years  have  led  me  to

recognize  that  the  most  immediate  and,  for  practical  purposes,  the

most  significant  causes  of  every  case  of  neurotic  illness  are  to  be

found in factors arising from sexual life. This theory is not entirely new.

A certain amount of importance has been allowed to sexual factors in

the  aetiology  of  the  neuroses  from  time  immemorial  and  by  every

writer on the subject. In certain marginal regions of medicine a cure for

‘sexual  complaints’  and  for  ‘nervous  weakness’  has  always  been

promised in the same breath. When once the validity of the theory

ceases  to  be  denied,  therefore,  it  will  not  be  hard  to  dispute  its

originality.

   In a few short papers which have appeared during the last years in

the Neurologisches  Zentralblatt,  the Revue  Neurolgique  and  the

Wiener klinische Rundschau, I have tried to give an indication of the

material and the points of view which offer scientific support for the

theory of the ‘sexual aetiology of the neuroses’. A full presentation is,

however, still wanting, mainly because, in endeavouring to throw light

on what is recognized as the actual state of affairs, we come upon

ever  fresh  problems  for  the  solution  of  which  the  necessary

preliminary work has not been done. It does not seem to me at all

premature,  however,  to  attempt  to  direct  the  attention  of  medical

practitioners  to  what  I  believe  to  be  the  facts  so  that  they  mayconvince themselves of the truth of my assertions and at the same

time of the benefits they may derive in their practice from a knowledge

of them.

   I am aware that efforts will be made, by the use of arguments with

an ethical colouring, to prevent the physician from pursuing the matter

further. Anyone who wants to make certain whether or not his patients’

neuroses  are  really  connected  with  their  sexual  life  cannot  avoid

asking them about their sexual life and insisting upon receiving a true

account of it. But in this, it is asserted, lies the danger both for the

individual and society. A doctor, I hear it being said, has no right to

intrude  upon  his  patients’  sexual  secrets  and  grossly  injure  their

modesty (especially with women patients) by an interrogation of this

sort.  His  clumsy  hand  can  only  ruin  family  happiness,  offend  the

innocence  of  young  people  and  encroach  upon  the  authority  of

parents;  and  where  adults  are  concerned  he  will  come  to  share

uncomfortable  knowledge  and  destroy  his  own  relations  to  his

patients. It is therefore his ethical duty, the conclusion is, to keep away

from the whole business of sex.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        456

 

   To this one may well reply that it is the expression of a prudery

which is unworthy of a physician and which inadequately conceals its

weakness behind bad arguments. If factors arising out of sexual life

must really be acknowledged to be causes of illness, then, for that

very reason, investigation and discussion of them automatically falls

within the sphere of a physician’s duty. The injury to modesty of which

he is guilty in this is no different and no worse, one would imagine,

than when he insists on examining a woman’s genital organs in order

to cure a local affection - a demand on which he is pledged to insist by

his medical training itself. Even now one often hears elderly women

who have spent their youth in the provinces tell of how at one time

they  were  reduced  to  a  state  of  exhaustion  by  excessive  genital

haemorrhages, because they could not make up their minds to allow a

doctor  to  see  their  nakedness.  The  educative  influence  which  hasbeen exercised on the public by the medical world has, in the course

of one generation, so altered things that an objection of this sort is an

extremely rare occurrence among the young women of to-day. If it

were to occur, it would be condemned as unreasonable prudery, as

modesty in the wrong place. Are we living in Turkey, a husband would

ask, where all that a sick woman may show to the physician is her arm

through a hole in the wall?

   It is not true that interrogation of his patients and knowledge about

their sexual concerns give the physician a dangerous degree of power

over them. It was possible in earlier times for the same objection to be

made against the uses of anaesthetics, which deprive the patient of

his consciousness and of the exercise of his will and leave it to the

doctor to decide whether and when he shall regain them. And yet to-

day anaesthetics have become indispensable to us because they are

able,  better  than  anything  else,  to  assist  the  doctor  in  his  medical

work; and among his many other serious obligations, he has taken

over the responsibility for their use.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        457

 

   A doctor can always do harm if he is unskilful or unscrupulous, and

this is no more and no less true where it is a question of investigating

his patients’ sexual life than it is in other things. Naturally, if someone,

after an honest self-examination, feels that he does not possess the

tact, seriousness and discretion which are necessary for questioning

neurotic  patients,  and  if  he  is  aware  that  revelations  of  a  sexual

character would provoke lascivious thrills in him rather than scientific

interest, then he will be right to avoid the topic of the aetiology of the

neuroses. All we ask, in addition, is that he should also refrain from

treating nervous patients.

   Nor is it true that patients put insuperable obstacles in the way of an

investigation into their sexual life. After some slight hesitation, adults

usually adjust themselves to the situation by saying: ‘After all, I’m at

the doctor’s; I can say anything to him.’ A great many women who find

it difficult enough to go through life concealing their sexual feelings,are  relieved  to  find  that  with  the  doctor  no  other  consideration

outweighs that of their recovery, and they are grateful to him that for

once they are allowed to behave quite humanly about sexual things. A

dim knowledge of the overwhelming importance of sexual factors in

the production of neuroses (a knowledge which I am trying to capture

afresh  for  science)  seems  never  to  have  been  lost  in  the

consciousness of laymen. How often do we witness scenes like this: A

married couple, one of whom is suffering from a neurosis, comes to us

for  consultation.  After  we  have  made  a  great  many  introductory

remarks  and  apologies  to  the  effect  that  no  conventional  barriers

should exist between them and the doctor who wants to be of use in

such cases, and so on, we tell them that we suspect that the cause of

the  illness  lies  in  the  unnatural  and  detrimental  form  of  sexual

intercourse  which  they  must  have  chosen  since  the  wife’s  last

confinement.  We  tell  them  that  doctors  do  not  as  a  rule  concern

themselves with such matters, but that that is reprehensible of them,

even though the patients do not want to be told about things like that,

etc. Thereupon one of the couple nudges the other and says: ‘You

see! I told you all along it would make me ill.’ And the other answers:

‘Well, I know, I thought so too; but what is one to do?’

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        458

 

   In certain other circumstances, such as when one is dealing with

young girls, who, after all, are systematically brought up to conceal

their sexual life, one will have to be content with a very small measure

of  sincere  response  on  the  part  of  the  patient.  But  an  important

consideration  comes  into  play  here  namely  that  a  doctor  who  is

experienced in these things does not meet his patients unprepared

and as a rule does not have to ask them for information but only for a

confirmation of his surmises. Anyone who will follow my indications as

to how to elucidate the morphology of the neuroses and translate it

into  aetiological  terms,  will  need  the  addition  of  very  few  further

admissions  from  his  patients;  in  the  very  description  of  their

symptoms, which they are only too ready to give, they have usuallyacquainted  him  at  the  same  time  with  the  sexual  factors  that  are

hidden behind.

   It would be a great advantage if sick people had a better knowledge

of the certainty with which a doctor is now in a position to interpret

their neurotic complaints and to infer from them their operative sexual

aetiology. It would undoubtedly spur such people on to abandon their

secretiveness  from  the  moment  they  have  made  up  their  minds  to

seek help for their sufferings. Moreover, it is in the interest of all of us

that a higher degree of honesty about sexual things should become a

duty  among  men  and  women  than  has  hitherto  been  expected  of

them.  This  cannot  be  anything  but  a  gain  for  sexual  morality.  In

matters of sexuality we are at present, every one of us, ill or well,

nothing but hypocrites. It will be all to our good if, as a result of such

general  honesty,  a  certain  amount  of  toleration  in  sexual  concerns

should be attained.

      Doctors  usually  take  very  little  interest  in  a  good  many  of  the

questions  which  are  discussed  among  neuropathologists  in

connection with the neuroses: whether, for instance, one is justified in

making  a  strict  differentiation  between  hysteria  and  neurasthenia,

whether one may distinguish hystero-neurasthenia alongside of them,

whether  obsessions  should  be  classed  with  neurasthenia  or

recognized  as  a  separate  neurosis,  and  so  on.  And,  indeed,  such

distinctions may well be a matter of indifference to a practitioner, so

long as no further consequences follow from the decisions arrived at -

no deeper insight and no pointers for therapeutic treatment - and so

long as the patient will in every instance be sent off to a hydropathic

establishment, and be told that there is nothing the matter with him.

But it will be a different thing if our point of view about the causative

relations  between  sexuality  and  the  neuroses  is  adopted.  Fresh

interest is then aroused in the symptomatology of the different neurotic

cases, and it becomes of practical importance that one should be able

correctly to break down the complicated picture into its components

and correctly to name them. For the morphology of the neuroses can

with little difficulty be translated into aetiology and a knowledge of the

latter leads on quite naturally to new indications for methods of cure.

                   Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        459

 

   Now the important decision we have to make - and this can be done

with certainty in every instance if the symptoms are carefully assessed

- is whether the case bears the characteristics of neurasthenia or of a

psychoneurosis (hysteria, obsessions).(Mixed cases in which signs of

neurasthenia are combined with signs of a psychoneurosis are of very

frequent occurrence; but we will leave consideration of them till later.)

It  is  only  in  neurasthenias  that  questioning  the  patient  succeeds  in

disclosing the aetiological factors in his sexual life. These factors are,

of  course,  known  to  him  and  belong  to  the  present  time,  or,  more

properly, to the period of his life since sexual maturity (though this

delimitation  does  not  cover  every  case).  In  psychoneuroses

questioning  of  this  kind  has  little  result.  It  may  perhaps  give  us  a

knowledge of the factors which have to be recognized as precipitating

ones, and these may or may not be connected with sexual life. If they

are,  they  show  themselves  to  be  no  different  in  kind  from  the

aetiological  factors  of  neurasthenia;  that  is,  they  entirely  lack  any

specific relation to the causation of the psychoneurosis. And yet, in

every instance, the aetiology of the psychoneuroses, too, lies in the

field of sexuality. By a curious circuitous path, of which I shall speak

later, it is possible to arrive at a knowledge of this aetiology and to

understand why the patient was unable to tell us anything about it. For

the  events  and  influences  which  lie  at  the  root  of  every

psychoneurosis, belong, not to the present day, but to an epoch of life

which is long past and which is, as it were, a prehistoric one-to the

time of early childhood; and that is why the patient, too, knows nothing

of them. He has - though only in a particular sense - forgotten them.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        460

 

   Thus, in every case of neurosis there is a sexual aetiology; but in

neurasthenia it is an aetiology of a present-day kind, whereas in the

psychoneuroses the factors are of an infantile nature. This is the first

great  contrast  in  the  aetiology  of  the  neuroses.  1  A  second  oneemerges when we take account of a difference in the symptomatology

of neurasthenia itself. Here, on the one hand, we find cases in which

certain  complaints  characteristic  of  neurasthenia  (intracranial

pressure,  proneness  to  fatigue,  dyspepsia,  constipation,  spinal

irritation, etc.) are prominent; in other cases these signs play a minor

part  and  the  clinical  picture  is  composed  of  other  symptoms,  all  of

which exhibit a relation to the nuclear symptom, that of anxiety (free

anxiousness,  unrest,  expectant  anxiety,  complete,  rudimentary  or

supplementary  anxiety  attacks,  locomotor  vertigo,  agoraphobia,

insomnia,  increased  sensitivity  to  pain,  and  so  on).  I  have  left  the

name  of  neurasthenia  to  the  first  type,  but  have  distinguished  the

second type as ‘anxiety neurosis’; and I have given reasons for this

separation in another place, where I have also taken account of the

fact  that  as  a  rule  both  neuroses  appear  together.  For  the  present

purpose it is enough to emphasize that parallel to the difference in the

symptoms of these two forms of illness there goes a difference in their

aetiology. Neurasthenia can always be traced back to a condition of

the nervous system such as is acquired by excessive masturbation or

arises  spontaneously  from  frequent  emissions;  anxiety  neurosis

regularly discloses sexual influences which have in common the factor

of  reservation  or  of  incomplete  satisfaction  -  such  as  coitus

interruptus,  abstinence  together  with  a  lively  libido,  so-called

unconsummated excitation, and so on. In my short paper intended to

introduce  anxiety  neurosis  I  put  forward  the  formula  that  anxiety  is

always libido which has been deflected from its employment.

   Where there is a case in which symptoms of neurasthenia and of

anxiety neurosis are combined - where, that is, we have a mixed case

- we have only to keep to our proposition, empirically arrived at, that a

mingling of neuroses implies the collaboration of several aetiological

factors, and we shall find our expectation confirmed in every instance.

How  often  these  aetiological  factors  are  linked  with  one  another

organically, through the interplay of sexual processes - for instance,

coitus interruptus or insufficient potency in the man, going along with

masturbation - would well deserve separate discussion.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses                                                                                        461

 

   Having diagnosed a case of neurasthenic neurosis with certainty

and having classified its symptoms correctly, we are in a position to

translate the symptomatology into aetiology; and we may then boldly

demand confirmation of our suspicions from the patient. We must not

be  led  astray  by  initial  denials.  If  we  keep  firmly  to  what  we  have

inferred, we shall in the end conquer every resistance by emphasizing

the unshakeable nature of our convictions. In this way we learn all

sorts of things about the sexual life of men and women, which might

well fill a useful and instructive volume; and we learn, too, to regret

from  every  point  of  view  that  sexual  science  is  even  to-day  still

regarded as disreputable. Since minor deviations from a normal vita

sexualis  are  much  too  common  for  us  to  attach  any  value  to  their

discovery,  we  shall  only  allow  a  serious  and  long  continued

abnormality in the sexual life of a neurotic patient to carry weight as an

explanation. Moreover, the idea that one might, by one’s insistence,

cause a patient who is psychically normal to accuse himself falsely of

sexual misdemeanours - such an idea may safely be disregarded as

an imaginary danger.

   If one proceeds in this manner with one’s patients, one also gains

the  conviction  that,  so  far  as  the  theory  of  the  sexual  aetiology  of

neurasthenia is concerned, there are no negative cases. In my mind,

at  least,  the  conviction  has  become  so  certain  that  where  an

interrogation  has  shown  a  negative  result,  I  have  turned  this  to

account too for diagnostic purposes. I have told myself, that is, that

such a case cannot be one of neurasthenia. In this way I have been

led  in  several  instances  to  assume  the  presence  of  progressive

paralysis  instead  of  neurasthenia,  because  I  had  not  succeeded  in

establishing the fact - a fact that was necessary for my theory - that

the patient indulged very freely in masturbation; and the further course

of  those  cases  later  confirmed  my  view.  In  another  instance  the

patient,  who  exhibited  no  clear  organic  changes,  complained  of

intracranial  pressure,  headaches  and  dyspepsia,  but  countered  my

suspicions about his sexual life straightforwardly and with unshaken

certainty;  and  the  possibility  occurred  to  me  that  he  might  have  a

latent suppuration in one of his nasal sinuses. A specialist colleagueof mine confirmed this inference I had made from the negative sexual

results  of  my  interrogation,  by  removing  the  pus  from  the  patient’s

antrum and relieving him of his ailments.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        462

 

   The appearance of there nevertheless being ‘negative cases’ can

arise in another way as well. Sometimes an interrogation discloses the

presence of a normal sexual life in a patient whose neurosis, on a

superficial view, does in fact closely resemble neurasthenia or anxiety

neurosis. But a more deep -going investigation regularly reveals the

true state of affairs. Behind such cases, which have been taken for

neurasthenia,  there  lies  a  psychoneurosis  -  hysteria  or  obsessional

neurosis.  Hysteria  in  especial,  which  imitates  so  many  organic

affections, can easily assume the appearance of one of the ‘actual

neuroses’  by  elevating  the  latter’s  symptoms  into  hysterical  ones.

Such hysterias in the form of neurasthenia are not even very rare.

Falling back on psychoneurosis when a case of neurasthenia shows a

negative sexual result, is, however, no cheap way out of the difficulty;

the proof that we are right is to be obtained by the method which alone

unmasks hysteria with certainty - the method of psycho-analysis, to

which we shall refer presently.

   There may perhaps be some, however, who are quite willing to

recognize the sexual aetiology in their neurasthenic patients, but who

nevertheless blame it as one-sidedness if they are not asked to pay

attention as well to the other factors which are always mentioned by

the authorities as causes of neurasthenia. Now it would never occur to

me  to  substitute  a  sexual  aetiology  in  neuroses  for  every  other

aetiology, and so to assert that the latter have no operative force. This

would be a misunderstanding. What I think is rather that in addition to

all the familiar aetiological factors which have been recognized - and

probably correctly so - by the authorities as leading to neurasthenia,

the  sexual  factors,  which  have  not  hitherto  been  sufficiently

appreciated,  should  also  be  taken  into  account.  In  my  opinion,

however, these sexual factors deserve to be given a special place inthe aetiological series. For they alone are never absent in any case of

neurasthenia,  they  alone  are  capable  of  producing  the  neurosis

without any further assistance, so that those other factors seem to be

reduced to the role of an auxiliary and supplementary aetiology, and

they  alone  allow  the  physician  to  recognize  firm  relations  between

their manifold nature and the multiplicity of the clinical pictures. If, on

the other hand, I group together all the patients who have ostensibly

become neurasthenic from overwork, emotional agitation, as an after-

effect of typhoid fever, and so on, they show me nothing in common in

their symptoms. The nature of their aetiology gives me no idea of what

kind  of  symptoms  to  expect,  any  more  than,  conversely,  does  the

clinical picture they present enable me to infer what aetiology is at

work in them.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        463

 

   The sexual causes, too, are the ones which most readily offer the

physician a foothold for his therapeutic influence. Heredity is no doubt

an important factor, when it is present; it enables a strong pathological

effect to come about where otherwise only a very slight one would

have resulted. But heredity is inaccessible to the physician’s influence;

everyone is born with his own hereditary tendencies to illness, and we

can  do  nothing  to  change  them.  Nor  should  we  forget  that  it  is

precisely in regard to the aetiology of the neurasthenias that we must

necessarily deny the first place to heredity. Neurasthenia (in both its

forms)  is  one  of  those  affections  which  anyone  may  easily  acquire

without having any hereditary taint. If it were otherwise, the enormous

increase in neurasthenia, of which all the authorities complain, would

be  unthinkable.  In  what  concerns  civilization,  among  whose  sins

people  so  often  include  responsibility  for  neurasthenia,  these

authorities may indeed be right (although the way in which this comes

about is probably quite different from what they imagine). Yet the state

of our civilization is, once again, something that is unalterable for the

individual. Moreover this factor, being common to all the members of

the  same  society,  can  never  explain  the  fact  of  selectivity  in  theincidence  of  the  illness.  The  physician  who  is  not  neurasthenic  is

exposed to the same influence of an allegedly detrimental civilization

as the neurasthenic patient whom he has to treat. Subject to these

limitations, the factors of exhaustion retain their significance. But the

element of ‘overwork’, which physicians are so fond of producing to

their  patients  as  the  cause  of  their  neurosis,  is  too  often  unduly

misused. It is quite true that anyone who, owing to sexual noxae, has

made himself disposed to neurasthenia, tolerates intellectual work and

the  psychical  exigencies  of  life  badly;  but  no  one  ever  becomes

neurotic through work or excitement alone. Intellectual work is rather a

protection against falling ill of neurasthenia; it is precisely the most

unremitting  intellectual  workers  who  remain  exempt  from

neurasthenia, and what neurasthenics complain of as ‘overwork that is

making them ill’  does not as a rule deserve to be called ‘intellectual

work’ at all, either in its quality or quantity. Physicians will have to

become accustomed to explaining to an office-worker who has been

‘overworked’  at  his  desk  or  to  a  housewife  for  whom  her  domestic

activities have become too heavy, that they have fallen ill, not because

they have tried to carry out duties which are in fact easily performed

by a civilized brain, but because all the while they have been grossly

neglecting and damaging their sexual life.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        464

 

   Furthermore, it is only the sexual aetiology which makes it possible

for  us  to  understand  all  the  details  of  the  clinical  history  of

neurasthenics,  the  mysterious  improvements  in  the  middle  of  the

course of the illness and the equally incomprehensible deteriorations,

both of which are usually related by doctors and patients to whatever

treatment has been adopted. In my records, which include more than

two hundred cases, there is, for instance, the story of a man who,

when the treatment prescribed by his family physician had done him

no good, went to Pastor Kneipp and for a year after being treated by

him showed an extraordinary improvement in the middle of his illness.

But when, a year later, his symptoms grew worse once more and heagain  went  to  Wörishofen  for  help,  the  second  treatment  was

unsuccessful.  A  glance  into  the  patient’s  family  record  solved  the

double  riddle.  Six  and  a  half  months  after  his  first  return  from

Wörishofen his wife bore him a child. This meant that he had left her

at the beginning of a pregnancy of which he was not yet aware; after

his return he was able to practise natural intercourse with her. At the

close of this period, which had a curative effect on him, his neurosis

was started up afresh by his once more resorting to coitus interruptus;

the  second  treatment  was  bound  to  prove  a  failure,  since  this

pregnancy of his wife’s remained her last.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        465

 

   There was a similar case, in which, once again, the treatment had

an unexpected effect which called for an explanation. This case turned

out to be still more instructive, for it exhibited a puzzling alternation in

the symptoms of the neurosis. A young neurotic patient had been sent

by his physician to a reputable hydropathic establishment on account

of a typical neurasthenia. There his condition steadily improved at first,

so that there was every prospect that he would be discharged as a

grateful  disciple  of  hydrotherapy.  But  in  the  sixth  week  a  complete

change  occurred;  the  patient  ‘could  no  longer  tolerate  the  water’,

became  more  and  more  nervous,  and  finally  left  the  establishment

after two more weeks, uncured and dissatisfied. When he complained

to me about this therapeutic fraud I asked him a few questions about

the symptoms which had overtaken him in the middle of the treatment.

Curiously enough, a complete change had come over them. He had

entered  the  sanatorium  with  intracranial  pressure,  fatigue  and

dyspepsia;  what  had  troubled  him during  the  treatment  were

excitement, attacks of dyspnoea, vertigo in walking, and disturbances

of sleep. I was now able to say to him: ‘You are doing hydrotherapy an

injustice. As you yourself very well knew, you fell ill as a result of long-

continued masturbation. In the sanatorium you gave up this form of

satisfaction, and therefore you quickly recovered. When you felt well,

however, you unwisely sought to have relations with a lady - a fellow-patient, let us suppose - which could only lead to excitement without

normal satisfaction. The beautiful walks in the neighbourhood of the

establishment  gave  you  ample  opportunity  for  this.  It  was  this

relationship,  not  a  sudden  inability  to  tolerate  hydrotherapy,  which

caused you to fall ill once more. Moreover, your present state of health

leads me to conclude that you are continuing this relationship here in

town as well.’ I can assure my readers that the patient confirmed what

I said, point by point.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        466

 

   The present treatment of neurasthenia - which is, perhaps, carried

out most successfully in hydropathic establishments - has as its aim

the  amelioration  of  the  nervous  condition  by  means  of  two  factors:

shielding  the  patient  and  strengthening  him.  I  have  nothing  to  say

against such a method of treatment, except that it takes no account of

the  circumstances  of  the  patient’s  sexual  life.  According  to  my

experience,  it  is  highly  desirable  that  the  medical  directors  of  such

establishments should become properly aware that they are dealing,

not with victims of civilization or heredity, but - sit venia verbo - with

people who are crippled in sexuality. They would then, on the one

hand, be more easily able to account for their successes as well as

their failures; and, on the other, they would achieve new successes

which, till now, have been at the mercy of chance or of the patient’s

unguided behaviour. If we take a neurasthenic woman, suffering from

anxiety,  away  from  her  home  and  send  her  to  a  hydropathic

establishment, and if there, freed from all duties, she is made to bathe

and take exercise and eat plenty of food, we shall certainly be inclined

to think that the improvement - often a brilliant one - which is achieved

in a few weeks or months is due to the rest which she has enjoyed

and to the invigorating effects of hydrotherapy. That may be so: but

we are overlooking the fact that her removal from home also entails an

interruption  of  marital  intercourse,  and  that  it  is  only  the  temporary

elimination of this pathogenic cause which makes it possible for her to

recover under favourable treatment. Neglect of this aetiological pointof  view  brings  its  subsequent  revenge,  when  what  seemed  such  a

gratifying cure turns out to be a very transitory one. Soon after the

patient has returned to ordinary life the symptoms of the complaint

appear  once  more  and  oblige  him  either  to  spend  a  part  of  his

existence unproductively from time to time in establishments of this

kind or to direct his hopes of recovery elsewhere. It is therefore clear

that with neurasthenia the therapeutic problems must be attacked, not

in hydropathic institutions but within the framework of the patient’s life.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        467

 

      In  other  cases  our  aetiological  theory  can  help  the  physician  in

charge  of  the  institution  by  throwing  light  on  the  source  of  failures

which occur in the institution itself, and can suggest to him means of

avoiding them. Masturbation is far commoner among grown-up girls

and  mature  men  than  is  generally  supposed,  and  it  has  a  harmful

effect not only by producing neurasthenic symptoms, but also because

it  keeps  the  patients  under  the  weight  of  what  they  feel  to  be  a

disgraceful  secret.  Physicians  who  are  not  accustomed  to  translate

neurasthenia into masturbation account for the patient’s pathological

state  by  referring  it  to  some  catchword  like  anaemia,

undernourishment,  overwork,  etc.,  and  then  expect  to  cure  him  by

applying  a  therapy  devised  against  those  conditions.  To  their

astonishment, however, periods of improvement in him alternate with

periods in which all his symptoms grow worse and are accompanied

by severe depression. The outcome of such a treatment is, in general,

doubtful.  If  physicians  knew  that  all  the  while  the  patient  was

struggling against his sexual habit and that he was in despair because

he had once more been obliged to give way to it, if they understood

how to win his secret from him, to make it less serious in his eyes and

to support him in his fight against the habit, then the success of their

therapeutic efforts might in this way well be assured.

   To break the patient of the habit of masturbating is only one of the

new therapeutic tasks which are imposed on the physician who takes

the sexual aetiology of the neurosis into account; and it seems thatprecisely this task, like the cure of any other addiction, can only be

carried  out  in  an  institution  and  under  medical  supervision.  Left  to

himself,  the  masturbator  is  accustomed,  whenever  something

happens  that  depresses  him,  to  return  to  his  convenient  form  of

satisfaction. Medical treatment, in this instance, can have no other aim

than to lead the neurasthenic, who has now recovered his strength,

back to normal sexual intercourse. For sexual need, when once it has

been aroused and has been satisfied for any length of time, can no

longer  be  silenced;  it  can  only  be  displaced  along  another  path.

Incidentally, the same thing applies to all treatments for breaking an

addiction. Their success will only be an apparent one, so long as the

physician  contents  himself  with  withdrawing  the  narcotic  substance

from his patients, without troubling about the source from which their

imperative need for it springs. ‘Habit’ is a mere form of words, without

any  explanatory  value.  Not  everyone  who  has  occasion  to  take

morphia, cocaine, chloral hydrate, and so on, for a period, acquires in

this  way  an  ‘addiction’  to  them.  Closer  enquiry  usually  shows  that

these  narcotics  are  meant  to  serve  -  directly  or  indirectly  -  as  a

substitute  for  a  lack  of  sexual  satisfaction;  and  whenever  normal

sexual  life  can  no  longer  be  re-established,  we  can  count  with

certainty on the patient’s relapse.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        468

 

      Another  task  is  set  to  the  physician  by  the  aetiology  of  anxiety

neurosis. It consists in inducing the patient to give up all detrimental

forms of sexual intercourse and to adopt normal sexual relations. This

duty,  it  will  be  understood,  falls  primarily  on  the  patient’s  trusted

physician - his family doctor; and he will do his patient a serious injury

if he regards himself as too respectable to intervene in this field.

   Since in these instances it is most often a question of a married

couple, the physician’s efforts at once encounter Malthusian plans for

limiting the number of conceptions in marriage. There seems to me no

doubt that such proposals are gaining ground more and more among

our  middle  classes.  I  have  come  across  some  couples  who  havealready begun practising methods for preventing conception as soon

as they have had their first child, and others whose sexual intercourse

was from their wedding-night designed to comply with that purpose.

The problem of Malthusianism is far-reaching and complicated, and I

have no intention of handling it here in the exhaustive manner which

would actually be necessary for the treatment of neuroses. I shall only

consider  what  attitude  a  physician  who  recognizes  the  sexual

aetiology of the neuroses had best take up towards the problem.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        469

 

   The worst thing he can do is obviously - under whatever pretext - to

try to ignore it. Nothing that is necessary can be beneath my dignity as

a  doctor;  and  it  is  necessary  to  give  a  married  couple  who

contemplate limiting the number of their offspring the assistance of

one’s medical advice if one does not want to expose one or both of

them  to  a  neurosis.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  in  any  marriage

Malthusian preventive measures will become necessary at some time

or other; and, from a theoretical point of view, it would be one of the

greatest  triumphs  of  humanity,  one  of  the  most  tangible  liberations

from the constraints of nature to which mankind is subject, if we could

succeed in raising the responsible act of procreating children to the

level of a deliberate and intentional activity and in freeing it from its

entanglement with the necessary satisfaction of a natural need.

      A  perspicacious  physician  will  therefore  take  it  upon  himself  to

decide  under  what  conditions  the  use  of  measures  for  preventing

conception are justified, and, among those measures, he will have to

separate the harmful from the harmless ones. Everything is harmful

that  hinders  the  occurrence  of  satisfaction.  But,  as  we  know,  we

possess at present no method of preventing conception which fulfils

every legitimate requirement - that is, which is certain and convenient,

which does not diminish the sensation of pleasure during coitus and

which does not wound the woman’s sensibilities. This sets physicians

a practical task to the solution of which they could bend their energies

with  rewarding  results.  Whoever  fills  in  this  lacuna  in  our  medicaltechnique will have preserved the enjoyment of life and maintained the

health of numberless people; though, it is true, he will also have paved

the way for a drastic change in our social conditions.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        470

 

   This does not exhaust the possibilities which flow from a recognition

of the sexual aetiology of the neuroses. The main benefit which we

obtain from it for neurasthenics lies in the sphere of prophylaxis. If

masturbation is the cause of neurasthenia in youth, and if, later on, it

acquires  aetiological  significance  for  anxiety  neurosis  as  well,  by

reason  of  the  reduction  of  potency  which  it  brings  about,  then  the

prevention of masturbation in both sexes is a task that deserves more

attention than it has hitherto received. When we reflect upon all the

injuries,  both  the  grosser  and  the  finer  ones,  which  proceed  from

neurasthenia - a disorder which we are told is growing more and more

prevalent - we see that it is positively a matter of public interest that

men should enter upon sexual relations with full potency. In matters of

prophylaxis, however, the individual is relatively helpless. The whole

community must become interested in the matter and give their assent

to the creation of generally acceptable regulations. At present we are

still  far  removed  from  such  a  state  of  affairs  which  would  promise

relief,  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  we  may  with  justice  regard

civilization, too, as responsible for the spread of neurasthenia. Much

would  have  to  be  changed.  The  resistance  of  a  generation  of

physicians  who  can  no  longer  remember  their  own  youth  must  be

broken down; the pride of fathers, who are unwilling to descend to the

level of humanity in their children’s eyes, must be overcome; and the

unreasonable prudery of mothers must be combated - the mothers

who at present look upon it as an incomprehensible and undeserved

stroke of fate that ‘their children should have been the ones to become

neurotic’. But above all, a place must be created in public opinion for

the discussion of the problems of sexual life. It will have to become

possible to talk about these things without being stamped as a trouble-

maker or as a person who makes capital out of the lower instincts.And so here, too, there is enough work left to do for the next hundred

years - in which our civilization will have to learn to come to terms with

the claims of our sexuality.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        471

 

      The  value  of  making  a  correct  diagnostic  separation  of  the

psychoneuroses from neurasthenia is also shown by the fact that the

psychoneuroses  call  for  a  different  practical  assessment  and  for

special therapeutic measures. They make their appearance as a result

of two kinds of determinants, either independently or in the train of the

‘actual  neuroses’  (neurasthenia  and  anxiety  neurosis).  In  the  latter

case we are dealing with a new type of neurosis - incidentally, a very

frequent one - a mixed neurosis. The aetiology of the ‘actual neuroses’

has become an auxiliary aetiology of the psychoneuroses. A clinical

picture arises in which, let us say, anxiety neurosis predominates but

which  also  contains  traits  of  genuine  neurasthenia,  hysteria  and

obsessional neurosis. When confronted with a mixture of this kind, we

shall nevertheless not be wise to give up separating out the clinical

pictures proper to each neurotic illness; for after all it is not difficult to

explain the case to oneself in the following manner. The predominant

place taken by the anxiety neurosis shows that the illness has come

into being under the aetiological influence of an ‘actual’ sexual noxa.

But the person concerned was, apart from that, disposed to one or

more of the psychoneuroses owing to a special aetiology and would at

some  time  or  other  have  fallen  ill  of  a  psychoneurosis  either

spontaneously or with the advent of some other weakening factor. In

this way the auxiliary aetiology for the psychoneurosis which is still

lacking is supplied by the actual aetiology of the anxiety neurosis.

   For such cases it has quite correctly come to be the therapeutic

practice  to  disregard  the  psychoneurotic  components  in  the  clinical

picture  and  to  treat  the  ‘actual  neurosis’  exclusively.  In  very  many

cases  it  is  possible  to  overcome  the  neurosis  as  well  which  it  has

brought along with it, provided that the neurasthenia is effectively dealt

with.  But  a  different  view  must  be  taken  in  those  cases  ofpsychoneurosis which either appear spontaneously or remain behind

as an independent entity after an illness composed of neurasthenia

and  psychoneurosis  has  run  its  course.  When  I  speak  of  a

‘spontaneous’ appearance of a psychoneurosis, I do not mean that

anamnestic investigation shows us no aetiological element whatever.

It may do so, no doubt; but it may also happen that our attention is

directed  to  some  indifferent  factor  -  an  emotional  state,  an

enfeeblement owing to physical illness, and so on. It must, however,

be  borne  in  mind  in  all  these  cases  that  the  true  aetiology  of  the

psychoneuroses does not lie in such precipitating causes, but remains

beyond the reach of ordinary anamnestic examination.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        472

 

      As  we  know,  it  is  in  an  attempt  to  bridge  this  gap  that  the

assumption  has  been  made  of  a  special  neuropathic  disposition

(which,  incidentally,  if  it  existed,  would  not  leave  much  hope  of

success  for  the  treatment  of  such  pathological  conditions).  The

neuropathic  disposition  itself  is  regarded  as  a  sign  of  a  general

degeneracy, and thus this convenient technical term has come to be

superabundantly  used  against  the  wretched  patients  whom  the

doctors are quite incapable of helping. Fortunately, the state of affairs

is  different.  The  neuropathic  disposition  does  no  doubt  exist,  but  I

must deny that it suffices for the creation of a psychoneurosis. I must

further  deny  that  the  conjunction  of  a  neuropathic  disposition  with

precipitating  causes  occurring  in  later  life  constitutes  an  adequate

aetiology of the psychoneuroses. In tracing back the vicissitudes of an

individual’s illness to the experiences of his ancestors, we have gone

too  far;  we  have  forgotten  that  between  his  conception  and  his

maturity there lies a long and important period of life - his childhood -

in which the seeds of later illness may be acquired. And that- is what

in fact happens with a psychoneurosis. Its true aetiology is to be found

in  childhood  experiences,  and,  once  again  -  and  exclusively  -  in

impressions concerned with sexual life. We do wrong to ignore the

sexual life of children entirely; in my experience, children are capableof every psychical sexual activity, and many somatic sexual ones as

well. Just as the whole human sexual apparatus is not comprised in

the  external  genitals  and  the  two  reproductive  glands,  so  human

sexual life does not begin only with puberty, as on a rough inspection

it may appear to do. Nevertheless it is true that the organization and

evolution of the human species strives to avoid any great degree of

sexual  activity  during  childhood.  It  seems  that  in  man  the  sexual

instinctual forces are meant to be stored up so that, on their release at

puberty,  they  may  serve  great  cultural  ends.  (W.  Fliess.)

Consideration of this sort may make it possible to understand why the

sexual  experiences  of  childhood  are  bound  to  have  a  pathogenic

effect. But they produce their effect only to a very slight degree at the

time at which they occur; what is far more important is their deferred

effect,  which  can  only  take  place  at  later  periods  of  growth.  This

deferred  effect  originates  -  as  it  can  do  in  no  other  way  -  in  the

psychical  traces  which  have  been  left  behind  by  infantile  sexual

experiences.  During  the  interval  between  the  experiences  of  those

impressions and their reproduction (or rather, the reinforcement of the

libidinal  impulses  which  proceed  from  them),  not  only  the  somatic

sexual apparatus but the psychical apparatus as well has undergone

an important development; and thus it is that the influence of these

earlier  sexual  experiences  now  leads  to  an  abnormal  psychical

reaction, and psychopathological structures come into existence.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        473

 

   I can do no more in these brief hints than mention the chief factors

on  which  the  theory  of  the  psychoneuroses  is  based:  the  deferred

nature of the effect and the infantile state of the sexual apparatus and

of  the  mental  instrument.  To  reach  a  true  understanding  of  the

mechanism  by  which  the  psychoneuroses  come  about,  a  more

extended  exposition  would  be  necessary.  Above  all,  it  would  be

indispensable to put forward as worthy of belief certain hypotheses,

which seem to me to be new, about the composition and mode of

operation of the psychical apparatus. In a book on the interpretation ofdreams on which I am now engaged I shall find occasion to touch

upon those fundamental elements of a psychology of the neuroses.

For dreams belong to the same set of psychopathological structures

as hysterical idées fixes, obsessions, and delusions.

      Since  the  manifestations  of  the  psychoneuroses  arise  from  the

deferred action of unconscious psychical traces, they are accessible

to  psychotherapy.  But  in  this  case  the  therapy  must  pursue  paths

other than the only one so far followed of suggestion with or without

hypnosis. Basing myself on the ‘cathartic’ method introduced by Josef

Breuer,  I  have  in  recent  years  almost  completely  worked  out  a

therapeutic  procedure  which  I  propose  to  describe  as  ‘psycho-

analytic’. I owe a great number of successes to it, and I hope I may be

able  further  to  increase  it  effectiveness  considerably.  The  first

accounts of the technique and scope of this method were given in

Studies on Hysteria, written jointly with Breuer and published in 1895.

Since then a good deal, as I think I may say, has been altered for the

better.  Whereas  at  that  time  we  modestly  declared  that  we  could

undertake to only to remove the symptoms of hysteria, not to cure

hysteria itself, this distinction has since come to seem to me without

substance, so that there is a prospect of a genuine cure of hysteria

and obsessions. It is therefore with very lively interest that I have read

in  the  publications  of  colleagues  that  ‘in  this  case  the  ingenious

procedure  devised  by  Breuer  and  Freud  has  failed’,  or  that  ‘the

method has not performed what it seemed to promise’. This gave me

something of the feelings of a man who reads his own obituary in the

paper, but who is able to reassure himself by his better knowledge of

the facts. For the method is so difficult that it has quite definitely to be

learned;  and  I  cannot  recall  that  a  single  one  of  my  critics  has

expressed a wish to learn it from me. Nor do I believe that, like me,

they have occupied themselves with it intensely enough to have been

able  to  discover  it  for  themselves.  The  remarks  in  the Studies  on

Hysteria  are  totally  inadequate  to  enable  a  reader  to  master  the

technique, nor are they in any way intended to give any such complete

instruction.

   Psycho-analytic therapy is not at present applicable to all cases. It

has, to my knowledge, the following limitations. It demands a certain

degree of maturity and understanding in the patient and is thereforenot  suited  for  the  young  or  for  adults  who  are  feeble-minded  or

uneducated. It also fails with people who are very advanced in years,

because, owing to the accumulation of material in them, it would take

up so much time that by the end of the treatment they would have

reached  a  period  of  life  in  which  value  is  no  longer  attached  to

nervous health. Finally, the treatment is only possible if the patient has

a normal psychical state from which the pathological material can be

mastered from which to work i.e. a relatively normal ego. During a

condition  of  hysterical  confusion,  or  an  interpolated  mania  or

melancholia, nothing can be effected by psycho-analytic means. Such

cases  can  nevertheless  be  treated  by  analysis  after  the  violent

manifestations have been quieted by the usual measures. In actual

practice,  chronic  cases  of  psychoneurosis  are  altogether  more

amenable to the method than cases with acute crises, in which the

greatest stress is naturally laid on the speed with which the crises can

be dealt with. For this reason, the most favourable field of work for this

new therapy is offered by hysterical phobias and the various forms of

obsessional neurosis.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        474

 

   That the method is confined within these limits is to a large extent

explained  by  the  circumstances  in  which  I  had  to  work  it  out.  My

material does in fact consist of chronic nervous cases derived from the

more educated classes. I think it very probable that supplementary

methods may be devised for treating children and the public who go

for assistance to hospitals. I ought also to say that up to the present I

have tried my treatment exclusively on severe cases of hysteria and

obsessional neurosis; I cannot tell how it would turn out with those

mild  cases  which,  to  all  appearance  at  least,  are  cured  by  some

unspecific kind of treatment lasting for a few months. It will readily be

understood  that  a  new  therapy  which  calls  for  many  sacrifices  can

only reckon on obtaining patients who have already tried the generally

accepted methods without success, or whose condition has justified

the inference that they could expect nothing from these supposedlymore  convenient  and  shorter  therapeutic  procedures.  Thus  it

happened that I was obliged to tackle the hardest tasks straightaway

with  an  imperfect  instrument.  The  test  has  proved  all  the  more

convincing.

      The  main  difficulties  which  still  stand  in  the  way  of  the  psycho-

analytic method of cure. It is no more than a necessary corollary to

this complete ignorance that doctors consider themselves justified in

using  the  most  unfounded  assurances  for  the  consolation  of  their

patients or in order to induce them to adopt therapeutic measures.

‘Come to my sanatorium for six weeks’, they will say, ‘and you will get

rid  of  your  symptoms’  (travel  anxiety,  obsessions,  and  so

on).Sanatoria are, it is true, indispensable for calming acute attacks

that  may  arise  in  the  course  of  a  psychoneurosis  by  diverting  the

patient’s attention, nursing him and taking care of him. But towards

removing chronic conditions they achieve precisely nothing: and the

superior sanatoria, which are supposed to be conducted on scientific

lines, do no more than the ordinary hydropathic establishments.

 


                  Sexuality In The Aetiology Of The Neuroses

                                                                                        475

 

   It would be more dignified as well as more helpful to the patient -

who, after all, has to come to terms with his ailments - for the doctor to

tell  the  truth,  as  he  knows  it  from  his  daily  practice.  The

psychoneuroses as a genus are by no means mild illnesses. When

hysteria sets in, no one can foretell when it will come to an end. We

mostly comfort ourselves with the vain prophecy that ‘one day it will

suddenly disappear’. Recovery often enough turns out to be merely an

agreement to mutual toleration between the sick part of the patient

and  the  healthy  part;  or  it  is  the  result  of  the  transformation  of  a

symptom into a phobia. A girl’s hysteria, calmed down with difficulty,

revives in her as a wife after the short interruption of young married

happiness. The only difference is that another person, the husband, is

now driven by his own interests to keep silence about her condition.

Even if an illness of this kind leads to no manifest incapacity on the

patients’  part  to  carry  on  their  life,  it  nearly  always  prevents  freeunfolding of their mental powers. Obsessions recur throughout their

lives; and phobias and other restrictions upon the will have hitherto

been unamenable to treatment of any kind. All this is kept from the

knowledge  of  the  layman.  The  father  of  a  hysterical  girl  is

consequently  horrified  if,  for  instance,  he  is  asked  to  agree  to  her

being given a year’s treatment, when she has perhaps only been ill for

a few months. The layman is, as it were, deeply convinced in himself

that  all  these  psychoneuroses  are  unnecessary;  so  he  has  no

patience with the processes of the illness and no readiness to make

sacrifices for its treatment. If, in face of a case of typhus which lasts

three weeks, or of a broken leg which takes six months to mend, he

adopts  a  more  understanding  attitude,  and  if,  as  soon  as  his  child

shows the first signs of a curvature of the spine, he finds it reasonable

that orthopaedic treatment should be carried on over several years,

the difference in his behaviour is due to the better knowledge on the

part of the physicians who pass on their knowledge honestly to the

layman. Honesty on the part of the physician and willing acquiescence

on the part of the layman will be established for the neuroses too, as

soon  as  an  insight  into  the  nature  of  those  affections  becomes

common  property  in  the  medical  world.  Radical  treatment  of  these

disorders  will  no  doubt  always  require  special  training  and  will  be

incompatible with other kinds of medical activity. On the other hand,

this class of physicians, which will, I believe, be a large one in the

future,  has  the  prospect  of  achieving  noteworthy  results  and  of

obtaining a satisfying insight into the mental life of mankind.

                                                                                         476

 

          THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM OF FORGETFULNESS

                                        (1898)

 


                                                                                        477

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                        478

 

          THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM OF FORGETFULNESS

 

The phenomenon of forgetfulness, which I should like to describe and

then go on to explain in this paper, has doubtless been experienced

by everyone in himself or been observed by him in others. It affects in

particular the use of proper names - nomen propria - and it manifests

itself  in  the  following  manner.  In  the  middle  of  carrying  on  a

conversation we find ourselves obliged to confess to the person we

are talking to that we cannot hit on a name we wanted to mention at

that moment, and we are forced to ask for his - usually ineffectual -

help. ‘What is his name? I know it so well. It’s on the tip of my tongue.

Just this minute it’s escaped me.’ An unmistakable feeling of irritation,

similar  to  that  which  accompanies  motor  aphasia,  now  attends  our

further efforts to find the name, which we feel we had in our head only

a  moment  before.  In  appropriate  instances  two  accompanying

features  deserve  our  notice.  First,  an  energetic  deliberate

concentration of the function which we call attention proves powerless,

however long it is continued, to find the lost name. Secondly, in place

of  the  name  we  are  looking  for,  another  name  promptly  appears,

which  we  recognize  as  incorrect  and  reject,  but  which  persists  in

coming back. Or else, instead of a substituted name, we find in our

memory a single letter or syllable, which we. We say, for instance: ‘It

begins with a "B".’ If we finally succeed, in one way or another, in

discovering what the name is, we find in the great majority of cases

that it does not begin with a ‘B’ and does not in fact contain the letter‘B’ at all.

 


                  The Psychical Mechanism Of Forgetfulness

                                                                                        479

 

   The best procedure for getting hold of the missing name is, as is

generally known, ‘not to think of it’ - that is, to divert from the task that

part  of  the  attention  over  which  one  has  voluntary  control.  After  a

while, the missing name ‘shoots’ into one’s mind; one cannot prevent

oneself from calling it out aloud - to the great astonishment of one’s

companion, who has already forgotten the episode and who has in

any case only taken very little interest in the speaker’s efforts. ‘Really,’

he is apt to say, ‘it makes no difference what the man is called; only

go on with your story.’ The whole of the time until the matter is cleared

up, and even after the intentional diversion, one feels preoccupied to a

degree which cannot in fact be explained by the amount of interest

possessed by the whole affair.¹

   In a few cases which I have myself experienced of forgetting names

in  this  way,  I  have  succeeded,  by  means  of  psychical  analysis,  in

accounting to myself for the chain of events; and I shall now describe

in detail the simplest and clearest case of this kind.

   During my summer holidays I once went for a carriage drive from the

lovely city of Ragusa to a town nearby in Herzegovina. Conversation

with my companion centred, as was natural, round the condition of the

two  countries  (Bosnia  and  Herzegovina)  and  the  character  of  their

inhabitants. I talked about the various peculiarities of the Turks living

there, as I had heard them described years before by a friend and

colleague who had lived among them as a doctor for many years. A

little  later,  our  conversation  turned  to  the  subject  of  Italy  and  of

pictures, and I had occasion to recommend my companion strongly to

visit Orvieto some time, in order to see the frescoes there of the end of

the world and the Last Judgement, with which one of the chapels in

the cathedral had been decorated by a great artist. But the artist’s

name escaped me and I could not recall it. I exerted my powers of

recollection, made all the details of the day I spent in Orvieto pass

before my memory and convinced myself that not the smallest part ofit had been obliterated or become indistinct. On the contrary, I was

able to conjure up the pictures with greater sensory vividness than is

usual  with  me.  I  saw  before  my  eyes  with  especial  sharpness  the

artist’s self-portrait - with a serious face and folded hands - which he

has put in a corner of one of the pictures, next to the portrait of his

predecessor  in  the  work,  Fra  Angelico  da  Fiesole;  but  the  artist’s

name, ordinarily so familiar to me, remained obstinately in hiding, nor

could my travelling companion help me out. My continued efforts met

with no success beyond bringing up the names of two other artists,

who I knew could not be the right ones. These were Botticelli and, in

the second place, Boltraffio.² The repetition of the sound ‘Bo’ in the

two substitutive names might perhaps have led a novice to suppose

that it belonged to the missing name as well, but I took good care to

steer clear of that expectation.

 

   ¹ Nor by any feeling of unpleasure one may have at being inhibited in a psychical act.

   ² The first of these names was very familiar to me; the second, on the other hand, I hardly

knew.

 


                  The Psychical Mechanism Of Forgetfulness

                                                                                        480

 

   Since I had no access to any reference books on my journey, I had

for several days to put up with this lapse of memory and with the inner

torment associated with it which recurred at frequent intervals each

day, until I fell in with a cultivated Italian who freed me from it by telling

me  the  name: Signorelli.  I  was  myself  able  to  add  the  artist’s first

name, Luca. Soon my ultra-clear memory of the master’s features, as

depicted in his portrait, faded away.

   What influences had led me to forget the name Signorelli which was

so familiar to me and which is so easily impressed on the memory?

And what paths had led to its replacement by the names Botticelli and

Boltraffio? A short excursion back into the circumstances in which the

forgetting had taken place sufficed to throw a light on both questions.

      Shortly  before  I  had  come  to  the  subject  of  the  frescoes  in  the

cathedral  at  Orvieto,  I  had  been  telling  my  travelling-companion

something I had heard from my colleague years ago about the Turksin Bosnia. They treat doctors with special respect and they show, in

marked contrast to our own people, an attitude of resignation towards

the dispensations of fate. If the doctor has to inform the father of a

family that one of his relatives is about to die, his reply is: ‘Herr, what

is there to be said? If he could be saved, I know you would help him.’

Another recollection lay in my memory close to this story. The same

colleague  had  told  me  what  overriding  importance  these  Bosnians

attached to sexual enjoyments. One of his patients said to him once:

‘Herr, you must know, that if that comes to an end then life is of no

value.’  At  the  time,  it  seemed  to  the  doctor  and  me  that  the  two

character-traits  of  the  Bosnian  people  illustrated  by  this  could  be

assumed  to  be  intimately  connected  with  each  other.  But  when  I

remembered these stories on my drive into Herzegovina, I suppressed

the second one, in which the subject of sexuality was touched on. It

was soon after this that the name Signorelli escaped me and that the

names Botticelli and Boltraffio appeared as substitutes.

   The influence which had made the name Signorelli inaccessible to

memory, or, as I am accustomed to say, had ‘repressed’ it, could only

proceed from the story I had suppressed about the value set on death

and sexual enjoyment. If that was so, we ought to be able to discover

the intermediate ideas which had served to connect the two themes.

The  affinity  between  their content  -  in  the  one  case,  the  Last

Judgement, ‘Doomsday’, and in the other, death and sexuality- seems

to be very slight; and since the matter concerned the repression from

memory  of  a name,  it  was  on  the  face  of  it  probable  that  the

connection was between one name and another. Now, ‘Signor’ means

‘Herr,  and  the  ‘Herr’  is  also  present  in  the  name  ‘Herzegovina’.

Moreover it was certainly not without relevance that both the patients’

remarks which I was to recall contained a ‘Herr’ as a form of address

to the doctor. The translation of ‘Signor’ into ‘Herr’ was therefore the

means by which the story that I had suppressed had drawn after it into

repression the name I was looking for. The whole process was clearly

made easier by the fact that during the last few days in Ragusa I had

been  speaking  Italian  continually  -  that  is,  that  I  had  become

accustomed to translating German into Italian in my head.¹

   When I tried to recover the name of the artist, to bring it back out of

repression, the influence of the tie which the name had entered into inthe meantime inevitably made itself felt. I did find an artist’s name, but

not  the  right  one.  It  was  a  displaced  name,  and  the  line  of

displacement was laid down by the names that were contained in the

repressed  topic.  ‘Botticelli’  contains  the  same  final  syllables  as

‘Signorelli’; the final syllables - which, unlike the first part of the word,

‘Signor’,  could  not  make  a  direct  connection  with  the  name

‘Herzegovina’ - had therefore returned; but the influence of the name

‘Bosnia’, which is regularly associated with the name ‘Herzegovina’,

had  shown  itself  by  directing  the  substitution  to  two  artists’  names

which  began  with  the  same  syllable  ‘Bo’:  ‘Botticelli’  and  then

‘Boltraffio’. The finding of the name ‘Signorelli’ is thus seen to have

been  interfered  with  by  the  topic  which  lay  behind  it,  in  which  the

names ‘Bosnia’ and ‘Herzegovina’ appear.

 

     ¹ ‘A  far-fetched,  forced  explanation’,  it  will  be  said.  This  impression  to  establish  a

connection with what is not suppressed; and for this purpose it does not scorn even the path
of external association. There is the same ‘forced’ situation when rhymes have to be made.

 


                  The Psychical Mechanism Of Forgetfulness

                                                                                        481

 

   For this topic to have been able to produce such effects it is not

enough that I should have suppressed it once in conversation - an

event brought about by chance motives. We must assume rather that

the  topic  itself  was  also  intimately  bound  up  with  trains  of  thought

which  were  in  a  state  of  repression  in  me  -  that  is,  with  trains  of

thought which, in spite of the intensity of the interest taken in them,

were  meeting  with  a  resistance  that  was  keeping  them  from  being

worked over by a particular psychical agency and thus from becoming

conscious. That this was really true at that time of the topic of ‘death

and sexuality’ I have plenty of evidence, which I need not bring up

here, derived from my own self-investigation. But I may draw attention

to  one  consequence  of  these  repressed  thoughts.  Experience  has

taught  me  to  require  that  every  psychical  product  shall  be  fully

elucidated  and  even  overdetermined.  Accordingly,  it  seemed  to  me

that  the  second  substitutive  name,  ‘Boltraffio’,  called  for  a  further

determination; for so far only its initial letters had been accounted for,by  their  assonance  with  ‘Bosnia’.  I  now  recollected  that  these

repressed thoughts had never engrossed me more than they had a

few weeks before after I had received a certain piece of news. The

place where the news reached me was called ‘Trafoi’ and this name is

too much like the second half of the name ‘Boltraffio’ not to have had a

determining effect on my choice of the latter. In the following small

schematic diagram, I have attempted to reproduce the relations which

have now been brought to light.

 















 

                                          Fig. 1

 


                  The Psychical Mechanism Of Forgetfulness

                                                                                        482

 

   It is perhaps not without interest for its own sake to be able to see

into the history of a psychical event of this kind, which is among the

most trivial disturbances that can affect the control of the psychical

apparatus and which is compatible with an otherwise untroubled state

of  psychical  health.  But  the  example  elucidated  here  receives  an

immensely added interest when we learn that it may serve as nothing

more nor less than a model for the pathological processes to which

the psychical symptoms of the psychoneuroses - hysteria, obsessions

and  paranoia  -  owe  their  origin.  In  both  cases  we  find  the  same

elements and the same play of forces between those elements. In thesame  manner  as  here  and  by  means  of  similar  superficial

associations,  a  repressed  train  of  thought  takes  possession  in

neuroses of an innocent recent impression and draws it down with

itself  into  repression.  The  same  mechanism  which  causes  the

substitute names ‘Botticelli’ and ‘Boltraffio’ to emerge from  ‘Signorelli’

(a substitution by means of intermediate or compromise ideas) also

governs  the  formation  of  obsessional  thoughts  and  paranoic

paramnesias. Again, we have seen that such cases of forgetfulness

have  the  characteristic  of  liberating  continuous  unpleasure  till  the

moment the problem is solved - a characteristic which is unintelligible

apart from this, and something which was in fact unintelligible to the

person I was talking to; but there is a complete analogy to it in the way

in  which  collections  of  repressed  thoughts  attach  their  capacity  for

producing affect to some symptom whose psychical content seems to

our judgement totally unsuited to such a liberation of affect. Finally,

the resolution of the whole tension by a communication of the correct

name from an external quarter is itself a good example of the efficacy

of psycho-analytic therapy, which aims at correcting the repressions

and displacements and which removes the symptoms by re-instating

the genuine psychical object.

 


                  The Psychical Mechanism Of Forgetfulness

                                                                                        483

 

   Among the various factors, therefore, which contribute to a failure in

recollection or a loss of memory, the part played by repression must

not be overlooked; and it can be demonstrated not only in neurotics

but (in a manner that is qualitatively the same) in normal people as

well. It may be asserted quite generally that the ease (and ultimately

the faithfulness, too) with which a given impression is awakened in the

memory  depends  not  only  on  the  psychical  constitution  of  the

individual,  the  strength  of  the  impression  when  it  was  fresh,  the

interest directed towards it at the time, the psychical constellation at

the present time, the interest that is now devoted to its awakening, the

connections into which the impression has been drawn, and so on -

not only on such things but also on the favourable or unfavourableattitude  of  a  particular  psychical  factor  which  refuses  to  reproduce

anything  that  might  liberate  unpleasure,  or  that  might  subsequently

lead  to  the  liberation  of  unpleasure.  Thus  the  function  of  memory,

which we like to regard as an archive open to anyone who is curious,

is in this way subjected to restriction by a trend of the will, just as is

any part of our activity directed to the external world. Half the secret of

hysterical amnesia is uncovered when we say that hysterical people

do  not  know  what  they  do  not want  to  know;  and  psycho-analytic

treatment, which endeavours to fill up such gaps of memory in the

course of its work, leads us to the discovery that the bringing back of

those lost memories is opposed by a certain resistance which has to

be  counterbalanced  by  work  proportionate  to  its  magnitude.  In  the

case of psychical processes which are on the whole normal, it cannot,

of course, be claimed that the influence of this one-sided factor in the

revival  of  memories  in  any  way  regularly  overcomes  all  the  other

factors that must be taken into account.¹

 

   ¹ It would be a mistake to believe that the mechanism which I have brought to light in these

pages  only  operates  in  rare  cases.  It  is,  on  the  contrary,  a  very  common  one.  On  one
occasion,  for  instance,  when  I  was  meaning  to  describe  the  same  small  incident  to  a
colleague of mine, the name of my authority for the stories about Bosnia suddenly escaped
me. The reason for this was as follows. Just before, I had been playing cards. My authority
was called Pick. Now ‘Pick’ and ‘Herz’ are two of the four suits in the pack. Moreover the two
words were connected by an anecdote in which this same person pointed to himself and said:
‘I’m not called "Herz", but "Pick".’ ‘Herz’ appears in the name ‘Herzegovina’ and the heart
itself, as a sick bodily organ, played a part in the thoughts I have described as having been
repressed.
 


                  The Psychical Mechanism Of Forgetfulness

                                                                                        484

 

   In connection with the tendentious nature of our remembering and

forgetting,  I  not  long  ago  experienced  an  instructive  example  -

instructive because of what it betrayed - of which I should like to add

an account here. I was intending to pay a twenty-four-hour visit to a

friend of mine who unfortunately lives very far away, and I was full of

the  things  I  was  going  to  tell  him.  But  before  this  I  felt  under  an

obligation to call on a family of my acquaintance in Vienna, one of

whose members had moved to the town in question, so as to taketheir greetings and messages with me to the absent relative. They told

me the name of the pension in which he lived, and also the name of

the  street  and  the  number  of  the  house,  and,  in  view  of  my  bad

memory, wrote the address on a card, which I put in my wallet. The

next day, when I had arrived at my friend’s, I began: ‘I’ve only one

duty to carry out that may interfere with our being together; it’s a call,

and it shall be the first thing I do. The address is in my wallet.’ To my

astonishment, however, it was not to be found there. So now I had to

fall  back  on  my  memory,  after  all.  My  memory  for  names  is  not

particularly  good,  but  it  is  incomparably  better  than  for  figures  and

numbers. I may have been paying medical visits at a certain house for

a year on end, and yet, if I should have to be driven there by a cab

driver,  I  should  have  difficulty  in  remembering  the  number  of  the

house. But in this case I had taken special note of the house number;

it was ultra-clear, as if to jeer at me - for no trace remained in my

recollection of the name of the pension or the street. I had forgotten all

the data in the address which might have served as a starting - point

for discovering the pension; and, quite against my usual habit, I had

retained the number of the house, which was useless for the purpose.

In  consequence,  I  was  unable  to  make  the  call.  I  was  consoled

remarkably quickly, and I devoted myself entirely to my friend. When I

was back again in Vienna and standing in front of my writing desk, I

knew without a moment’s hesitation where it was that, in my ‘absent-

mindedness’,  I  had  put  the  card  with  the  address  on  it.  In  my

unconscious hiding of the thing the same intention had been operative

as in my curiously modified act of forgetting.

                                                                                         485

 

                                  SCREEN MEMORIES

                                        (1899)

 


                                                                                        486

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                        487

 

                                  SCREEN MEMORIES

 

In the course of my psycho-analytic treatment of cases of hysteria,

obsessional neurosis, etc., I have often had to deal with fragmentary

recollections which have remained in the patient’s memory from the

earliest  years  of  his  childhood.  As  I  have  shown  elsewhere,  great

pathogenic importance must be attributed to the impressions of that

time  of  life.  But  the  subject  of  childhood  memories  is  in  any  case

bound to be of psychological interest, for they bring into striking relief

a fundamental difference between the psychical functioning of children

and of adults. No one calls in question the fact that the experiences of

the  earliest  years  of  our  childhood  leave  ineradicable  traces  in  the

depths  of  our  minds.  If,  however,  we  seek  in  our memories  to

ascertain what were the impressions that were destined to influence

us to the end of our lives, the outcome is either nothing at all or a

relatively  small  number  of  isolated  recollections  which  are  often  of

dubious or enigmatic importance. It is only from the sixth or seventh

year onwards - in many cases only after the tenth year - that our lives

can be reproduced in memory as a connected chain of events. From

that  time  on,  however,  there  is  also  a  direct  relation  between  the

psychical  significance  of  an  experience  and  its  retention  in  the

memory. Whatever seems important on account of its immediate or

directly  subsequent  effects  is  recollected;  whatever  is  judged  to  be

inessential is forgotten. If I can remember an event a long time after itsoccurrence, I regard the fact of having retained it in my memory as

evidence of its having made a deep impression on me at the time. I

feel surprised at forgetting; and I feel even more surprised, perhaps, at

remembering something apparently indifferent.

 


                                    Screen Memories

                                                                                        488

 

   It is only in certain pathological mental conditions that the relation

holding  in  normal  adults  between  the  psychical  significance  of  an

event and its retention in memory once more ceases to apply. For

instance, a hysteric habitually shows amnesia for some or all of the

experiences which led to the onset of his illness and which from that

very fact have become important to him and, apart from that fact, may

have  been  important  on  their  own  account.  The  analogy  between

pathological amnesia of this kind and the normal amnesia affecting

our early years seems to me to give a valuable hint at the intimate

connection that exists between the psychical content of neuroses and

our infantile life.

      We  are  so  much  accustomed  to  this  lack  of  memory  of  the

impressions  of  childhood  that  we  are  apt  to  overlook  the  problem

underlying  it  and  are  inclined  to  explain  it  as  a  self-evident

consequence of the rudimentary character of the mental activities of

children. Actually, however, a normally developed child of three or four

already  exhibits  an  enormous  amount  of  highly  organized  mental

functioning in the comparisons and inferences which he makes and in

the expression of his feelings; and there is no obvious reason why

amnesia should overtake these psychical acts, which carry no less

weight than those of a later age.

      Before  dealing  with  the  psychological  problems  attaching  to  the

earliest  memories  of  childhood,  it  would  of  course  be  essential  to

make a collection of material by circularizing a fairly large number of

normal adults and discovering what kind of recollections they are able

to produce from these early years. A first step in this direction was

taken in 1895 by V. and C. Henri, who sent round a paper of questions

drawn  up  by  them.  The  highly  suggestive  results  of  theirquestionnaire,  which  brought  in  replies  from  123  persons,  were

published by the two authors in 1897. I have no intention at present of

discussing the subject as a whole, and I shall therefore content myself

with emphasizing the few points which will enable me to introduce the

notion of what I have termed ‘screen memories’.

   The age to which the content of the earliest memories of childhood

is usually referred back is the period between the ages of two and

four. (This is the case with 88 persons in the series observed by the

Henris.)  There  are  some,  however,  whose  memory  reaches  back

further - even to the time before the completion of their first year; and,

on  the  other  hand,  there  are  some  whose  earliest  recollections  go

back only to their sixth, seventh, or even eighth year. There is nothing

at  the  moment  to  show  what  else  is  related  to  these  individual

differences;  is  to  be  noticed,  say  the  Henris,  that  a  person  whose

earliest recollection goes back to a very tender age - to the first year of

his  life,  perhaps  -  will  also  have  at  his  disposal  further  detached

memories  from  the  following  years,  and  that  he  will  be  able  to

reproduce his experiences as a continuous chain from an earlier point

of time - from about his fifth year - than is possible for other people,

whose first recollection dates from a later time. Thus not only the date

of the appearance of the first recollection but the whole function of

memory may, in the case of some people, be advanced or retarded.

 


                                    Screen Memories

                                                                                        489

 

   Quite special interest attaches to the question of what is the usual

content of these earliest memories of childhood. The psychology of

adults  would  necessarily  lead  us  to  expect  that  those  experiences

would be selected as worth remembering which had aroused some

powerful emotion or which, owing to their consequences, had been

recognized as important soon after their occurrence. And some indeed

of  the  observations  collected  by  the  Henris  appear  to  fulfil  this

expectation.  They  report  that  the  most  frequent  content  of  the  first

memories of childhood are on the one hand occasions of fear, shame,

physical pain, etc., and on the other hand important events such asillnesses, deaths, fires, births of brothers and sisters, etc. We might

therefore be inclined to assume that the principle governing the choice

of memories is the same in the case of children as in that of adults. It

is intelligible - though the fact deserves to be explicitly mentioned -

that the memories retained from childhood should necessarily show

evidence of the difference between what attracts the interest of a child

and of an adult. This easily explains why, for instance, one woman

reports that she remembers a number of accidents that occurred to

her dolls when she was two years old but has no recollection of the

serious  and  tragic  events  she  might  have  observed  at  the  same

period.

   Now, however, we are met by a fact that is diametrically opposed to

our expectations and cannot fail to astonish us. We hear that there are

some people whose earliest recollections of childhood are concerned

with  everyday  and  indifferent  events  which  could  not  produce  any

emotional  effect  even  in  children,  but  which  are  recollected  (too

clearly,  one  is  inclined  to  say)  in  every  detail,  while  approximately

contemporary events, even if, on the evidence of their parents, they

moved  them  intensely  at  the  time,  have  not  been  retained  in  their

memory.  Thus  the  Henris  mention  a  professor  of  philology  whose

earliest memory, dating back to between the ages of three and four,

showed him a table laid for a meal and on it a basin of ice. At the

same  period  there  occurred  the  death  of  his  grandmother  which,

according  to  his  parents,  was  a  severe  blow  to  the  child.  But  the

professor  of  philology,  as  he  now  is,  has  no  recollection  of  this

bereavement; all that he remembers of those days is the basin of ice.

Another man reports that his earliest memory is an episode upon a

walk in which he broke off a branch from a tree. He thinks he can still

identify  the  spot  where  this  happened.  There  were  several  other

people present, and one of them helped him.

 


                                    Screen Memories

                                                                                        490

 

   The Henris describe such cases as rare. In my experience, based

for the most part, it is true, on neurotics, they are quite frequent. Oneof  the  subjects  of  the  Henris’  investigation  made  an  attempt  at

explaining the occurrence of these mnemic images, whose innocence

makes them so mysterious, and his explanation seems to me very

much to the point. He thinks that in such cases the relevant scene

may perhaps have been only incompletely retained in the memory,

and that that may be why it seems so unenlightening: the parts that

have  been  forgotten  probably  contained  everything  that  made  the

experience  noteworthy.  I  am  able  to  confirm  the  truth  of  this  view,

though I should prefer to speak of these elements of the experience

being omitted rather than forgotten. I have often succeeded, by means

of psycho-analytic treatment, in uncovering the missing portions of a

childhood experience and in thus proving that when the impression, of

which no more than a torso was retained in the memory, had been

restored to completeness, it did in fact agree with the presumption that

it  is  the  most  important  things  that  are  recollected.  This,  however,

provides no explanation of the remarkable choice which memory has

made among the elements of the experience. We must first enquire

why it should be that precisely what is important is suppressed and

what is indifferent retained; and we shall not find an explanation of this

until we have investigated the mechanism of these processes more

deeply.  We  shall  then  form  a  notion  that  two  psychical  forces  are

concerned in bringing about memories of this sort. One of these forces

takes  the  importance  of  the  experience  as  a  motive  for  seeking  to

remember it, while the other - a resistance - tries to prevent any such

preference  from  being  shown.  These  two  opposing  forces  do  not

cancel each other out, nor does one of them (whether with or without

loss to itself) overpower the other. Instead, a compromise is brought

about, somewhat on the analogy of the resultant in a parallelogram of

forces. And the compromise is this. What is recorded as a mnemic

image  is  not  the  relevant  experience  itself  -  in  this  respect  the

resistance gets its way; what is recorded is another psychical element

closely associated with the objectionable one - and in this respect the

first principle shows its strength, the principle which endeavours to fix

important impressions by establishing reproducible mnemic images.

The result of the conflict is therefore that, instead of the mnemic image

which  would  have  been  justified  by  the  original  event,  another  is

produced  which  has  been  to  some  degree  associatively displacedfrom the former one. And since the elements of the experience which

aroused objection were precisely the important ones, the substituted

memory  will  necessarily  lack  those  important  elements  and  will  in

consequence  most  probably  strike  us  as  trivial.  It  will  seem

incomprehensible to us because we are inclined to look for the reason

for its retention in its own content, whereas in fact that retention is due

to the relation holding between its own content and a different one

which has been suppressed. There is a common saying among us

about shams, that they are not made of gold themselves but have lain

beside something that is made of gold. The same simile might well be

applied  to  some  of  the  experiences  of  childhood  which  have  been

retained in the memory.

 


                                    Screen Memories

 491

 

   There are numerous possible types of case in which one psychical

content is substituted for another, and these come about in a variety of

psychological  constellations.  One  of  the  simplest  of  these  cases  is

obviously that occurring in the childhood memories with which we are

here concerned - the case, that is, where the essential elements of an

experience are represented in memory by the inessential elements of

the same experience. It is a case of displacement on to something

associated by continuity; or, looking at the process as a whole, a case

of  repression  accompanied  by  the  substitution  of  something  in  the

neighbourhood  (whether  in  space  or  time).  I  have  elsewhere¹  had

occasion  to  describe  a  very  similar  instance  of  substitution  which

occurred  in  the  analysis  of  a  patient  suffering  from  paranoia.  The

woman  in  question  hallucinated  voices,  which  used  to  repeat  long

passages  from  Otto  Ludwig’s  novel Die Heiterethei  to  her.  But  the

passages they chose were the most trifling and irrelevant in the book.

The analysis showed, however, that there were other passages in the

same work which had stirred up the most distressing thoughts in the

patient. The distressing affect was a motive for putting up a defence

against them, but the motives in favour of pursuing them further were

not  to  be  suppressed.  The  result  was  a  compromise  by  which  theinnocent passages emerged in the patient’s memory with pathological

strength and clarity. The process which we here see at work - conflict,

repression,  substitution  involving  a  compromise  -  returns  in  all

psychoneurotic symptoms and gives us the key to understanding their

formation. Thus it is not without importance if we are able to show the

same process operating in the mental life of normal individuals, and

the  fact  that  what  it  influences  in  normal  people  is  precisely  their

choice of childhood memories seems to afford one more indication of

the intimate relations which have already been insisted upon between

the mental life of children and the psychical material of the neuroses.

      The  processes  of  normal  and  pathological  defence  and  the

displacements in which they result are clearly of great importance. But

to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  no  study  whatever  has  hitherto  been

made of them by psychologists; and it remains to be ascertained in

what strata of psychical activity and under what conditions they come

into operation. The reason for this neglect may well be that our mental

life,  so  far  as  it  is  the  object  of  our conscious  internal  perception,

shows  nothing  of  these  processes,  apart  from  instances  which  we

classify as ‘faulty reasoning’ and some mental operations which aim at

producing a comic effect. The assertion that a psychical intensity can

be displaced from one presentation (which is then abandoned) on to

another  (which  thenceforward  plays  the  psychological  part  of  the

former  one)  is  as  bewildering  to  us  as  certain  features  of  Greek

mythology  -  as,  for  instance,  when  the  gods  are  said  to  clothe

someone with beauty as though it were with a veil, whereas we think

only of a face transfigured by a change of expression.

 

   ¹ ‘Further Remarks on the Neuro-Psychoses of Defence’ (1896b).

 


                                    Screen Memories

                                                                                        492

 

   Further investigation of these indifferent childhood memories has

taught me that they can originate in other ways as well and that an

unsuspected wealth of meaning lies concealed behind their apparent

innocence. But on this point I shall not content myself with a mere

assertion  but  shall  give  a  detailed  report  of  one  particular  instancewhich seems to me the most instructive out of a considerable number

of  similar  ones.  Its  value  is  certainly  increased  by  the  fact  that  it

relates to someone who is not at all or only very slightly neurotic.

 

   The subject of this observation is a man of university education,

aged thirty-eight. Though his own profession lies in a very different

field, he has taken an interest in psychological questions ever since I

was  able  to  relieve  him  of  a  slight  phobia  by  means  of  psycho-

analysis. Last year he drew my attention to his childhood memories,

which had already played some part in his analysis. After studying the

investigation  made  by  V.  and  C.  Henri,  he  gave  me  the  following

summarized account of his own experience.

   ‘I have at my disposal a fair number of early memories of childhood

which I can date with great certainty. For at the age of three I left the

small place where I was born and moved to a large town; and all these

memories of mine relate to my birth place and therefore date from my

second and third years. They are mostly short scenes, but they are

very  well  preserved  and  furnished  with  every  detail  of  sense-

perception, in complete contrast to my memories of adult years, which

are entirely lacking in the visual element. From my third year onwards

my recollections grow scantier and less clear; there are gaps in them

which must cover more than a year; and it is not, I believe, until my

sixth  or  seventh  year  that  the  stream  of  my  memories  becomes

continuous. My memories up to the time of my leaving my first place of

residence  fall  into  three  groups.  The  first  group  consists  of  scenes

which my parents have repeatedly since described to me. As regards

these, I feel uncertain whether I have had the mnemic image from the

beginning or whether I only construed it after hearing one of these

descriptions.  I  may  remark,  however,  that  there  are  also  events  of

which I have no mnemic image in spite of their having been frequently

retailed by my parents. I attach more importance to the second group.

It comprises scenes which have not (so far as I know) been described

to me and some of which, indeed, could not have been described to

me, as I have not met the other participants in them (my nurse and

playmates)  since  their  occurrence.  I  shall  come  to  the  third  group

presently.  As  regards  the  content  of  these  scenes  and  their

consequent claim to being recollected, I should like to say that I amnot entirely at sea. I cannot maintain, indeed, that what I have retained

are memories of the most important events of the period, or what I

should to-day judge to be the most important. I have no knowledge of

the birth of a sister, who is two and a half years younger than I am; my

departure,  my  first  sight  of  the  railway  and  the  long  carriage-drive

before it - none of these has left a trace in my memory. On the other

hand,  I  can  remember  two  small  occurrences  during  the  railway-

journey; these, as you will recollect, came up in the analysis of my

phobia. But what should have made most impression on me was an

injury to my face which caused a considerable loss of blood and for

which I had to have some stitches put in by a surgeon. I can still feel

the  scar  resulting  from  this  accident,  but  I  know  of  no  recollection

which  points  to  it,  either  directly  or  indirectly.  It  is  true  that  I  may

perhaps have been under two years old at the time.

 


                                    Screen Memories

                                                                                        493

 

   ‘It follows from this that I feel no surprise at the pictures and scenes

of these first two groups. No doubt they are displaced memories from

which the essential element has for the most part been omitted. But in

a few of them it is at least hinted at, and in others it is easy for me to

complete  them  by  following  certain  pointers.  By  doing  so  I  can

establish  a  sound  connection  between  the  separate  fragments  of

memories  and  arrive  at  a  clear  understanding  of  what  the  childish

interest  was  that  recommended  these  particular  occurrences  to  my

memory.  This  does  not  apply,  however,  to  the  content  of  the  third

group, which I have not so far discussed. There I am met by material -

one rather long scene and several smaller pictures - with which I can

make no headway at all. The scene appears to me fairly indifferent

and  I  cannot  understand  why  it  should  have  become  fixed  in  my

memory. Let me describe it to you. I see a rectangular, rather steeply

sloping piece of meadow-land, green and thickly grown; in the green

there  are  a  great  number  of  yellow  flowers  -  evidently  common

dandelions. At the top end of the meadow there is a cottage and in

front of the cottage door two women are standing chatting busily, apeasant-woman  with  a  handkerchief  on  her  head  and  a  children’s

nurse. Three children are playing in the grass. One of them is myself

(between the age of two and three); the two others are my boy cousin,

who is a year older than me, and his sister, who is almost exactly the

same age as I am. We are picking the yellow flowers and each of us is

holding a bunch of flowers we have already picked. The little girl has

the best bunch; and, as though by mutual agreement, we - the two

boys  -  fall  on  her  and  snatch  away  her  flowers.  She  runs  up  the

meadow in tears and as a consolation the peasant-woman gives her a

big piece of black bread. Hardly have we seen this than we throw the

flowers away, hurry to the cottage and ask to be given some bread

too. And we are in fact given some; the peasant-woman cuts the loaf

with a long knife. In my memory the bread tastes quite delicious - and

at that point the scene breaks off.

   ‘Now what is there in this occurrence to justify the expenditure of

memory which it has occasioned me?  I have racked my brains in vain

over it. Does the emphasis lie on our disagreeable behaviour to the

little girl? Did the yellow colour of the dandelions- a flower which I am,

of course, far from admiring to-day - so greatly please me? Or, as a

result of my careering round the grass, did the bread taste so much

nicer than usual that it made an unforgettable impression on me? Nor

can I find any connection between this scene and the interest which

(as I was able to discover without any difficulty) bound together the

other  scenes  from  my  childhood.  Altogether,  there  seems  to  me

something not quite right about this scene. The yellow of the flowers is

a  disproportionately  prominent  element  in  the  situation  as  a  whole,

and the nice taste of the bread seems to me exaggerated in an almost

hallucinatory fashion. I cannot help being reminded of some pictures

that I once saw in a burlesque exhibition. Certain portions of these

pictures, and of course the most inappropriate ones, instead of being

painted, were built up in three dimensions - for instance, the ladies’

bustles. Well, can you point out any way of finding an explanation or

interpretation of this redundant memory of my childhood?’

 


                                    Screen Memories

                                                                                        494 

   I thought it advisable to ask him since when he had been occupied

with this recollection: whether he was of opinion that it had recurred to

his memory periodically since his childhood, or whether it had perhaps

emerged at some later time on some occasion that could be recalled.

This question was all that it was necessary for me to contribute to the

solution of the problem; the rest was found by my collaborator himself,

who was no novice at jobs of this kind.

   ‘I have not yet considered that point,’ he replied. ‘Now that you have

raised  the  question,  it  seems  to  me  almost  a  certainty  that  this

childhood memory never occurred to me at all in my earlier years. But

I  can  also  recall  the  occasion  which  led  to  my  recovering  this  and

many  other  recollections  of  my  earliest  childhood.  When  I  was

seventeen and at my secondary school, I returned for the first time to

my birthplace for the holidays, to stay with a family who had been our

friends ever since that remote date. I know quite well what a wealth of

impressions overwhelmed me at that time. But I see now that I shall

have to tell you a whole big piece of my history: it belongs here, and

you have brought it upon yourself by your question. So listen. I was

the child of people who were originally well-to-do and who, I fancy,

lived comfortably enough in that little corner of the provinces. When I

was  about  three,  the  branch  of  industry  in  which  my  father  was

concerned met with a catastrophe. He lost all his means and we were

forced to leave the place and move to a large town. Long and difficult

years  followed,  of  which,  as  it  seems  to  me,  nothing  was  worth

remembering. I never felt really comfortable in the town. I believe now

that I was never free from a longing for the beautiful woods near our

home, in which (as one of my memories from those days tells me) I

used to run off from my father, almost before I had learnt to walk.

Those holidays, when I was seventeen, were my first holidays in the

country, and, as I have said, I stayed with a family with whom we were

friends and who had risen greatly in the world since our move. I could

compare  the  comfort  reigning  there  with  our  own  style  of  living  at

home in the town. But it is no use evading the subject any longer: I

must admit that there was something else that excited me powerfully. I

was seventeen, and in the family where I was staying there was a

daughter of fifteen, with whom I immediately fell in love. It was my firstcalf-love and sufficiently intense, but I kept it completely secret. After a

few days the girl went off to her school (from which she too was home

for  the  holidays)  and  it  was  this  separation  after  such  a  short

acquaintance that brought my longings to a really high pitch. I passed

many hours in solitary walks through the lovely woods that I had found

once  more  and  spent  my  time  building  castles  in  the  air.  These,

strangely enough, were not concerned with the future but sought to

improve the past. If only the smash had not occurred! If only I had

stopped at home and grown up in the country and grown as strong as

the young men in the house, the brothers of my love! And then if only I

had followed my father’s profession and if I had finally married her - for

I  should  have  known  her  intimately  all  those  years!  I  had  not  the

slightest doubt, of course, that in the circumstances created by my

imagination I should have loved her just as passionately as I really

seemed to then. A strange thing. For when I see her now from time to

time  -  she  happens  to  have  married  someone  here  -  she  is  quite

exceptionally indifferent to me. Yet I can remember quite well for what

a long time afterwards I was affected by the yellow colour of the dress

she was wearing when we first met, whenever I saw the same colour

anywhere else.’

 


                                    Screen Memories

                                                                                        495

 

   That sounds very much like your parenthetical remark to the effect

that you are no longer fond of the common dandelion. Do you not

suspect that there may be a connection between the yellow of the

girl’s dress and the ultra-clear yellow of the flowers in your childhood

scene?

   ‘Possibly. But it was not the same yellow. The dress was more of a

yellowish brown, more like the colour of wallflowers. However, I can at

least  let  you  have  an  the  intermediate  idea  which  may  serve  your

purpose. At a later date, while I was the in the Alps, I saw how certain

flowers  which  have  light  colouring  in  the  lowlands  take  on  darker

shades  at  high  altitudes.  Unless  I  am  greatly  mistaken,  there  is

frequently to be found in mountainous regions a flower which is verysimilar to the dandelion but which is dark yellow and would exactly

agree in colour with the dress of the girl I was so fond of. But I have

not finished yet. I now come to a second occasion which stirred up in

me the impressions of my childhood and which dates from a time not

far  distant  from  the  first.  I  was  seventeen  when  I  revisited  my

birthplace. Three years later during my holidays I visited my uncle and

met once again the children who had been my first playmates, the

same two cousins, the boy a year older than I am and the girl of the

same  age  as  myself,  who  appear  in  the  childhood  scene  with  the

dandelions. This family had left my birthplace at the same time as we

did and had become prosperous in a far-distant city.’

   And did you once more fall in love - with your cousin this time - and

indulge in a new set of phantasies?

   ‘No, this time things turned out differently. By then I was at the

University and I was a slave to my books. I had nothing left over for

my  cousin.  So  far  as  I  know  I  had  no  similar  phantasies  on  that

occasion. But I believe that my father and my uncle had concocted a

plan by which I was to exchange the abstruse subject of my studies

for one of more practical value, settle down, after my studies were

completed, in the place where my uncle lived, and marry my cousin.

No doubt when they saw how absorbed I was in my own intentions the

plan was dropped; but I fancy I must certainly have been aware of its

existence. It was not until later, when I was a newly-fledged man of

science and hard pressed by the exigencies of life and when I had to

wait so long before finding a post here, that I must sometimes have

reflected that my father had meant well in planning this marriage for

me,  to  make  good  the  loss  in  which  the  original  catastrophe  had

involved my whole existence.’

 


                                    Screen Memories

                                                                                        496

 

      Then  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  the  childhood  scene  we  are

considering emerged at this time, when you were struggling for your

daily bread - provided, that is, that you can confirm my idea that it was

during this same period that you first made the acquaintance of theAlps.

      ‘Yes,  that  is  so:  mountaineering  was  the  one  enjoyment  that  I

allowed myself at that time. But I still cannot grasp your point.’

   I am coming to it at once. The element on which you put most stress

in  your  childhood  scene  was  the  fact  of  the  country-made  bread

tasting  so  delicious.  It  seems  clear  that  this  idea,  which  amounted

almost  to  a  hallucination,  corresponded  to  your  phantasy  of  the

comfortable life you would have led if you had stayed at home and

married this girl - or, in symbolic language, of how sweet the bread

would have tasted for which you had to struggle so hard in your later

years. The yellow of the flowers, too, points to the same girl. But there

are also elements in the childhood scene which can only be related to

the second phantasy - of being married to your cousin. Throwing away

the flowers in exchange for bread strikes me as not a bad disguise for

the  scheme  your  father  had  for  you:  you  were  to  give  up  your

unpractical ideals and take on a ‘bread-and-butter’ occupation, were

you not?

   ‘It seems then that I amalgamated the two sets of phantasies of how

my  life  could  have  been  more  comfortable  -the  "yellow"  and  the

"country-made  bread"  from  the  one  and  the  throwing  away  of  the

flowers and the actual people concerned from the other.’

   Yes. You projected the two phantasies on to one another and made

a childhood memory of them. The element about the Alpine flowers is

as it were a stamp giving the date of manufacture. I can assure you

that  people  often  construct  such  things  unconsciously  -  almost  like

works of fiction.

      ‘But  if  that  is  so,  there  was no  childhood  memory,  but  only  a

phantasy put back into childhood. A feeling tells me, though, that the

scene is genuine. How does that fit in?’

      There  is  in  general  no  guarantee  of  the  data  produced  by  our

memory. But I am ready to agree with you that the scene is genuine. If

so, you selected it from innumerable others of a similar or another kind

because, on account of its content (which in itself was indifferent) it

was  well  adapted  to  represent  the  two  phantasies,  which  were

important enough to you. A recollection of this kind, whose value lies

in the fact that it represents in the memory impressions and thoughts

of a later date whose content is connected with its own by symbolic orsimilar links, may appropriately be called a ‘screen memory’. In any

case you will cease to feel any surprise that this scene should so often

recur to your mind. It can no longer be regarded as an innocent one

since, as we have discovered, it is calculated to illustrate the most

momentous turning-points in your life, the influence of the two most

powerful motive forces - hunger and love.

 


                                    Screen Memories

 497

 

   ‘Yes, it represented hunger well enough. But what about love?’

   In the yellow of the flowers, I mean. But I cannot deny that in this

childhood scene of yours love is represented far less prominently than

I should have expected from my previous experience.

   ‘No. You are mistaken. The essence of it is its representation of

love. Now I understand for the first time. Think for a moment! Taking

flowers  away  from  a  girl  means  to  deflower  her.  What  a  contrast

between the boldness of this phantasy and my bashfulness on the first

occasion and my indifference on the second.’

      I  can  assure  you  that  youthful  bashfulness  habitually  has  as  its

complement bold phantasies of that sort.

   ‘But in that case the phantasy that has transformed itself into these

childhood  memories  would  not  be  a  conscious  one  that  I  can

remember, but an unconscious one?’

   Unconscious thoughts which are a prolongation of conscious ones.

You  think  to  yourself  ‘If  I  had  married  so-and-so’,  and  behind  the

thought  there  is  an  impulse  to  form  a  picture  of  what  the  ‘being

married’ really is.

   ‘I can go on with it now myself. The most seductive part of the whole

subject for a young scapegrace is the picture of the marriage night.

(What does he care about what comes afterwards?) But that picture

cannot  venture  out  into  the  light  of  day:  the  dominating  mood  of

diffidence and of respect towards the girl keeps it suppressed. So it

remains unconscious-'

                                     Screen Memories

                                                                                        498

 

   And slips away into a childhood memory. You are quite right. It is

precisely the coarsely sensual element in the phantasy which explains

why  it  does  not  develop  into  a conscious  phantasy  but  must  be

content to find its way allusively and under a flowery disguise into a

childhood scene.

   ‘But why precisely, into a childhood scene, I should like to know?’

   For the sake of its innocence, perhaps. Can you imagine a greater

contrast to these designs for gross sexual aggression than childish

pranks?  However,  there  are  more  general  grounds  that  have  a

decisive  influence  in  bringing  about  the  slipping  away  of  repressed

thoughts  and  wishes  into  childhood  memories:  for  you  will  find  the

same  thing  invariably  happening  in  hysterical  patients.  It  seems,

moreover,  as  though  the  recollection  of  the  remote  past  is  in  itself

facilitated by some pleasurable motive: forsan et haec olim meminisse

juvabit.¹

   ‘If that is so, I have lost all faith in the genuineness of the dandelion

scene. This is how I look at it: On the two occasions in question, and

with the support of very comprehensible realistic motives, the thought

occurred to me: "If you had married this or that girl, your life would

have become much pleasanter." The sensual current in my mind took

hold of the thought which is contained in the protasis and repeated it

in  images  of  a  kind  capable  of  giving  that  same  sensual  current

satisfaction. This second version of the thought remained unconscious

on account of its incompatibility with the dominant sexual disposition;

but this very fact of its remaining unconscious enabled it to persist in

my mind long after changes in the real situation had quite got rid of the

conscious version. In accordance, as you say, with a general law, the

clause that had remained unconscious sought to transform itself into a

childhood scene which, on account of its innocence, would be able to

become conscious. With this end in view it had to undergo a fresh

transformation,  or  rather  two  fresh  transformations.  One  of  these

removed the objectionable element from the protasis by expressing it

figuratively; the second forced the apodosis into a shape capable of

visual representation - using for the purpose the intermediary ideas of"bread" and "bread-and-butter occupations". I see that by producing a

phantasy like this I was providing, as it were, a fulfilment of the two

suppressed wishes for deflowering a girl and for material comfort. But

now that I have given such a complete account of the motives that led

to my producing the dandelion phantasy, I cannot help concluding that

what I am dealing with is something that never happened at all but has

been unjustifiably smuggled in among my childhood memories.’

 

   ¹ [‘Some day, perhaps, it will be a joy to remember even these things.’]

 


                                    Screen Memories

                                                                                        499

 

   I see that I must take up the defence of its genuineness. You are

going too far. You have accepted my assertion that every suppressed

phantasy of this kind tends to slip away into a childhood scene. But

suppose now that this cannot occur unless there is a memory-trace

the content of which offers the phantasy a point of contact - comes, as

it were, half way to meet it. Once a point of contact of this kind has

been found - in the present instance it was the deflowering, the taking

away  of  the  flowers  -  the  remaining  content  of  the  phantasy  is

remodelled with the help of every legitimate intermediate idea - take

the bread as an example - till it can find further points of contact with

the  content  of  the  childhood  scene.  It  is  very  possible  that  in  the

course  of  this  process  the  childhood  scene  itself  also  undergoes

changes; I regard it as certain that falsifications of memory may be

brought about in this way too. In your case the childhood scene seems

only to have had some of its lines engraved more deeply: think of the

over-emphasis  on  the  yellow  and  the  exaggerated  niceness  of  the

bread. But the raw material was utilizable. If that had not been so, it

would not have been possible for this particular memory, rather than

any  others,  to  make  its  way  forward  into  consciousness.  No  such

scene would have occurred to you as a childhood memory, or perhaps

some other one would have - for you know how easily our ingenuity

can build connecting bridges from any one point to any other. And

apart  from  your  own  subjective  feeling  which  I  am  not  inclined  tounder-estimate,  there  is  another  thing  that  speaks  in  favour  of  the

genuineness of your dandelion memory. It contains elements which

have not been solved by what you have told me and which do not in

fact fit in with the sense required by the phantasy. For instance, your

boy cousin helping you to rob the little girl of her flowers - can you

make any sense of the idea of being helped in deflowering someone?

or of the peasant woman and the nurse in front of the cottage?

 


                                    Screen Memories

                                                                                        500

 

   ‘Not that I can see.’

   So the phantasy does not coincide completely with the childhood

scene. It is only based on it at certain points. That argues in favour of

the childhood memory being genuine.

   ‘Do you think an interpretation like this of an apparently innocent

childhood memory is often applicable?’

   Very often, in my experience. Shall we amuse ourselves by seeing

whether the two examples given by the Henris can be interpreted as

screen memories concealing subsequent experiences and wishes? I

mean the memory of a table laid for a meal with a basin of ice on it,

which was supposed to have some connection with the death of the

subject’s grandmother, and the other memory, of a child breaking off a

branch from a tree while he was on a walk and of his being helped to

do it by someone.

   He reflected for a little and then answered: ‘I can make nothing of

the first one. It is most probably a case of displacement at work; but

the intermediate steps are beyond guessing. As for the second case, I

should  be  prepared  to  give  an  interpretation,  if  only  the  person

concerned had not been a Frenchman.’

   I cannot follow you there. What difference would that make?

   ‘A great deal of difference, since what provides the intermediate step

between a screen memory and what it conceals is likely to be a verbal

expression. In German "to pull one out" is a very common vulgar term

for  masturbation.  The  scene  would  then  be  putting  back  into  early

childhood a seduction to masturbation - someone was helping him todo it - which in fact occurred at a later period. But even so, it does not

fit, for in the childhood scene there were a number of other people

present.’

   Whereas his seduction to masturbate must have occurred in solitude

and secrecy. It is just that contrast that inclines me to accept your

view: it serves once again to make the scene innocent. Do you know

what it means when in a dream we see ‘a lot of strangers’, as happens

so  often  in  dreams  of  nakedness  in  which  we  feel  so  terribly

embarrassed? Nothing more nor less than secrecy, which there again

is expressed by its opposite. However, our interpretation remains a

jest, since we have no idea whether a Frenchman would recognize an

allusion to masturbation in the words casser une branche d’un arbre

or in some suitably emended phrase.

 


                                    Screen Memories

                                                                                        501

 

 

   This analysis, which I have reproduced as accurately as possible,

will, I hope, have to some extent clarified the concept of a ‘screen

memory’ as one which owes its value as a memory not to its own

content but to the relation existing between that content and some

other,  that  has  been  suppressed.  Different  classes  of  screen

memories can be distinguished according to the nature of that relation.

We have found examples of two of these classes among what are

described as the earliest memories of childhood - that is, if we include

under  the  heading  of  screen  memories  the  incomplete  childhood

scenes which are innocent by very reason of their incompleteness. It

is to be anticipated that screen memories will also be formed from

residues of memories relating to later life as well. Anyone who bears

in mind their distinctive feature - namely that they are extremely well

remembered but that their content is completely indifferent - will easily

recall a number of examples of the sort from his own memory. Some

of these screen memories dealing with events later in life owe their

importance  to  a  connection  with  experiences  in  early  youth  which

have remained suppressed. The connection, that is, is the reverse ofthe one in the case which I have analysed, where a childhood memory

was accounted for by later experiences. A screen memory may be

described as ‘retrogressive’ or as having ‘pushed forward’ according

as  the  one  chronological  relation  or  the  other  holds  between  the

screen and the thing screened-off. From another point of view, we can

distinguish positive screen memories from negative ones (or refractory

memories)  whose  content  stands  in  a  contrary  relation  to  the

suppressed  material.  The  whole  subject  deserves  a  more  thorough

examination;  but  I  must  content  myself  with  pointing  out  what

complicated processes - processes, incidentally, which are altogether

analogous to the formation of hysterical symptoms - are involved in

the building up of our store of memories.

 


                                    Screen Memories

                                                                                        502

 

   Our earliest childhood memories will always be a subject of special

interest because the problem mentioned at the beginning of this paper

(of  how  it  comes  about  that  the  impressions  which  are  of  most

significance  for  our  whole  future  usually  leave  no  mnemic  images

behind) leads us to reflect upon the origin of conscious memories in

general.  We  shall  no  doubt  be  inclined  at  first  to  separate  off  the

screen  memories  which  are  the  subject  of  this  study  as

heterogeneous  elements  among  the  residues  of  childhood

recollections.  As  regards  the  remaining  images,  we  shall  probably

adopt  the  simple  view  that  they  arise  simultaneously  with  an

experience as an immediate consequence of the impression it makes

and that thereafter they recur from time to time in accordance with the

familiar  laws  of  reproduction.  Closer  observation,  however,  reveals

certain features which do not tally with this view. Above all, there is the

following  point.  In  the  majority  of  significant  and  in  other  respects

unimpeachable  childhood  scenes  the  subject  sees  himself  in  the

recollection as a child, with the knowledge that this child is himself; he

sees this child, however, as an observer from outside the scene would

see him. The Henris duly draw attention to the fact that many of those

taking part in their investigation expressly emphasized this peculiarityof childhood scenes. Now it is evident that such a picture cannot be an

exact repetition of the impression that was originally received. For the

subject was then in the middle of the situation and was attending not

to himself but to the external world.

   Whenever in a memory the subject himself appears in this way as

an object among other objects this contrast between the acting and

the  recollecting  ego  may  be  taken  as  evidence  that  the  original

impression has been worked over. It looks as though a memory-trace

from childhood had here been translated back into a plastic and visual

form  at  a  later  date  -  the  date  of  the  memory’s  arousal.  But  no

reproduction of the original impression has ever entered the subject’s

consciousness.

 


                                    Screen Memories

                                                                                        503

 

   There is another fact that affords even more convincing evidence in

favour of this second view. Out of a number of childhood memories of

significant experiences, all of them of similar distinctness and clarity,

there will be some scenes which, when they are tested (for instance

by the recollections of adults), turn out to have been falsified. Not that

they are complete inventions; they are false in the sense that the they

have shifted an event to a place where it did not occur - this is the

case in one of the instances quoted by the Henris - or that they have

merged two people into one or substituted one for the other, or the

scenes as a whole give signs of being combinations of two separate

experiences.  Simple  inaccuracy  of  recollection  does  not  play  any

considerable part here, in view of the high degree of sensory intensity

possessed  by  the  images  the  and  the  efficiency  of  the  function  of

memory in the young; close the investigation shows rather that these

falsifications of memory are tendentious - that is, that they serve the

purposes  of  the  repression  and  replacement  of  objectionable  or

disagreeable  impressions.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  these  falsified

memories too, must have originated at a period of life when it has

become the possible for conflicts of this kind and impulsions towards

repression to have made a place for themselves in mental life - farlater, therefore, than the period to which their content belongs. But in

these cases too the falsified memory is the first that we become aware

of:  the  raw  material  of  memory-traces  out  of  which  it  was  forged

remains unknown to us in its original form.

   The recognition of this fact must diminish the distinction we have

drawn between screen memories and other memories derived from

our  childhood.  It  may  indeed  be  questioned  whether  we  have  any

memories  at  all from  our  childhood:  memories relating  to  our

childhood may be all that we possess. Our childhood memories show

us our earliest years not as they were but as they appeared at the

later periods when the memories were aroused. In these periods of

arousal, the child hood memories did not, as people are accustomed

to  say, emerge;  they  were formed  at  that  time.  And  a  number  of

motives, with no concern for historical accuracy, had a part in forming

them, as well as in the selection of the memories themselves.

                                                                                         504

 

                              AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

                                        (1901)

 


                                                                                        505

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                        506

 

                              AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

 

FREUD,  SIGM.,  Vienna.  Born  May  6,  1856,  at  Freiberg  in  Moravia.

Studied in Vienna. Pupil of Brücke, the physiologist. Promotion, 1881.

Pupil of Charcot in Paris 1885-6. Habilitation, 1885. Has worked as

physician and Dozent at Vienna University since 1886. Proposed as

Professor Extraordinarius, 1897. Earlier Freud produced writings on

histology and cerebral anatomy and, subsequently, clinical works on

neuropathology; translated writings by Charcot and Bernheim. In 1884

‘Über Coca’, a paper which introduced cocaine into medicine. In 1891

Zur Auffassung der Aphasien. In 1891 and 1893 monographs on the

cerebral palsies of children, which culminated in 1897 in the volume

on  the  subject  in  Nothnagel’s Handbuch.  In  1895 Studien  über

Hysterie (with Dr. J. Breuer). Since then Freud has turned to the study

of  the  psychoneuroses  and  especially  hysteria,  and  in  a  series  of

shorter works he has stressed the aetiological significance of sexual

life for the neuroses. He has also developed a new psychotherapy of

hysteria, on which only extremely little has been published. A book,

Die Traumdeutung, is in the press.

                                                                                         507

 

                      THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS

                                        (1900)

 

              Flectere si nequero superos, Acheronta movebo

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        508

 

                            Preface to the First Edition

 

I have attempted in this volume to give an account of the interpretation

of dreams; and in doing so I have not, I believe, trespassed beyond

the sphere of interest covered by neuro-pathology. For psychological

investigation shows that the dream is the first member of a class of

abnormal psychical phenomena of which further members, such as

hysterical phobias, obsessions and delusions, are bound for practical

reasons to be a matter of concern to physicians. As will be seen in the

sequel, dreams can make no such claim to practical importance; but

their  theoretical  value  as  a  paradigm  is  on  the  other  hand

proportionately greater. Anyone who has failed to explain the origin of

dream-images can scarcely hope to understand phobias, obsessions

or delusions or to bring a therapeutic influence to bear on them.

   But the same correlation that is responsible for the importance of the

subject must also bear the blame for the deficiencies of the present

work.  The  broken  threads  which  so  frequently  interrupt  my

presentation are nothing less than the many points of contact between

the problem of the formation of dreams and the more comprehensive

problems of psycho pathology. These cannot be treated here, but, if

time and strength allow and further material comes to hand, will form

the subject of later communications.

   The difficulties of presentation have been further increased by the

peculiarities of the material which I have had to use to illustrate the

interpreting of dreams. It will become plain in the course of the work

itself why it is that none of the dreams already reported in the literatureof the subject or collected from unknown sources could be of any use

for my purposes. The only dreams open to my choice were my own

and those of my patients undergoing psycho-analytic treatment. But I

was precluded from using the latter material by the fact that in its case

the  dream-processes  were  subject  to  an  undesirable  complication

owing to the added presence of neurotic features. But if I was to report

my own dreams, it inevitably followed that I should have to reveal to

the public gaze more of the intimacies of my mental life than I liked, or

than is normally necessary for any writer who is a man of science and

not  a  poet.  Such  was  the  painful  but  unavoidable  necessity;  and  I

have submitted to it rather than totally abandon the possibility of giving

the evidence for my psychological findings. Naturally, however, I have

been unable to resist the temptation of taking the edge off some of my

indiscretions by omissions and substitutions. But whenever this has

happened,  the  value  of  my  instance  has  been  very  definitely

diminished. I can only express a hope that readers of this book will put

themselves in my difficult situation and treat me with indulgence, and

further, that anyone who finds any sort of reference to himself in my

dreams may be willing to grant me the right of freedom of thought - in

my dream-life, if nowhere else.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        509

 

                          Preface to the Second Edition

 

If within ten years of the publication of this book (which is very far from

being an easy one to read) a second edition is called for, this is not

due to the interest taken in it by the professional circles to whom my

original preface was addressed. My psychiatric colleagues seem to

have taken no trouble to overcome the initial bewilderment created by

my  new  approach  to  dreams.  The  professional  philosophers  have

become accustomed to polishing off the problems of dream-life (which

they treat as a mere appendix to conscious states) in a few sentences

-  and  usually  in  the  same  ones;  and  they  have  evidently  failed  to

notice  that  we  have  something  here  from  which  a  number  ofinferences  can  be  drawn  that  are  bound  to  transform  our

psychological  theories.  The  attitude  adopted  by  reviewers  in  the

scientific periodicals could only lead one to suppose that my work was

doomed to be sunk into complete silence; while the small group of

gallant  supporters,  who  practise  medical  psycho-analysis  under  my

guidance  and  who  follow  my  example  in  interpreting  dreams  and

make  use  of  their  interpretations  in  treating  neurotics,  would  never

have  exhausted  the  first  edition  of  the  book.  Thus  it  is  that  I  feel

indebted to a wider circle of educated and curious-minded readers,

whose interest has led me to take up once more after nine years this

difficult, but in many respects fundamental, work.

   I am glad to say that I have found little to change in it. Here and

there I have inserted some new material, added some fresh points of

detail derived from my increased experience, and at some few points

recast my statements. But the essence of what I have written about

dreams  and  their  interpretation,  as  well  as  about  the  psychological

theorems  to  be  deduced  from  them  -  all  this  remains  unaltered:

subjectively at all events, it has stood the test of time. Anyone who is

acquainted with my other writings (on the aetiology and mechanism of

the  psycho-neuroses)  will  know  that  I  have  never  put  forward

inconclusive opinions as though they were established facts, and that I

have always sought to modify my statements so that they may keep in

step with my advancing knowledge. In the sphere of dream-life I have

been able to leave my original assertions unchanged. During the long

years in which I have been working at the problems of the neuroses I

have  often  been  in  doubt  and  some  times  been  shaken  in  my

convictions.  At  such  times  it  has  always  been  the Interpretation  of

Dreams that has given me back my certainty. It is thus a sure instinct

which has led my many scientific opponents to refuse to follow me

more especially in my researches upon dreams.

      An  equal  durability  and  power  to  withstand  any  far-reaching

alterations  during  the  process  of  revision  has  been  shown  by  the

material of the book, consisting as it does of dreams of my own which

have  for  the  most  part  been  overtaken  or  made  valueless  by  the

march  of  events  and  by  which  I  illustrated  the  rules  of  dream-

interpretation. For this book has a further subjective significance for

me  personally  -  a  significance  which  I  only  grasped  after  I  hadcompleted it. It was, I found, a portion of my own self-analysis, my

reaction to my father’s death - that is to say, to the most important

event, the most poignant loss, of a man’s life. Having discovered that

this was so, I felt unable to obliterate the traces of the experience. To

my  readers,  however,  it  will  be  a  matter  of  indifference  upon  what

particular material they learn to appreciate the importance of dreams

and how to interpret them.

   Wherever I have found it impossible to incorporate some essential

addition into the original context, I have indicated its more recent date

by enclosing it in square brackets.¹

 

BERCHTESGADEN, Summer 1908

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1914.] In later editions these were omitted.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        510

 

                            Preface to the Third Edition

 

Nine years elapsed between the first and second editions of this book,

but after scarcely more than a single year a third edition has become

necessary.  This  new  turn  of  events  may  please  me;  but  just  as

formerly I was unwilling to regard the neglect of my book by readers

as evidence of its worthlessness, so I cannot claim that the interest

which is now being taken in it is a proof of its excellence.

   Even the Interpretation of Dreams has not been left untouched by

the  advance  of  scientific  knowledge.  When  I  wrote  it  in  1899,  my

theory of sexuality was not yet in existence and the analysis of the

more complicated forms of psycho-neurosis was only just beginning. It

was my hope that dream-interpretation would help to make possible

the  psychological  analysis  of  the  neuroses;  since  then  a  deeper

understanding  of  neuroses  has  reacted  in  turn  upon  our  view  of

dreams.  The  theory  of  dream-interpretation  has  itself  developed

further in a direction on which insufficient stress had been laid in the

first edition of this book. My own experience, as well as the works of

Wilhelm  Stekel  and  others,  have  since  taught  me  to  form  a  truerestimate  of  the  extent  and  importance  of  symbolism  in  dreams  (or

rather in unconscious thinking ). Thus in the course of these years

much has accumulated which demands attention. I have endeavoured

to  take  these  innovations  into  account  by  making  numerous

interpolations in the text and by additional footnotes. If these additions

threaten at times to burst the whole framework of the book or if I have

not everywhere succeeded in bringing the original text up to the level

of our present knowledge, I must ask the reader’s indulgence for these

deficiencies: they are the results and signs of the present increasingly

rapid development of our science. I may even venture to prophesy in

what  other  directions  later  editions  of  this  book  -  if  any  should  be

needed - will differ from the present one. They will have on the one

hand to afford a closer contact with the copious material presented in

imaginative writing, in myths, in linguistic usage and in folklore; while

on the other hand they will have to deal in greater detail than has here

been possible with the relations of dreams to neuroses and mental

diseases.

   Herr Otto Rank has given me valuable assistance in selecting the

additional matter and has been entirely responsible for correcting the

proofs.  I  owe  my  thanks  to  him  and  to  many  others  for  their

contributions and corrections.

 

VIENNA, Spring 1911

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        511

 

                          Preface to the Fourth Edition

 

Last  year  (1913)  Dr.  A.  A.  Brill  of  New  York  produced  an  English

translation of this book (The Interpretation of Dreams, G. Allen & Co.,

London).

   On this occasion Dr. Otto Rank has not only corrected the proofs but

has  also  contributed  two  self-contained  chapters  to  the  text  -  the

appendices to Chapter VI.

 VIENNA, June 1914

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        512

 

                            Preface to the Fifth Edition

 

Interest in the Interpretation of Dreams has not flagged even during

the  World  War,  and  while  it  is  still  in  progress  a  new  edition  has

become necessary. It has not been possible, however, to notice fully

publications since 1914; neither Dr. Rank nor I have any knowledge of

foreign works since that date.

   A Hungarian translation, prepared by Dr. Hollós and Dr. Ferenczi, is

on  the  point  of  appearing.  In  1916-17  my Introductory  Lectures  on

Psycho-Analysis  were  published  in  Vienna  by  Hugo  Heller.  The

central section of these, comprising eleven lectures, is devoted to an

account of dreams which aims at being more elementary and at being

in  closer  contact  with  the  theory  of  the  neuroses  than  the  present

work.  On  the  whole  it  is  in  the  nature  of  an  epitome  of  the

Interpretation of Dreams, though at certain points it enters into greater

detail.

      I  have  not  been  able  to  bring  myself  to  embark  upon  any

fundamental revision of this book, which might bring it up to the level

of  our  present  psycho-analytic  views  but  would  on  the  other  hand

destroy its historic character. I think, however, that after an existence

of nearly twenty years it has accomplished its task.

 

BUDAPEST-STEINBRUCH, July 1918

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        513

 

                            Preface to the Sixth Edition

 

Owing to the difficulties in which the book trade is placed at present,

this new edition has long been in demand, and the preceding editionhas, for the first time, been reprinted without any alterations. Only the

bibliography  at  the  end  of  the  volume  has  been  completed  and

brought up to date by Dr. Otto Rank.

   Thus my assumption that after an existence of nearly twenty years

this book had accomplished its task has not been confirmed. On the

contrary, I might say that it has a new task to perform. If its earlier

function was to offer some information on the nature of dreams, now it

has  the  no  less  important  duty  of  dealing  with  the  obstinate

misunderstandings to which that information is subject.

 

VIENNA, April 1921

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        514

 

                          Preface to the Eighth Edition

 

During the interval between the publication of the last (seventh) edition

of this book in 1922 and the present one, my Gesammelte Schriften

have been issued in Vienna by the Internationaler Psychoanalytischer

Verlag.  The  second  volume  of  that  collection  consists  of  an  exact

reprint of the first edition of the Interpretation of Dreams, while the

third volume contains all the additions that have since been made to it.

The translations of the book which have appeared during the same

interval are based upon the usual, single-volume, form of the work: a

French one by I. Meyerson published under the title of La science des

rêves in the ‘Bibliothèque de Philosophie Contemporaine’ in 1926; a

Swedish one by John Landquist, Drömtydning (1927); and a Spanish

one by Luis López Ballesteros y de Torres, which occupies Volumes

VI and VII of the Obras Completas. The Hungarian translation, which I

thought was on the point of completion as long ago as in 1918, has

even now not appeared.

   In the present revised edition of the work I have again treated it

essentially  as  an  historic  document  and  I  have  only  made  such

alterations in it as were suggested by the clarification and deepening

of my own opinions. In accordance with this, I have finally given up theidea of including a list of works on the problems of dreams published

since  the  book’s  first  appearance,  and  that  section  has  now  been

dropped.  The  two  essays  which  Otto  Rank  contributed  to  earlier

editions, on ‘Dreams and Creative Writing’ and ‘Dreams and Myths’,

have also been omitted.

 

VIENNA, December 1929

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        515

 

              Preface to the Third (Revised) English Edition

 

In 1909 G. Stanley Hall invited me to Clark University, in Worcester, to

give the first lectures on psycho-analysis. In the same year Dr. Brill

published the first of his translations of my writings, which were soon

followed  by  further  ones.  If  psycho-analysis  now  plays  a  role  in

American intellectual life, or if it does so in the future, a large part of

this result will have to be attributed to this and other activities of Dr.

Brill’s.

   His first translation of The Interpretation of Dreams appeared in

1913. Since then much has taken place in the world, and much has

been changed in our views about the neuroses. This book, with the

new contribution to psychology which surprised the world when it was

published  (1900),  remains  essentially  unaltered.  It  contains,  even

according to my present-day judgement, the most valuable of all the

discoveries it has been my good fortune to make. Insight such as this

falls to one’s lot but once in a lifetime.

 

VIENNA, March 15, 1931

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        516

 

                                      CHAPTER I

 THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE DEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS

                                    OF DREAMS

 

In  the  pages  that  follow  I  shall  bring  forward  proof  that  there  is  a

psychological technique which makes it possible to interpret dreams,

and that, if that procedure is employed, every dream reveals itself as a

psychical structure which has a meaning and which can be inserted at

an assignable point in the mental activities of waking life. I shall further

endeavour to elucidate the processes to which the strangeness and

obscurity of dreams are due and to deduce from those processes the

nature  of  the  psychical  forces  by  whose  concurrent  or  mutually

opposing  action  dreams  are  generated.  Having  gone  thus  far,  my

description will break off, for it will have reached a point at which the

problem of dreams merges into more comprehensive problems, the

solution of which must be approached upon the basis of material of

another kind.

   I shall give by way of preface a review of the work done by earlier

writers  on  the  subject  as  well  as  of  the  present  position  of  the

problems of dreams in the world of science, since in the course of my

discussion I shall not often have occasion to revert to those topics.

For,  in  spite  of  many  thousands  of  years  of  effort,  the  scientific

understanding  of  dreams  has  made  very  little  advance  -  a  fact  so

generally admitted in the literature that it seems unnecessary to quote

instances in support of it. In these writings, of which a list appears at

the end of my work, many stimulating observations are to be found

and a quantity of interesting material bearing upon our theme, but little

or nothing that touches upon the essential nature of dreams or that

offers a final solution of any of their enigmas. And still less, of course,

has passed into the knowledge of educated laymen.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

  517

 

 

   It may be asked what view was taken of dreams in prehistoric times

by primitive races of men and what effect dreams may have had uponthe formation of their conceptions of the world and of the soul; and this

is a subject of such great interest that it is only with much reluctance

that I refrain from dealing with it in this connection. I must refer my

readers to the standard works of Sir John Lubbock, Herbert Spencer,

E. B. Tylor and others, and I will only add that we shall not be able to

appreciate the wide range of these problems and speculations until we

have dealt with the task that lies before us here - the interpretation of

dreams.

   The prehistoric view of dreams is no doubt echoed in the attitude

adopted towards dreams by the peoples of classical antiquity.¹ They

took  it  as  axiomatic  that  dreams  were  connected  with  the  world  of

superhuman  beings  in  whom  they  believed  and  that  they  were

revelations  from  gods  and  daemons.  There  could  be  no  question,

moreover,  that  for  the  dreamer  dreams  had  an  important  purpose,

which was as a rule to foretell the future. The extraordinary variety in

the content of dreams and in the impression they produced made it

difficult,  however,  to  have  any  uniform  view  of  them  and  made  it

necessary to classify dreams into numerous groups and subdivisions

according  to  their  importance  and  trustworthiness.  The  position

adopted towards dreams by individual philosophers in antiquity was

naturally  dependent  to  some  extent  upon  their  attitude  towards

divination in general.

   In the two works of Aristotle which deal with dreams, they have

already become a subject for psychological study. We are told that

dreams are not sent by the gods and are not of a divine character, but

that they are ‘daemonic’, since nature is ‘daemonic’ and not divine.

Dreams,  that  is,  do  not  arise  from  supernatural  manifestations  but

follow the laws of the human spirit, though the latter, it is true, is akin

to the divine. Dreams are defined as the mental activity of the sleeper

in so far as he is asleep.

 

   ¹  What follows is based on Büchsenschütz’s scholarly study (1868).

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        518

 

   Aristotle was aware of some of the characteristics of dream life. Heknew, for instance, that dreams give a magnified construction to small

stimuli arising during sleep. ‘Men think that they are walking through

fire  and  are  tremendously  hot,  when  there  is  only  a  slight  heating

about  certain  parts.’  And  from  this  circumstance  he  draws  the

conclusion that dreams may very well betray to a physician the first

signs of some bodily change which has not been observed in waking.¹

   Before the time of Aristotle, as we know, the ancients regarded

dreams  not  as  a  product  of  the  dreaming  mind  but  as  something

introduced by a divine agency; and already the two opposing currents,

which we shall find influencing opinions of dream-life at every period

of  history,  were  making  themselves  felt.  The  distinction  was  drawn

between truthful and valuable dreams, sent to the sleeper to warn him

or foretell the future, and vain, deceitful and worthless dreams, whose

purpose it was to mislead or destroy him.

   Gruppe (1906, 2, 930) quotes a classification of dreams on these

lines made by Macrobius and Artemidorus: ‘Dreams were divided into

two classes. One class was supposed to be influenced by the present

or past, but to have no future significance. It included the έυύπυια or

insomnia, which gave a direct representation of a given idea or of its

opposite - e.g. of hunger or of its satiation -, and the φαυτάσματα, which

lent  a  fantastic  extension  to  the  given  idea  -  e.g.  the  nightmare  or

ephialtes.  The  other  class,  on  the  contrary,  was  supposed  to

determine the future. It included (1) direct prophecies received in a

dream (the χρηματισμός  or oraculum),  (2)  previsions  of  some  future

event (the όραμα  or visio)  and  (3)  symbolic  dreams,  which  needed

interpretation (the όυειρος or somnium). This theory persisted for many

centuries.’

 

   ¹ The Greek physician Hippocrates deals with the relation of dreams to illnesses in one of

the chapters of his famous work.
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        519

 

   This variation in the value that was to be assigned to dreams was

closely  related  to  the  problem  of  ‘interpreting’  them.  Important

consequences  were  in  general  to  be  expected  from  dreams.  Butdreams  were  not  all  immediately  comprehensible  and  it  was

impossible to tell whether a particular unintelligible dream might not be

making some important announcement. This provided an incentive for

elaborating a method by which the unintelligible content of a dream

might be replaced by one that was comprehensible and significant. In

the later years of antiquity Artemidorus of Daldis was regarded as the

greatest authority on the interpretation of dreams, and the survival of

his  exhaustive  work  must  compensate  us  for  the  loss  of  the  other

writings on the same subject.¹

      The  pre-scientific  view  of  dreams  adopted  by  the  peoples  of

antiquity  was  certainly  in  complete  harmony  with  their  view  of  the

universe in general, which led them to project into the external world

as realities things which in fact enjoyed reality only within their own

minds. Moreover, their view of dreams took into account the principal

impression produced upon the waking mind in the morning by what is

left  of  a  dream  in  the  memory:  an  impression  of  something  alien,

arising from another world and contrasting with the remaining contents

of the mind. Incidentally, it would be a mistake to suppose that the

theory of the supernatural origin of dreams is without its supporters in

our  own  days.  We  may  leave  on  one  side  pietistic  and  mystical

writers, who, indeed, are perfectly justified in remaining in occupation

of what is left of the once wide domain of the supernatural so long as

that  field  is  not  conquered  by  scientific  explanation.  But  apart  from

them, one comes across clear-headed men, without any extravagant

ideas, who seek to support their religious faith in the existence and

activity  of  superhuman  spiritual  forces  precisely  by  the  inexplicable

nature of the phenomena of dreaming. (Cf. Haffner, 1887.) The high

esteem in which dream-life is held by some schools of philosophy (by

the followers of Schelling, for instance) is clearly an echo of the divine

nature  of  dreams  which  was  undisputed  in  antiquity.  Nor  are

discussions of the premonitory character of dreams and their power to

foretell the future at an end. For attempts at giving a psychological

explanation  have  been  inadequate  to  cover  the  material  collected,

however decidedly the sympathies of those of a scientific cast of mind

may incline against accepting any such beliefs.

 

   ¹ For the further history of dream-interpretation in the Middle Ages see Diepgen (1912) andthe  monographs  of  Förster  (1910  and  1911),  Gotthard  (1912),  etc.  Dream-interpretation
among the Jews has been discussed by Almoli (1848), Amram (1901), and Löwinger (1908);
also,  quite  recently  and  taking  account  of  psycho-analytic  findings,  by  Lauer  (1913).
Information  upon  dream-interpretation  among  the  Arabs  has  been  given  by  Drexl  (1909),
Schwarz (1913) and the missionary Tfinkdji (1913); among the Japanese by Miura (1906) and
Iwaya (1902); among the Chinese by Secker (1909-10); and among the people of India by
Negelein (1912).
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        520

 

 

   It is difficult to write a history of the scientific study of the problems of

dreams because, however valuable that study may have been at a

few points, no line of advance in any particular direction can be traced.

No  foundation  has  been  laid  of  secure  findings  upon  which  a  later

investigator  might  build;  but  each  new  writer  examines  the  same

problems afresh and begins again, as it were, from the beginning. If I

attempted  to  take  those  who  have  written  on  the  question  in

chronological order and to give a summary of their views upon the

problems of dreams, I should have to abandon any hope of giving a

comprehensive general picture of the present state of knowledge of

the subject. I have therefore chosen to frame my account according to

topics rather than authors and, as I raise each dream problem in turn,

I shall bring forward whatever material the literature contains for its

solution.

   Since, however, it has been impossible for me to cover the whole of

the  literature  of  the  subject,  widely  scattered  as  it  is  and  trenching

upon many other fields, I must ask my readers to be satisfied so long

as no fundamental fact and no important point of view is overlooked in

my description.

   Until recently most writers on the subject have felt obliged to treat

sleep and dreams as a single topic, and as a rule they have dealt in

addition  with  analogous  conditions  on  the  fringe  of  pathology,  and

dream-like states, such as hallucinations, visions and so on. The latest

works, on the contrary, show a preference for a restricted theme and

take as their subject, perhaps, some isolated question in the field of

dream-life.  I  should  be  glad  to  see  in  this  change  of  attitude  theexpression of a conviction that in such obscure matters it will only be

possible to arrive at explanations and agreed results by a series of

detailed  investigations.  A  piece  of  detailed  research  of  that  kind,

predominantly psychological in character, is all I have to offer in these

pages. I have had little occasion to deal with the problem of sleep, for

that is essentially a problem of physiology, even though one of the

characteristics  of  the  state  of  sleep  must  be  that  it  brings  about

modifications in the conditions of functioning of the mental apparatus.

The  literature  on  the  subject  of  sleep  is  accordingly  disregarded  in

what follows.

 

   The questions raised by a scientific enquiry into the phenomena of

dreams as such may be grouped under the headings which follow,

though a certain amount of overlapping can not be avoided.

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        521

 

                                          (A)

 

                    THE RELATION OF DREAMS TO WAKING LIFE

 

   The unsophisticated waking judgement of someone who has just

woken  from  sleep  assumes  that  his  dreams,  even  if  they  did  not

themselves come from another world, had at all events carried him off

into another world. The old physiologist Burdach (1838, 499), to whom

we owe a careful and shrewd account of the phenomena of dreams,

has given expression to this conviction in a much-quoted passage: ‘In

dreams, daily life, with its labours and pleasures, its joys and pains, is

never repeated. On the contrary, dreams have as their very aim to

free  us  from  it.  Even  when  our  whole  mind  has  been  filled  with

something, when we are torn by some deep sorrow or when all our

intellectual power is absorbed in some problem, a dream will do no

more than enter into the tone of our mood and represent reality in

symbols.’  I.  H.  Fichte  (1864,  1,  541),  in  the  same  sense,  actually

speaks of ‘complementary dreams’ and describes them as one of the

secret benefactions of the self-healing nature of the spirit. Strümpell(1877, 16) writes to similar effect in his study on the nature and origin

of dreams a work which is widely and deservedly held in high esteem:

‘A  man  who  dreams  is  removed  from  the  world  of  waking

consciousness.’  So  too  (ibid.,  17):  ‘In  dreams  our  memory  of  the

ordered contents of waking consciousness and of its normal behaviour

is as good as completely lost.’ And again (ibid., 19) he writes that ‘the

mind is cut off in dreams, almost without memory, from the ordinary

content and affairs of waking life.’

   The preponderant majority of writers, however, take a contrary view

of the relation of dreams to waking life. Thus Haffner (1887, 245): ‘In

the  first  place,  dreams  carry  on  waking  life.  Our  dreams  regularly

attach themselves to the ideas that have been in our consciousness

shortly before. Accurate observation will almost always find a thread

which connects a dream with the experiences of the previous day.’

Weygandt  (1893,  6)    specifically  contradicts  Burdach’s  statement

which  I  have  just  quoted:  ‘For  it  may  often,  and  apparently  in  the

majority of dreams, be observed that they actually lead us back to

ordinary life instead of freeing us from it.’ Maury (1878, 51) advances

a concise formula: ‘Nous rêvons de ce que nous avons vu, dit, désiré

ou  fait’  ¹;  while  Jessen,  in  his  book  on  psychology  (1855,  530),

remarks  at  somewhat  greater  length:  ‘the  content  of  a  dream  is

invariably more or less determined by the individual personality of the

dreamer, by his age, sex, class, standard of education and habitual

way of living, and by the events and experiences of his whole previous

life.’

 

   ¹ [‘We dream of what we have seen, said, desired or done.’]

 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        522

 

   The most uncompromising attitude on this question is adopted by J.

G. E. Maass, the philosopher (1805 ), quoted by Winterstein (1912):

‘Experience confirms our view that we dream most frequently of the

things on which our warmest passions are centred. And this shows

that our passions must have an influence on the production of our

dreams.  The  ambitious  man  dreams  of  the  laurels  he  has  won  (orimagines he has won) or of those he has still to win; while the lover is

busied in his dreams with the object of his sweet hopes. . . . All the

sensual  desires  and  repulsions  that  slumber  in  the  heart  can,  if

anything sets them in motion, cause a dream to arise from the ideas

that are associated with them or cause those ideas to intervene in a

dream that is already present.’

   The same view was taken in antiquity on the dependence of the

content of dreams upon waking life. Radestock (1879, 134) tells us

how before Xerxes started on his expedition against Greece, he was

given sound advice of a discouraging kind but was always urged on

again by his dreams; whereupon Artabanus, the sensible old Persian

interpreter  of  dreams,  observed  to  him  pertinently  that  as  a  rule

dream-pictures contain what the waking man already thinks.

   Lucretius’ didactic poem De rerum natura  contains  the  following

passage (IV, 962):

 

                                                Et quo quisque fere studio devinctus adhaeret
                                                aut quibus in rebus multum sumus ante morat
                                                atque in ea ratione fuit contenta magis mens,
                                                in somnis eadem plerumque videmur obire;
                                                causidici causas agere et componere leges,

                                                induperatores pugnare ac proelia obire . . .¹

 

   ¹ [‘And whatever be the pursuit to which one clings with devotion, whatever the things on

which we have been occupied much in the past, the mind being thus more intent upon that
pursuit, it is generally the same things that we seem to encounter in dreams: pleaders to
plead their cause and collate laws, generals to contend and engage battle . . .’]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        523

 

   Cicero (De divinatione, II, lxvii, 140) writes to exactly the same effect

as  Maury  so  many  years  later:  ‘Maximeque  reliquiae  rerum  earum

moventur in animis et agitantur de quibus vigilantes aut cogitavimus

aut egimus.’ ¹

      The  contradiction  between  these  two  views  upon  the  relation

between  dream-life  and  waking  life  seems  in  fact  insoluble.  It  is

therefore relevant at this point to recall the discussion of the subject by

Hildebrandt (1875, 8 ff.), who believes that it is impossible to describethe characteristics of dreams at all except by means of ‘a series of

contrasts  which  seem  to  sharpen  into  contradictions’.  ‘The  first  of

these  contrasts’,  he  writes,  ‘  is  afforded  on  the  one  hand  by  the

completeness with which dreams are secluded and separated from

real  and  actual  life  and  on  the  other  hand  by  their  constant

encroachment  upon  each  other  and  their  constant  mutual

dependence.  A  dream  is  something  completely  severed  from  the

reality experienced in waking life, something, as one might say, with

an hermetically sealed existence of its own, and separated from real

life by an impassable gulf. It sets us free from reality, extinguishes our

normal memory of it and places us in another world and in a quite

other  life-story  which  in  essentials  has  nothing  to  do  with  our  real

one. . . .’ Hildebrandt goes on to show how when we fall asleep our

whole  being  with  all  its  forms  of  existence  ‘disappears,  as  it  were,

through an invisible trap-door’. Then, perhaps, the dreamer may make

a  sea-voyage  to  St.  Helena  in  order  to  offer  Napoleon,  who  is  a

prisoner there, a choice bargain in Moselle wines. He is received most

affably by the ex-Emperor and feels almost sorry when he wakes and

the interesting illusion is destroyed. But let us compare the situation in

the dream, proceeds Hildebrandt, with reality. The dreamer has never

been  a  wine-merchant  and  has  never  wished  to  be.  He  has  never

gone on a sea-voyage, and if he did, St. Helena would be the last

place he would choose to go to. He nourishes no sympathetic feelings

whatever  towards  Napoleon,  but  on  the  contrary  a  fierce  patriotic

hatred. And, on top of all the rest, the dreamer was not even born

when  Napoleon  died  on  the  island;  so  that  to  have  any  personal

relations  with  him  was  beyond  the  bounds  of  possibility.  Thus  the

dream experience appears as something alien inserted between two

sections  of  life  which  are  perfectly  continuous  and  consistent  with

each other.

 

   ¹ [‘Then especially do the remnants of our waking thoughts and deeds move and stir within

the soul.’]
 


                            The Interpretation Of Dreams

                                                                                        524

 