one who can teach them, and themselves follow in the same way. And they

have the less difficulty in finding the nature of their own god in themselves,

because they have been compelled to gaze intensely on him; their recollection

clings to him, and they become possessed of him, and receive from him their

character and disposition, so far as man can participate in God. The qualities

of their god they attribute to the beloved, wherefore they love him all the

more, and if, like the Bacchic Nymphs, they draw inspiration from Zeus, they

pour  out  their  own  fountain  upon  him,  wanting  to  make  him  as  like  as

possible to their own god. But those who are the followers of Here seek a

royal love, and when they have found him they do just the same with him;

and in like manner the followers of Apollo, and of every other god walking in

the ways of their god, seek a love who is to be made like him whom they

serve, and when they have found him, they themselves imitate their god, and

persuade their love to do the same, and educate him into the manner and

nature of the god as far as they each can; for no feelings of envy or jealousy

are entertained by them towards their beloved, but they do their utmost to

create in him the greatest likeness of themselves and of the god whom they

honour. Thus fair and blissful to the beloved is the desire of the inspired

lover, and the initiation of which I speak into the mysteries of true love, if he

be captured by the lover and their purpose is effected. Now the beloved is

taken captive in the following manner:--


As I said at the beginning of this tale, I divided each soul into three-- two

horses and a charioteer; and one of the horses was good and the other bad: the

division may remain, but I have not yet explained in what the goodness or

badness of either consists, and to that I will now proceed. The right-hand

horse is upright and cleanly made; he has a lofty neck and an aquiline nose;

his colour is white, and his eyes dark; he is a lover of honour and modesty

and temperance, and the follower of true glory; he needs no touch of the

whip, but is guided by word and admonition only. The other is a crooked

lumbering animal, put together anyhow; he has a short thick neck; he is flat-

faced and of a dark colour, with grey eyes and blood-red complexion (Or

with grey and blood-shot eyes.); the mate of insolence and pride, shag-eared

and deaf, hardly yielding to whip and spur. Now when the charioteer beholds

the vision of love, and has his whole soul warmed through sense, and is full

of the prickings and ticklings of desire, the obedient steed, then as always

under the government of shame, refrains from leaping on the beloved; but theother, heedless of the pricks and of the blows of the whip, plunges and runs

away,  giving  all  manner  of  trouble  to  his  companion  and  the  charioteer,

whom he forces to approach the beloved and to remember the joys of love.

They at first indignantly oppose him and will not be urged on to do terrible

and unlawful deeds; but at last, when he persists in plaguing them, they yield

and agree to do as he bids them. And now they are at the spot and behold the

flashing beauty of the beloved; which when the charioteer sees, his memory

is carried to the true beauty, whom he beholds in company with Modesty like

an image placed upon a holy pedestal. He sees her, but he is afraid and falls

backwards in adoration, and by his fall is compelled to pull back the reins

with such violence as to bring both the steeds on their haunches, the one

willing and unresisting, the unruly one very unwilling; and when they have

gone  back  a  little,  the  one  is  overcome  with  shame  and  wonder,  and  his

whole soul is bathed in perspiration; the other, when the pain is over which

the bridle and the fall had given him, having with difficulty taken breath, is

full of wrath and reproaches, which he heaps upon the charioteer and his

fellow- steed, for want of courage and manhood, declaring that they have

been false to their agreement and guilty of desertion. Again they refuse, and

again he urges them on, and will scarce yield to their prayer that he would

wait until another time. When the appointed hour comes, they make as if they

had forgotten, and he reminds them, fighting and neighing and dragging them

on, until at length he on the same thoughts intent, forces them to draw near

again. And when they are near he stoops his head and puts up his tail, and

takes the bit in his teeth and pulls shamelessly. Then the charioteer is worse

off than ever; he falls back like a racer at the barrier, and with a still more

violent wrench drags the bit out of the teeth of the wild steed and covers his

abusive tongue and jaws with blood, and forces his legs and haunches to the

ground and punishes him sorely. And when this has happened several times

and the villain has ceased from his wanton way, he is tamed and humbled,

and follows the will of the charioteer, and when he sees the beautiful one he

is ready to die of fear. And from that time forward the soul of the lover

follows the beloved in modesty and holy fear.


And so the beloved who, like a god, has received every true and loyal service

from his lover, not in pretence but in reality, being also himself of a nature

friendly to his admirer, if in former days he has blushed to own his passion

and  turned  away  his  lover,  because  his  youthful  companions  or  othersslanderously told him that he would be disgraced, now as years advance, at

the appointed age and time, is led to receive him into communion. For fate

which has ordained that there shall be no friendship among the evil has also

ordained that there shall ever be friendship among the good. And the beloved

when he has received him into communion and intimacy, is quite amazed at

the good-will of the lover; he recognises that the inspired friend is worth all

other friends or kinsmen; they have nothing of friendship in them worthy to

be compared with his. And when this feeling continues and he is nearer to

him and embraces him, in gymnastic exercises and at other times of meeting,

then  the  fountain  of  that  stream,  which  Zeus  when  he  was  in  love  with

Ganymede named Desire, overflows upon the lover, and some enters into his

soul, and some when he is filled flows out again; and as a breeze or an echo

rebounds from the smooth rocks and returns whence it came, so does the

stream of beauty, passing through the eyes which are the windows of the

soul,  come  back  to  the  beautiful  one;  there  arriving  and  quickening  the

passages of the wings, watering them and inclining them to grow, and filling

the soul of the beloved also with love. And thus he loves, but he knows not

what; he does not understand and cannot explain his own state; he appears to

have caught the infection of blindness from another; the lover is his mirror in

whom he is beholding himself, but he is not aware of this. When he is with

the lover, both cease from their pain, but when he is away then he longs as he

is longed for, and has love's image, love for love (Anteros) lodging in his

breast, which he calls and believes to be not love but friendship only, and his

desire is as the desire of the other, but weaker; he wants to see him, touch

him, kiss him, embrace him, and probably not long afterwards his desire is

accomplished. When they meet, the wanton steed of the lover has a word to

say to the charioteer; he would like to have a little pleasure in return for many

pains, but the wanton steed of the beloved says not a word, for he is bursting

with passion which he understands not;--he throws his arms round the lover

and embraces him as his dearest friend; and, when they are side by side, he is

not  in  a  state  in  which  he  can  refuse  the  lover  anything,  if  he  ask  him;

although his fellow-steed and the charioteer oppose him with the arguments

of  shame  and  reason.  After  this  their  happiness  depends  upon  their  self-

control; if the better elements of the mind which lead to order and philosophy

prevail, then they pass their life here in happiness and harmony--masters of

themselves and orderly--enslaving the vicious and emancipating the virtuous

elements of the soul; and when the end comes, they are light and winged forflight,  having  conquered  in  one  of  the  three  heavenly  or  truly  Olympian

victories; nor can human discipline or divine inspiration confer any greater

blessing on man than this. If, on the other hand, they leave philosophy and

lead the lower life of ambition, then probably, after wine or in some other

careless hour, the two wanton animals take the two souls when off their guard

and bring them together, and they accomplish that desire of their hearts which

to the many is bliss; and this having once enjoyed they continue to enjoy, yet

rarely because they have not the approval of the whole soul. They too are

dear, but not so dear to one another as the others, either at the time of their

love or afterwards. They consider that they have given and taken from each

other the most sacred pledges, and they may not break them and fall into

enmity. At last they pass out of the body, unwinged, but eager to soar, and

thus obtain no mean reward of love and madness. For those who have once

begun the heavenward pilgrimage may not go down again to darkness and the

journey beneath the earth, but they live in light always; happy companions in

their pilgrimage, and when the time comes at which they receive their wings

they have the same plumage because of their love.


Thus great are the heavenly blessings which the friendship of a lover will

confer upon you, my youth. Whereas the attachment of the non-lover, which

is alloyed with a worldly prudence and has worldly and niggardly ways of

doling out benefits, will breed in your soul those vulgar qualities which the

populace applaud, will send you bowling round the earth during a period of

nine thousand years, and leave you a fool in the world below.


And thus, dear Eros, I have made and paid my recantation, as well and as

fairly as I could; more especially in the matter of the poetical figures which I

was compelled to use, because Phaedrus would have them. And now forgive

the past and accept the present, and be gracious and merciful to me, and do

not in thine anger deprive me of sight, or take from me the art of love which

thou hast given me, but grant that I may be yet more esteemed in the eyes of

the fair. And if Phaedrus or I myself said anything rude in our first speeches,

blame Lysias, who is the father of the brat, and let us have no more of his

progeny; bid him study philosophy, like his brother Polemarchus; and then

his lover Phaedrus will no longer halt between two opinions, but will dedicate

himself wholly to love and to philosophical discourses.PHAEDRUS: I join in the prayer, Socrates, and say with you, if this be for

my good, may your words come to pass. But why did you make your second

oration so much finer than the first? I wonder why. And I begin to be afraid

that I shall lose conceit of Lysias, and that he will appear tame in comparison,

even if he be willing to put another as fine and as long as yours into the field,

which I doubt. For quite lately one of your politicians was abusing him on

this very account; and called him a 'speech writer' again and again. So that a

feeling of pride may probably induce him to give up writing speeches.


SOCRATES: What a very amusing notion! But I think, my young man, that

you are much mistaken in your friend if you imagine that he is frightened at a

little noise; and, possibly, you think that his assailant was in earnest?


PHAEDRUS: I thought, Socrates, that he was. And you are aware that the

greatest and most influential statesmen are ashamed of writing speeches and

leaving  them  in  a  written  form,  lest  they  should  be  called  Sophists  by

posterity.


SOCRATES: You seem to be unconscious, Phaedrus, that the 'sweet elbow'

(A proverb, like 'the grapes are sour,' applied to pleasures which cannot be

had, meaning sweet things which, like the elbow, are out of the reach of the

mouth. The promised pleasure turns out to be a long and tedious affair.) of

the proverb is really the long arm of the Nile. And you appear to be equally

unaware of the fact that this sweet elbow of theirs is also a long arm. For

there  is  nothing  of  which  our  great  politicians  are  so  fond  as  of  writing

speeches and bequeathing them to posterity. And they add their admirers'

names at the top of the writing, out of gratitude to them.


PHAEDRUS: What do you mean? I do not understand.


SOCRATES: Why, do you not know that when a politician writes, he begins

with the names of his approvers?


PHAEDRUS: How so?


SOCRATES: Why, he begins in this manner: 'Be it enacted by the senate, the

people, or both, on the motion of a certain person,' who is our author; and soputting  on  a  serious  face,  he  proceeds  to  display  his  own  wisdom  to  his

admirers in what is often a long and tedious composition. Now what is that

sort of thing but a regular piece of authorship?


PHAEDRUS: True.


SOCRATES: And if the law is finally approved, then the author leaves the

theatre in high delight; but if the law is rejected and he is done out of his

speech-making, and not thought good enough to write, then he and his party

are in mourning.


PHAEDRUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: So far are they from despising, or rather so highly do they

value the practice of writing.


PHAEDRUS: No doubt.


SOCRATES: And when the king or orator has the power, as Lycurgus or

Solon or Darius had, of attaining an immortality or authorship in a state, is he

not thought by posterity, when they see his compositions, and does he not

think himself, while he is yet alive, to be a god?


PHAEDRUS: Very true.


SOCRATES:  Then  do  you  think  that  any  one  of  this  class,  however  ill-

disposed, would reproach Lysias with being an author?


PHAEDRUS: Not upon your view; for according to you he would be casting

a slur upon his own favourite pursuit.


SOCRATES: Any one may see that there is no disgrace in the mere fact of

writing.


PHAEDRUS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: The disgrace begins when a man writes not well, but badly.PHAEDRUS: Clearly.


SOCRATES: And what is well and what is badly--need we ask Lysias, or any

other poet or orator, who ever wrote or will write either a political or any

other work, in metre or out of metre, poet or prose writer, to teach us this?


PHAEDRUS: Need we? For what should a man live if not for the pleasures

of  discourse?  Surely  not  for  the  sake  of  bodily  pleasures,  which  almost

always have previous pain as a condition of them, and therefore are rightly

called slavish.


SOCRATES:  There  is  time  enough.  And  I  believe  that  the  grasshoppers

chirruping after their manner in the heat of the sun over our heads are talking

to one another and looking down at us. What would they say if they saw that

we, like the many, are not conversing, but slumbering at mid-day, lulled by

their voices, too indolent to think? Would they not have a right to laugh at

us? They might imagine that we were slaves, who, coming to rest at a place

of resort of theirs, like sheep lie asleep at noon around the well. But if they

see us discoursing, and like Odysseus sailing past them, deaf to their siren

voices, they may perhaps, out of respect, give us of the gifts which they

receive from the gods that they may impart them to men.


PHAEDRUS: What gifts do you mean? I never heard of any.


SOCRATES: A lover of music like yourself ought surely to have heard the

story of the grasshoppers, who are said to have been human beings in an age

before the Muses. And when the Muses came and song appeared they were

ravished  with  delight;  and  singing  always,  never  thought  of  eating  and

drinking, until at last in their forgetfulness they died. And now they live again

in the grasshoppers; and this is the return which the Muses make to them--

they neither hunger, nor thirst, but from the hour of their birth are always

singing, and never eating or drinking; and when they die they go and inform

the  Muses  in  heaven  who  honours  them  on  earth.  They  win  the  love  of

Terpsichore for the dancers by their report of them; of Erato for the lovers,

and  of  the  other  Muses  for  those  who  do  them  honour,  according  to  the

several ways of honouring them;--of Calliope the eldest Muse and of Urania

who is next to her, for the philosophers, of whose music the grasshoppersmake report to them; for these are the Muses who are chiefly concerned with

heaven and thought, divine as well as human, and they have the sweetest

utterance. For many reasons, then, we ought always to talk and not to sleep at

mid-day.


PHAEDRUS: Let us talk.


SOCRATES: Shall we discuss the rules of writing and speech as we were

proposing?


PHAEDRUS: Very good.


SOCRATES: In good speaking should not the mind of the speaker know the

truth of the matter about which he is going to speak?


PHAEDRUS: And yet, Socrates, I have heard that he who would be an orator

has nothing to do with true justice, but only with that which is likely to be

approved  by  the  many  who  sit  in  judgment;  nor  with  the  truly  good  or

honourable, but only with opinion about them, and that from opinion comes

persuasion, and not from the truth.


SOCRATES:  The  words  of  the  wise  are  not  to  be  set  aside;  for  there  is

probably something in them; and therefore the meaning of this saying is not

hastily to be dismissed.


PHAEDRUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: Let us put the matter thus:--Suppose that I persuaded you to

buy a horse and go to the wars. Neither of us knew what a horse was like, but

I knew that you believed a horse to be of tame animals the one which has the

longest ears.


PHAEDRUS: That would be ridiculous.


SOCRATES: There is something more ridiculous coming:--Suppose, further,

that in sober earnest I, having persuaded you of this, went and composed a

speech in honour of an ass, whom I entitled a horse beginning: 'A noble

animal and a most useful possession, especially in war, and you may get onhis back and fight, and he will carry baggage or anything.'


PHAEDRUS: How ridiculous!


SOCRATES: Ridiculous! Yes; but is not even a ridiculous friend better than

a cunning enemy?


PHAEDRUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And when the orator instead of putting an ass in the place of a

horse, puts good for evil, being himself as ignorant of their true nature as the

city on which he imposes is ignorant; and having studied the notions of the

multitude, falsely persuades them not about 'the shadow of an ass,' which he

confounds with a horse, but about good which he confounds with evil,--what

will be the harvest which rhetoric will be likely to gather after the sowing of

that seed?


PHAEDRUS: The reverse of good.


SOCRATES: But perhaps rhetoric has been getting too roughly handled by

us, and she might answer: What amazing nonsense you are talking! As if I

forced any man to learn to speak in ignorance of the truth! Whatever my

advice may be worth, I should have told him to arrive at the truth first, and

then come to me. At the same time I boldly assert that mere knowledge of the

truth will not give you the art of persuasion.


PHAEDRUS: There is reason in the lady's defence of herself.


SOCRATES: Quite true; if only the other arguments which remain to be

brought up bear her witness that she is an art at all. But I seem to hear them

arraying themselves on the opposite side, declaring that she speaks falsely,

and that rhetoric is a mere routine and trick, not an art. Lo! a Spartan appears,

and says that there never is nor ever will be a real art of speaking which is

divorced from the truth.


PHAEDRUS: And what are these arguments, Socrates? Bring them out that

we may examine them.SOCRATES: Come out, fair children, and convince Phaedrus, who is the

father of similar beauties, that he will never be able to speak about anything

as he ought to speak unless he have a knowledge of philosophy. And let

Phaedrus answer you.


PHAEDRUS: Put the question.


SOCRATES: Is not rhetoric, taken generally, a universal art of enchanting

the  mind  by  arguments;  which  is  practised  not  only  in  courts  and  public

assemblies, but in private houses also, having to do with all matters, great as

well as small, good and bad alike, and is in all equally right, and equally to be

esteemed--that is what you have heard?


PHAEDRUS: Nay, not exactly that; I should say rather that I have heard the

art confined to speaking and writing in lawsuits, and to speaking in public

assemblies--not extended farther.


SOCRATES: Then I suppose that you have only heard of the rhetoric of

Nestor and Odysseus, which they composed in their leisure hours when at

Troy, and never of the rhetoric of Palamedes?


PHAEDRUS: No more than of Nestor and Odysseus, unless Gorgias is your

Nestor, and Thrasymachus or Theodorus your Odysseus.


SOCRATES: Perhaps that is my meaning. But let us leave them. And do you

tell me, instead, what are plaintiff and defendant doing in a law court-- are

they not contending?


PHAEDRUS: Exactly so.


SOCRATES: About the just and unjust--that is the matter in dispute?


PHAEDRUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And a professor of the art will make the same thing appear to

the same persons to be at one time just, at another time, if he is so inclined, to

be unjust?PHAEDRUS: Exactly.


SOCRATES: And when he speaks in the assembly, he will make the same

things seem good to the city at one time, and at another time the reverse of

good?


PHAEDRUS: That is true.


SOCRATES: Have we not heard of the Eleatic Palamedes (Zeno), who has

an art of speaking by which he makes the same things appear to his hearers

like and unlike, one and many, at rest and in motion?


PHAEDRUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: The art of disputation, then, is not confined to the courts and

the assembly, but is one and the same in every use of language; this is the art,

if there be such an art, which is able to find a likeness of everything to which

a likeness can be found, and draws into the light of day the likenesses and

disguises which are used by others?


PHAEDRUS: How do you mean?


SOCRATES: Let me put the matter thus: When will there be more chance of

deception--when the difference is large or small?


PHAEDRUS: When the difference is small.


SOCRATES:  And  you  will  be  less  likely  to  be  discovered  in  passing  by

degrees into the other extreme than when you go all at once?


PHAEDRUS: Of course.


SOCRATES: He, then, who would deceive others, and not be deceived, must

exactly know the real likenesses and differences of things?


PHAEDRUS: He must.


SOCRATES: And if he is ignorant of the true nature of any subject, how canhe detect the greater or less degree of likeness in other things to that of which

by the hypothesis he is ignorant?


PHAEDRUS: He cannot.


SOCRATES: And when men are deceived and their notions are at variance

with realities, it is clear that the error slips in through resemblances?


PHAEDRUS: Yes, that is the way.


SOCRATES: Then he who would be a master of the art must understand the

real nature of everything; or he will never know either how to make the

gradual departure from truth into the opposite of truth which is effected by

the help of resemblances, or how to avoid it?


PHAEDRUS: He will not.


SOCRATES: He then, who being ignorant of the truth aims at appearances,

will only attain an art of rhetoric which is ridiculous and is not an art at all?


PHAEDRUS: That may be expected.


SOCRATES: Shall I propose that we look for examples of art and want of

art, according to our notion of them, in the speech of Lysias which you have

in your hand, and in my own speech?


PHAEDRUS: Nothing could be better; and indeed I think that our previous

argument has been too abstract and wanting in illustrations.


SOCRATES:  Yes;  and  the  two  speeches  happen  to  afford  a  very  good

example of the way in which the speaker who knows the truth may, without

any serious purpose, steal away the hearts of his hearers. This piece of good-

fortune I attribute to the local deities; and, perhaps, the prophets of the Muses

who are singing over our heads may have imparted their inspiration to me.

For I do not imagine that I have any rhetorical art of my own.


PHAEDRUS: Granted; if you will only please to get on.SOCRATES: Suppose that you read me the first words of Lysias' speech.


PHAEDRUS: 'You know how matters stand with me, and how, as I conceive,

they might be arranged for our common interest; and I maintain that I ought

not to fail in my suit, because I am not your lover. For lovers repent--'


SOCRATES: Enough:--Now, shall I point out the rhetorical error of those

words?


PHAEDRUS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  Every  one  is  aware  that  about  some  things  we  are  agreed,

whereas about other things we differ.


PHAEDRUS: I think that I understand you; but will you explain yourself?


SOCRATES: When any one speaks of iron and silver, is not the same thing

present in the minds of all?


PHAEDRUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES:  But  when  any  one  speaks  of  justice  and  goodness  we  part

company and are at odds with one another and with ourselves?


PHAEDRUS: Precisely.


SOCRATES: Then in some things we agree, but not in others?


PHAEDRUS: That is true.


SOCRATES: In which are we more likely to be deceived, and in which has

rhetoric the greater power?


PHAEDRUS: Clearly, in the uncertain class.


SOCRATES:  Then  the  rhetorician  ought  to  make  a  regular  division,  and

acquire a distinct notion of both classes, as well of that in which the many err,

as of that in which they do not err?PHAEDRUS:  He  who  made  such  a  distinction  would  have  an  excellent

principle.


SOCRATES: Yes; and in the next place he must have a keen eye for the

observation of particulars in speaking, and not make a mistake about the class

to which they are to be referred.


PHAEDRUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Now to which class does love belong--to the debatable or to the

undisputed class?


PHAEDRUS: To the debatable, clearly; for if not, do you think that love

would have allowed you to say as you did, that he is an evil both to the lover

and the beloved, and also the greatest possible good?


SOCRATES:  Capital.  But  will  you  tell  me  whether  I  defined  love  at  the

beginning  of  my  speech?  for,  having  been  in  an  ecstasy,  I  cannot  well

remember.


PHAEDRUS: Yes, indeed; that you did, and no mistake.


SOCRATES: Then I perceive that the Nymphs of Achelous and Pan the son

of Hermes, who inspired me, were far better rhetoricians than Lysias the son

of Cephalus. Alas! how inferior to them he is! But perhaps I am mistaken;

and  Lysias  at  the  commencement  of  his  lover's  speech  did  insist  on  our

supposing love to be something or other which he fancied him to be, and

according  to  this  model  he  fashioned  and  framed  the  remainder  of  his

discourse. Suppose we read his beginning over again:


PHAEDRUS: If you please; but you will not find what you want.


SOCRATES: Read, that I may have his exact words.


PHAEDRUS: 'You know how matters stand with me, and how, as I conceive,

they might be arranged for our common interest; and I maintain I ought not to

fail  in  my  suit  because  I  am  not  your  lover,  for  lovers  repent  of  the

kindnesses which they have shown, when their love is over.'SOCRATES: Here he appears to have done just the reverse of what he ought;

for he has begun at the end, and is swimming on his back through the flood to

the place of starting. His address to the fair youth begins where the lover

would have ended. Am I not right, sweet Phaedrus?


PHAEDRUS: Yes, indeed, Socrates; he does begin at the end.


SOCRATES: Then as to the other topics--are they not thrown down anyhow?

Is there any principle in them? Why should the next topic follow next in

order, or any other topic? I cannot help fancying in my ignorance that he

wrote off boldly just what came into his head, but I dare say that you would

recognize a rhetorical necessity in the succession of the several parts of the

composition?


PHAEDRUS: You have too good an opinion of me if you think that I have

any such insight into his principles of composition.


SOCRATES: At any rate, you will allow that every discourse ought to be a

living creature, having a body of its own and a head and feet; there should be

a middle, beginning, and end, adapted to one another and to the whole?


PHAEDRUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Can this be said of the discourse of Lysias? See whether you

can find any more connexion in his words than in the epitaph which is said by

some to have been inscribed on the grave of Midas the Phrygian.


PHAEDRUS: What is there remarkable in the epitaph?


SOCRATES: It is as follows:--


'I am a maiden of bronze and lie on the tomb of Midas; So long as water

flows and tall trees grow, So long here on this spot by his sad tomb abiding, I

shall declare to passers-by that Midas sleeps below.'


Now in this rhyme whether a line comes first or comes last, as you will

perceive, makes no difference.PHAEDRUS: You are making fun of that oration of ours.


SOCRATES:  Well,  I  will  say  no  more  about  your  friend's  speech  lest  I

should give offence to you; although I think that it might furnish many other

examples of what a man ought rather to avoid. But I will proceed to the other

speech, which, as I think, is also suggestive to students of rhetoric.


PHAEDRUS: In what way?


SOCRATES: The two speeches, as you may remember, were unlike; the one

argued that the lover and the other that the non-lover ought to be accepted.


PHAEDRUS: And right manfully.


SOCRATES: You should rather say 'madly;' and madness was the argument

of them, for, as I said, 'love is a madness.'


PHAEDRUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And of madness there were two kinds; one produced by human

infirmity, the other was a divine release of the soul from the yoke of custom

and convention.


PHAEDRUS: True.


SOCRATES: The divine madness was subdivided into four kinds, prophetic,

initiatory, poetic, erotic, having four gods presiding over them; the first was

the inspiration of Apollo, the second that of Dionysus, the third that of the

Muses, the fourth that of Aphrodite and Eros. In the description of the last

kind of madness, which was also said to be the best, we spoke of the affection

of love in a figure, into which we introduced a tolerably credible and possibly

true though partly erring myth, which was also a hymn in honour of Love,

who is your lord and also mine, Phaedrus, and the guardian of fair children,

and to him we sung the hymn in measured and solemn strain.


PHAEDRUS: I know that I had great pleasure in listening to you.


SOCRATES: Let us take this instance and note how the transition was madefrom blame to praise.


PHAEDRUS: What do you mean?


SOCRATES: I mean to say that the composition was mostly playful. Yet in

these chance fancies of the hour were involved two principles of which we

should be too glad to have a clearer description if art could give us one.


PHAEDRUS: What are they?


SOCRATES: First, the comprehension of scattered particulars in one idea; as

in our definition of love, which whether true or false certainly gave clearness

and  consistency  to  the  discourse,  the  speaker  should  define  his  several

notions and so make his meaning clear.


PHAEDRUS: What is the other principle, Socrates?


SOCRATES: The second principle is that of division into species according

to the natural formation, where the joint is, not breaking any part as a bad

carver might. Just as our two discourses, alike assumed, first of all, a single

form  of  unreason;  and  then,  as  the  body  which  from  being  one  becomes

double and may be divided into a left side and right side, each having parts

right and left of the same name--after this manner the speaker proceeded to

divide the parts of the left side and did not desist until he found in them an

evil  or  left-handed  love  which  he  justly  reviled;  and  the  other  discourse

leading us to the madness which lay on the right side, found another love,

also having the same name, but divine, which the speaker held up before us

and applauded and affirmed to be the author of the greatest benefits.


PHAEDRUS: Most true.


SOCRATES: I am myself a great lover of these processes of division and

generalization; they help me to speak and to think. And if I find any man who

is able to see 'a One and Many' in nature, him I follow, and 'walk in his

footsteps as if he were a god.' And those who have this art, I have hitherto

been in the habit of calling dialecticians; but God knows whether the name is

right or not. And I should like to know what name you would give to your orto Lysias' disciples, and whether this may not be that famous art of rhetoric

which Thrasymachus and others teach and practise? Skilful speakers they are,

and impart their skill to any who is willing to make kings of them and to

bring gifts to them.


PHAEDRUS: Yes, they are royal men; but their art is not the same with the

art of those whom you call, and rightly, in my opinion, dialecticians:-- Still

we are in the dark about rhetoric.


SOCRATES: What do you mean? The remains of it, if there be anything

remaining which can be brought under rules of art, must be a fine thing; and,

at any rate, is not to be despised by you and me. But how much is left?


PHAEDRUS: There is a great deal surely to be found in books of rhetoric?


SOCRATES:  Yes;  thank  you  for  reminding  me:--There  is  the  exordium,

showing how the speech should begin, if I remember rightly; that is what you

mean-- the niceties of the art?


PHAEDRUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then follows the statement of facts, and upon that witnesses;

thirdly, proofs; fourthly, probabilities are to come; the great Byzantian word-

maker  also  speaks,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  of  confirmation  and  further

confirmation.


PHAEDRUS: You mean the excellent Theodorus.


SOCRATES: Yes; and he tells how refutation or further refutation is to be

managed,  whether  in  accusation  or  defence.  I  ought  also  to  mention  the

illustrious  Parian,  Evenus,  who  first  invented  insinuations  and  indirect

praises; and also indirect censures, which according to some he put into verse

to help the memory. But shall I 'to dumb forgetfulness consign' Tisias and

Gorgias, who are not ignorant that probability is superior to truth, and who by

force of argument make the little appear great and the great little, disguise the

new in old fashions and the old in new fashions, and have discovered forms

for  everything,  either  short  or  going  on  to  infinity.  I  remember  Prodicuslaughing when I told him of this; he said that he had himself discovered the

true rule of art, which was to be neither long nor short, but of a convenient

length.


PHAEDRUS: Well done, Prodicus!


SOCRATES: Then there is Hippias the Elean stranger, who probably agrees

with him.


PHAEDRUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And there is also Polus, who has treasuries of diplasiology, and

gnomology, and eikonology, and who teaches in them the names of which

Licymnius made him a present; they were to give a polish.


PHAEDRUS: Had not Protagoras something of the same sort?


SOCRATES: Yes, rules of correct diction and many other fine precepts; for

the 'sorrows of a poor old man,' or any other pathetic case, no one is better

than the Chalcedonian giant; he can put a whole company of people into a

passion  and  out  of  one  again  by  his  mighty  magic,  and  is  first-rate  at

inventing or disposing of any sort of calumny on any grounds or none. All of

them agree in asserting that a speech should end in a recapitulation, though

they do not all agree to use the same word.


PHAEDRUS: You mean that there should be a summing up of the arguments

in order to remind the hearers of them.


SOCRATES: I have now said all that I have to say of the art of rhetoric: have

you anything to add?


PHAEDRUS: Not much; nothing very important.


SOCRATES: Leave the unimportant and let us bring the really important

question into the light of day, which is: What power has this art of rhetoric,

and when?


PHAEDRUS: A very great power in public meetings.SOCRATES: It has. But I should like to know whether you have the same

feeling as I have about the rhetoricians? To me there seem to be a great many

holes in their web.


PHAEDRUS: Give an example.


SOCRATES: I will. Suppose a person to come to your friend Eryximachus,

or to his father Acumenus, and to say to him: 'I know how to apply drugs

which shall have either a heating or a cooling effect, and I can give a vomit

and also a purge, and all that sort of thing; and knowing all this, as I do, I

claim to be a physician and to make physicians by imparting this knowledge

to others,'--what do you suppose that they would say?


PHAEDRUS: They would be sure to ask him whether he knew 'to whom' he

would give his medicines, and 'when,' and 'how much.'


SOCRATES: And suppose that he were to reply: 'No; I know nothing of all

that; I expect the patient who consults me to be able to do these things for

himself'?


PHAEDRUS: They would say in reply that he is a madman or a pedant who

fancies that he is a physician because he has read something in a book, or has

stumbled on a prescription or two, although he has no real understanding of

the art of medicine.


SOCRATES: And suppose a person were to come to Sophocles or Euripides

and say that he knows how to make a very long speech about a small matter,

and a short speech about a great matter, and also a sorrowful speech, or a

terrible, or threatening speech, or any other kind of speech, and in teaching

this fancies that he is teaching the art of tragedy--?


PHAEDRUS: They too would surely laugh at him if he fancies that tragedy is

anything  but  the  arranging  of  these  elements  in  a  manner  which  will  be

suitable to one another and to the whole.


SOCRATES: But I do not suppose that they would be rude or abusive to him:

Would  they  not  treat  him  as  a  musician  a  man  who  thinks  that  he  is  aharmonist  because  he  knows  how  to  pitch  the  highest  and  lowest  note;

happening to meet such an one he would not say to him savagely, 'Fool, you

are mad!' But like a musician, in a gentle and harmonious tone of voice, he

would answer: 'My good friend, he who would be a harmonist must certainly

know this, and yet he may understand nothing of harmony if he has not got

beyond your stage of knowledge, for you only know the preliminaries of

harmony and not harmony itself.'


PHAEDRUS: Very true.


SOCRATES:  And  will  not  Sophocles  say  to  the  display  of  the  would-be

tragedian, that this is not tragedy but the preliminaries of tragedy? and will

not Acumenus say the same of medicine to the would-be physician?


PHAEDRUS: Quite true.


SOCRATES:  And  if  Adrastus  the  mellifluous  or  Pericles  heard  of  these

wonderful arts, brachylogies and eikonologies and all the hard names which

we have been endeavouring to draw into the light of day, what would they

say? Instead of losing temper and applying uncomplimentary epithets, as you

and I have been doing, to the authors of such an imaginary art, their superior

wisdom would rather censure us, as well as them. 'Have a little patience,

Phaedrus and Socrates, they would say; you should not be in such a passion

with those who from some want of dialectical skill are unable to define the

nature of rhetoric, and consequently suppose that they have found the art in

the preliminary conditions of it, and when these have been taught by them to

others, fancy that the whole art of rhetoric has been taught by them; but as to

using  the  several  instruments  of  the  art  effectively,  or  making  the

composition a whole,--an application of it such as this is they regard as an

easy thing which their disciples may make for themselves.'


PHAEDRUS: I quite admit, Socrates, that the art of rhetoric which these men

teach and of which they write is such as you describe--there I agree with you.

But I still want to know where and how the true art of rhetoric and persuasion

is to be acquired.


SOCRATES: The perfection which is required of the finished orator is, orrather must be, like the perfection of anything else; partly given by nature,

but may also be assisted by art. If you have the natural power and add to it

knowledge and practice, you will be a distinguished speaker; if you fall short

in either of these, you will be to that extent defective. But the art, as far as

there  is  an  art,  of  rhetoric  does  not  lie  in  the  direction  of  Lysias  or

Thrasymachus.


PHAEDRUS: In what direction then?


SOCRATES:  I  conceive  Pericles  to  have  been  the  most  accomplished  of

rhetoricians.


PHAEDRUS: What of that?


SOCRATES: All the great arts require discussion and high speculation about

the truths of nature; hence come loftiness of thought and completeness of

execution. And this, as I conceive, was the quality which, in addition to his

natural gifts, Pericles acquired from his intercourse with Anaxagoras whom

he happened to know. He was thus imbued with the higher philosophy, and

attained  the  knowledge  of  Mind  and  the  negative  of  Mind,  which  were

favourite themes of Anaxagoras, and applied what suited his purpose to the

art of speaking.


PHAEDRUS: Explain.


SOCRATES: Rhetoric is like medicine.


PHAEDRUS: How so?


SOCRATES: Why, because medicine has to define the nature of the body

and  rhetoric  of  the  soul--if  we  would  proceed,  not  empirically  but

scientifically,  in  the  one  case  to  impart  health  and  strength  by  giving

medicine and food, in the other to implant the conviction or virtue which you

desire, by the right application of words and training.


PHAEDRUS: There, Socrates, I suspect that you are right.


SOCRATES: And do you think that you can know the nature of the soulintelligently without knowing the nature of the whole?


PHAEDRUS:  Hippocrates  the  Asclepiad  says  that  the  nature  even  of  the

body can only be understood as a whole. (Compare Charmides.)


SOCRATES: Yes, friend, and he was right:--still, we ought not to be content

with the name of Hippocrates, but to examine and see whether his argument

agrees with his conception of nature.


PHAEDRUS: I agree.


SOCRATES: Then consider what truth as well as Hippocrates says about this

or about any other nature. Ought we not to consider first whether that which

we wish to learn and to teach is a simple or multiform thing, and if simple,

then to enquire what power it has of acting or being acted upon in relation to

other things, and if multiform, then to number the forms; and see first in the

case of one of them, and then in the case of all of them, what is that power of

acting or being acted upon which makes each and all of them to be what they

are?


PHAEDRUS: You may very likely be right, Socrates.


SOCRATES:  The  method  which  proceeds  without  analysis  is  like  the

groping of a blind man. Yet, surely, he who is an artist ought not to admit of

a comparison with the blind, or deaf. The rhetorician, who teaches his pupil

to speak scientifically, will particularly set forth the nature of that being to

which he addresses his speeches; and this, I conceive, to be the soul.


PHAEDRUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: His whole effort is directed to the soul; for in that he seeks to

produce conviction.


PHAEDRUS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  Then  clearly,  Thrasymachus  or  any  one  else  who  teaches

rhetoric in earnest will give an exact description of the nature of the soul;

which will enable us to see whether she be single and same, or, like the body,multiform. That is what we should call showing the nature of the soul.


PHAEDRUS: Exactly.


SOCRATES: He will explain, secondly, the mode in which she acts or is

acted upon.


PHAEDRUS: True.


SOCRATES: Thirdly, having classified men and speeches, and their kinds

and affections, and adapted them to one another, he will tell the reasons of his

arrangement, and show why one soul is persuaded by a particular form of

argument, and another not.


PHAEDRUS: You have hit upon a very good way.


SOCRATES: Yes, that is the true and only way in which any subject can be

set forth or treated by rules of art, whether in speaking or writing. But the

writers of the present day, at whose feet you have sat, craftily conceal the

nature of the soul which they know quite well. Nor, until they adopt our

method of reading and writing, can we admit that they write by rules of art?


PHAEDRUS: What is our method?


SOCRATES: I cannot give you the exact details; but I should like to tell you

generally, as far as is in my power, how a man ought to proceed according to

rules of art.


PHAEDRUS: Let me hear.


SOCRATES: Oratory is the art of enchanting the soul, and therefore he who

would be an orator has to learn the differences of human souls--they are so

many and of such a nature, and from them come the differences between man

and  man.  Having  proceeded  thus  far  in  his  analysis,  he  will  next  divide

speeches into their different classes:--'Such and such persons,' he will say, are

affected by this or that kind of speech in this or that way,' and he will tell you

why. The pupil must have a good theoretical notion of them first, and then he

must have experience of them in actual life, and be able to follow them withall his senses about him, or he will never get beyond the precepts of his

masters.  But  when  he  understands  what  persons  are  persuaded  by  what

arguments, and sees the person about whom he was speaking in the abstract

actually before him, and knows that it is he, and can say to himself, 'This is

the man or this is the character who ought to have a certain argument applied

to him in order to convince him of a certain opinion;'--he who knows all this,

and knows also when he should speak and when he should refrain, and when

he should use pithy sayings, pathetic appeals, sensational effects, and all the

other modes of speech which he has learned;--when, I say, he knows the

times and seasons of all these things, then, and not till then, he is a perfect

master of his art; but if he fail in any of these points, whether in speaking or

teaching or writing them, and yet declares that he speaks by rules of art, he

who says 'I don't believe you' has the better of him. Well, the teacher will say,

is this, Phaedrus and Socrates, your account of the so-called art of rhetoric, or

am I to look for another?


PHAEDRUS:  He  must  take  this,  Socrates,  for  there  is  no  possibility  of

another, and yet the creation of such an art is not easy.


SOCRATES: Very true; and therefore let us consider this matter in every

light, and see whether we cannot find a shorter and easier road; there is no

use in taking a long rough roundabout way if there be a shorter and easier

one. And I wish that you would try and remember whether you have heard

from Lysias or any one else anything which might be of service to us.


PHAEDRUS: If trying would avail, then I might; but at the moment I can

think of nothing.


SOCRATES: Suppose I tell you something which somebody who knows told

me.


PHAEDRUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: May not 'the wolf,' as the proverb says, 'claim a hearing'?


PHAEDRUS: Do you say what can be said for him.SOCRATES: He will argue that there is no use in putting a solemn face on

these matters, or in going round and round, until you arrive at first principles;

for, as I said at first, when the question is of justice and good, or is a question

in which men are concerned who are just and good, either by nature or habit,

he who would be a skilful rhetorician has no need of truth--for that in courts

of law men literally care nothing about truth, but only about conviction: and

this is based on probability, to which he who would be a skilful orator should

therefore give his whole attention. And they say also that there are cases in

which the actual facts, if they are improbable, ought to be withheld, and only

the  probabilities  should  be  told  either  in  accusation  or  defence,  and  that

always in speaking, the orator should keep probability in view, and say good-

bye to the truth. And the observance of this principle throughout a speech

furnishes the whole art.


PHAEDRUS:  That  is  what  the  professors  of  rhetoric  do  actually  say,

Socrates. I have not forgotten that we have quite briefly touched upon this

matter already; with them the point is all-important.


SOCRATES: I dare say that you are familiar with Tisias. Does he not define

probability to be that which the many think?


PHAEDRUS: Certainly, he does.


SOCRATES: I believe that he has a clever and ingenious case of this sort: --

He  supposes  a  feeble  and  valiant  man  to  have  assaulted  a  strong  and

cowardly one, and to have robbed him of his coat or of something or other;

he is brought into court, and then Tisias says that both parties should tell lies:

the coward should say that he was assaulted by more men than one; the other

should prove that they were alone, and should argue thus: 'How could a weak

man like me have assaulted a strong man like him?' The complainant will not

like to confess his own cowardice, and will therefore invent some other lie

which his adversary will thus gain an opportunity of refuting. And there are

other devices of the same kind which have a place in the system. Am I not

right, Phaedrus?


PHAEDRUS: Certainly.SOCRATES:  Bless  me,  what  a  wonderfully  mysterious  art  is  this  which

Tisias or some other gentleman, in whatever name or country he rejoices, has

discovered. Shall we say a word to him or not?


PHAEDRUS: What shall we say to him?


SOCRATES: Let us tell him that, before he appeared, you and I were saying

that the probability of which he speaks was engendered in the minds of the

many by the likeness of the truth, and we had just been affirming that he who

knew the truth would always know best how to discover the resemblances of

the truth. If he has anything else to say about the art of speaking we should

like to hear him; but if not, we are satisfied with our own view, that unless a

man estimates the various characters of his hearers and is able to divide all

things into classes and to comprehend them under single ideas, he will never

be a skilful rhetorician even within the limits of human power. And this skill

he will not attain without a great deal of trouble, which a good man ought to

undergo, not for the sake of speaking and acting before men, but in order that

he may be able to say what is acceptable to God and always to act acceptably

to Him as far as in him lies; for there is a saying of wiser men than ourselves,

that a man of sense should not try to please his fellow-servants (at least this

should not be his first object) but his good and noble masters; and therefore if

the way is long and circuitous, marvel not at this, for, where the end is great,

there we may take the longer road, but not for lesser ends such as yours.

Truly, the argument may say, Tisias, that if you do not mind going so far,

rhetoric has a fair beginning here.


PHAEDRUS: I think, Socrates, that this is admirable, if only practicable.


SOCRATES: But even to fail in an honourable object is honourable.


PHAEDRUS: True.


SOCRATES: Enough appears to have been said by us of a true and false art

of speaking.


PHAEDRUS: Certainly.SOCRATES:  But  there  is  something  yet  to  be  said  of  propriety  and

impropriety of writing.


PHAEDRUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Do you know how you can speak or act about rhetoric in a

manner which will be acceptable to God?


PHAEDRUS: No, indeed. Do you?


SOCRATES: I have heard a tradition of the ancients, whether true or not they

only know; although if we had found the truth ourselves, do you think that we

should care much about the opinions of men?


PHAEDRUS: Your question needs no answer; but I wish that you would tell

me what you say that you have heard.


SOCRATES: At the Egyptian city of Naucratis, there was a famous old god,

whose name was Theuth; the bird which is called the Ibis is sacred to him,

and he was the inventor of many arts, such as arithmetic and calculation and

geometry and astronomy and draughts and dice, but his great discovery was

the use of letters. Now in those days the god Thamus was the king of the

whole country of Egypt; and he dwelt in that great city of Upper Egypt which

the Hellenes call Egyptian Thebes, and the god himself is called by them

Ammon. To him came Theuth and showed his inventions, desiring that the

other Egyptians might be allowed to have the benefit of them; he enumerated

them, and Thamus enquired about their several uses, and praised some of

them and censured others, as he approved or disapproved of them. It would

take a long time to repeat all that Thamus said to Theuth in praise or blame of

the various arts. But when they came to letters, This, said Theuth, will make

the Egyptians wiser and give them better memories; it is a specific both for

the memory and for the wit. Thamus replied: O most ingenious Theuth, the

parent or inventor of an art is not always the best judge of the utility or

inutility of his own inventions to the users of them. And in this instance, you

who are the father of letters, from a paternal love of your own children have

been  led  to  attribute  to  them  a  quality  which  they  cannot  have;  for  this

discovery of yours will create forgetfulness in the learners' souls, becausethey  will  not  use  their  memories;  they  will  trust  to  the  external  written

characters and not remember of themselves. The specific which you have

discovered is an aid not to memory, but to reminiscence, and you give your

disciples not truth, but only the semblance of truth; they will be hearers of

many things and will have learned nothing; they will appear to be omniscient

and will generally know nothing; they will be tiresome company, having the

show of wisdom without the reality.


PHAEDRUS: Yes, Socrates, you can easily invent tales of Egypt, or of any

other country.


SOCRATES: There was a tradition in the temple of Dodona that oaks first

gave prophetic utterances. The men of old, unlike in their simplicity to young

philosophy, deemed that if they heard the truth even from 'oak or rock,' it was

enough for them; whereas you seem to consider not whether a thing is or is

not true, but who the speaker is and from what country the tale comes.


PHAEDRUS: I acknowledge the justice of your rebuke; and I think that the

Theban is right in his view about letters.


SOCRATES: He would be a very simple person, and quite a stranger to the

oracles of Thamus or Ammon, who should leave in writing or receive in

writing any art under the idea that the written word would be intelligible or

certain; or who deemed that writing was at all better than knowledge and

recollection of the same matters?


PHAEDRUS: That is most true.


SOCRATES: I cannot help feeling, Phaedrus, that writing is unfortunately

like painting; for the creations of the painter have the attitude of life, and yet

if you ask them a question they preserve a solemn silence. And the same may

be said of speeches. You would imagine that they had intelligence, but if you

want to know anything and put a question to one of them, the speaker always

gives one unvarying answer. And when they have been once written down

they  are  tumbled  about  anywhere  among  those  who  may  or  may  not

understand them, and know not to whom they should reply, to whom not:

and, if they are maltreated or abused, they have no parent to protect them; andthey cannot protect or defend themselves.


PHAEDRUS: That again is most true.


SOCRATES: Is there not another kind of word or speech far better than this,

and  having  far  greater  power--a  son  of  the  same  family,  but  lawfully

begotten?


PHAEDRUS: Whom do you mean, and what is his origin?


SOCRATES: I mean an intelligent word graven in the soul of the learner,

which can defend itself, and knows when to speak and when to be silent.


PHAEDRUS: You mean the living word of knowledge which has a soul, and

of which the written word is properly no more than an image?


SOCRATES: Yes, of course that is what I mean. And now may I be allowed

to ask you a question: Would a husbandman, who is a man of sense, take the

seeds,  which  he  values  and  which  he  wishes  to  bear  fruit,  and  in  sober

seriousness plant them during the heat of summer, in some garden of Adonis,

that he may rejoice when he sees them in eight days appearing in beauty? at

least he would do so, if at all, only for the sake of amusement and pastime.

But when he is in earnest he sows in fitting soil, and practises husbandry, and

is  satisfied  if  in  eight  months  the  seeds  which  he  has  sown  arrive  at

perfection?


PHAEDRUS: Yes, Socrates, that will be his way when he is in earnest; he

will do the other, as you say, only in play.


SOCRATES: And can we suppose that he who knows the just and good and

honourable  has  less  understanding,  than  the  husbandman,  about  his  own

seeds?


PHAEDRUS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: Then he will not seriously incline to 'write' his thoughts 'in

water'  with  pen  and  ink,  sowing  words  which  can  neither  speak  for

themselves nor teach the truth adequately to others?PHAEDRUS: No, that is not likely.


SOCRATES: No, that is not likely--in the garden of letters he will sow and

plant, but only for the sake of recreation and amusement; he will write them

down as memorials to be treasured against the forgetfulness of old age, by

himself, or by any other old man who is treading the same path. He will

rejoice in beholding their tender growth; and while others are refreshing their

souls with banqueting and the like, this will be the pastime in which his days

are spent.


PHAEDRUS:  A  pastime,  Socrates,  as  noble  as  the  other  is  ignoble,  the

pastime of a man who can be amused by serious talk, and can discourse

merrily about justice and the like.


SOCRATES:  True,  Phaedrus.  But  nobler  far  is  the  serious  pursuit  of  the

dialectician, who, finding a congenial soul, by the help of science sows and

plants therein words which are able to help themselves and him who planted

them, and are not unfruitful, but have in them a seed which others brought up

in different soils render immortal, making the possessors of it happy to the

utmost extent of human happiness.


PHAEDRUS: Far nobler, certainly.


SOCRATES: And now, Phaedrus, having agreed upon the premises we may

decide about the conclusion.


PHAEDRUS: About what conclusion?


SOCRATES: About Lysias, whom we censured, and his art of writing, and

his discourses, and the rhetorical skill or want of skill which was shown in

them--these  are  the  questions  which  we  sought  to  determine,  and  they

brought us to this point. And I think that we are now pretty well informed

about the nature of art and its opposite.


PHAEDRUS: Yes, I think with you; but I wish that you would repeat what

was said.SOCRATES: Until a man knows the truth of the several particulars of which

he is writing or speaking, and is able to define them as they are, and having

defined them again to divide them until they can be no longer divided, and

until in like manner he is able to discern the nature of the soul, and discover

the different modes of discourse which are adapted to different natures, and

to arrange and dispose them in such a way that the simple form of speech

may be addressed to the simpler nature, and the complex and composite to

the  more  complex  nature--until  he  has  accomplished  all  this,  he  will  be

unable to handle arguments according to rules of art, as far as their nature

allows  them  to  be  subjected  to  art,  either  for  the  purpose  of  teaching  or

persuading;--such  is  the  view  which  is  implied  in  the  whole  preceding

argument.


PHAEDRUS: Yes, that was our view, certainly.


SOCRATES: Secondly, as to the censure which was passed on the speaking

or writing of discourses, and how they might be rightly or wrongly censured--

did not our previous argument show--?


PHAEDRUS: Show what?


SOCRATES: That whether Lysias or any other writer that ever was or will

be, whether private man or statesman, proposes laws and so becomes the

author of a political treatise, fancying that there is any great certainty and

clearness in his performance, the fact of his so writing is only a disgrace to

him,  whatever  men  may  say.  For  not  to  know  the  nature  of  justice  and

injustice, and good and evil, and not to be able to distinguish the dream from

the reality, cannot in truth be otherwise than disgraceful to him, even though

he have the applause of the whole world.


PHAEDRUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: But he who thinks that in the written word there is necessarily

much  which  is  not  serious,  and  that  neither  poetry  nor  prose,  spoken  or

written, is of any great value, if, like the compositions of the rhapsodes, they

are only recited in order to be believed, and not with any view to criticism or

instruction;  and  who  thinks  that  even  the  best  of  writings  are  but  areminiscence of what we know, and that only in principles of justice and

goodness  and  nobility  taught  and  communicated  orally  for  the  sake  of

instruction and graven in the soul, which is the true way of writing, is there

clearness and perfection and seriousness, and that such principles are a man's

own and his legitimate offspring;--being, in the first place, the word which he

finds in his own bosom; secondly, the brethren and descendants and relations

of his idea which have been duly implanted by him in the souls of others;--

and who cares for them and no others--this is the right sort of man; and you

and I, Phaedrus, would pray that we may become like him.


PHAEDRUS: That is most assuredly my desire and prayer.


SOCRATES: And now the play is played out; and of rhetoric enough. Go and

tell Lysias that to the fountain and school of the Nymphs we went down, and

were bidden by them to convey a message to him and to other composers of

speeches--to Homer and other writers of poems, whether set to music or not;

and to Solon and others who have composed writings in the form of political

discourses which they would term laws--to all of them we are to say that if

their compositions are based on knowledge of the truth, and they can defend

or prove them, when they are put to the test, by spoken arguments, which

leave their writings poor in comparison of them, then they are to be called,

not only poets, orators, legislators, but are worthy of a higher name, befitting

the serious pursuit of their life.


PHAEDRUS: What name would you assign to them?


SOCRATES:  Wise,  I  may  not  call  them;  for  that  is  a  great  name  which

belongs to God alone,--lovers of wisdom or philosophers is their modest and

befitting title.


PHAEDRUS: Very suitable.


SOCRATES:  And  he  who  cannot  rise  above  his  own  compilations  and

compositions, which he has been long patching and piecing, adding some and

taking away some, may be justly called poet or speech-maker or law-maker.


PHAEDRUS: Certainly.SOCRATES: Now go and tell this to your companion.


PHAEDRUS:  But  there  is  also  a  friend  of  yours  who  ought  not  to  be

forgotten.


SOCRATES: Who is he?


PHAEDRUS: Isocrates the fair:--What message will you send to him, and

how shall we describe him?


SOCRATES: Isocrates is still young, Phaedrus; but I am willing to hazard a

prophecy concerning him.


PHAEDRUS: What would you prophesy?


SOCRATES: I think that he has a genius which soars above the orations of

Lysias, and that his character is cast in a finer mould. My impression of him

is that he will marvellously improve as he grows older, and that all former

rhetoricians will be as children in comparison of him. And I believe that he

will not be satisfied with rhetoric, but that there is in him a divine inspiration

which  will  lead  him  to  things  higher  still.  For  he  has  an  element  of

philosophy in his nature. This is the message of the gods dwelling in this

place, and which I will myself deliver to Isocrates, who is my delight; and do

you give the other to Lysias, who is yours.


PHAEDRUS: I will; and now as the heat is abated let us depart.


SOCRATES: Should we not offer up a prayer first of all to the local deities?


PHAEDRUS: By all means.


SOCRATES: Beloved Pan, and all ye other gods who haunt this place, give

me beauty in the inward soul; and may the outward and inward man be at

one. May I reckon the wise to be the wealthy, and may I have such a quantity

of gold as a temperate man and he only can bear and carry.--Anything more?

The prayer, I think, is enough for me.


PHAEDRUS: Ask the same for me, for friends should have all things incommon.


SOCRATES: Let us go.


THE END                          Philebus Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    Beginning of PhilebusIntroduction to Plato's Philebus.


  The Philebus appears to be one of the later writings of Plato, in which the

style has begun to alter, and the dramatic and poetical element has become

subordinate  to  the  speculative  and  philosophical.  In  the  development  of

abstract thought great advances have been made on the Protagoras or the

Phaedrus, and even on the Republic. But there is a corresponding diminution

of artistic skill, a want of character in the persons, a laboured march in the

dialogue, and a degree of confusion and incompleteness in the general design.

As  in  the  speeches  of  Thucydides,  the  multiplication  of  ideas  seems  to

interfere with the power of expression. Instead of the equally diffused grace

and ease of the earlier dialogues there occur two or three highly-wrought

passages; instead of the ever-flowing play of humour, now appearing, now

concealed, but always present, are inserted a good many bad jests, as we may

venture to term them. We may observe an attempt at artificial ornament, and

far-fetched modes of expression; also clamorous demands on the part of his

companions, that Socrates shall answer his own questions, as well as other

defects of style, which remind us of the Laws. The connection is often abrupt

and  inharmonious,  and  far  from  clear.  Many  points  require  further

explanation; e.g. the reference of pleasure to the indefinite class, compared

with the assertion which almost immediately follows, that pleasure and pain

naturally have their seat in the third or mixed class: these two statements are

unreconciled. In like manner, the table of goods does not distinguish between

the two heads of measure and symmetry; and though a hint is given that the

divine mind has the first place, nothing is said of this in the final summing

up. The relation of the goods to the sciences does not appear; though dialectic

may be thought to correspond to the highest good, the sciences and arts and

true  opinions  are  enumerated  in  the  fourth  class.  We  seem  to  have  an

intimation of a further discussion, in which some topics lightly passed over

were to receive a fuller consideration. The various uses of the word 'mixed,'

for the mixed life, the mixed class of elements, the mixture of pleasures, or of

pleasure and pain, are a further source of perplexity. Our ignorance of the

opinions  which  Plato  is  attacking  is  also  an  element  of  obscurity.  Many

things in a controversy might seem relevant, if we knew to what they were

intended to refer. But no conjecture will enable us to supply what Plato hasnot  told  us;  or  to  explain,  from  our  fragmentary  knowledge  of  them,  the

relation in which his doctrine stood to the Eleatic Being or the Megarian

good, or to the theories of Aristippus or Antisthenes respecting pleasure. Nor

are we able to say how far Plato in the Philebus conceives the finite and

infinite  (which  occur  both  in  the  fragments  of  Philolaus  and  in  the

Pythagorean  table  of  opposites)  in  the  same  manner  as  contemporary

Pythagoreans.


  There is little in the characters which is worthy of remark. The Socrates

of the Philebus is devoid of any touch of Socratic irony, though here, as in the

Phaedrus, he twice attributes the flow of his ideas to a sudden inspiration.

The interlocutor Protarchus, the son of Callias, who has been a hearer of

Gorgias, is supposed to begin as a disciple of the partisans of pleasure, but is

drawn over to the opposite side by the arguments of Socrates. The instincts of

ingenuous youth are easily induced to take the better part. Philebus, who has

withdrawn from the argument, is several times brought back again, that he

may support pleasure, of which he remains to the end the uncompromising

advocate. On the other hand, the youthful group of listeners by whom he is

surrounded, 'Philebus' boys' as they are termed, whose presence is several

times  intimated,  are  described  as  all  of  them  at  last  convinced  by  the

arguments of Socrates. They bear a very faded resemblance to the interested

audiences of the Charmides, Lysis, or Protagoras. Other signs of relation to

external  life  in  the  dialogue,  or  references  to  contemporary  things  and

persons, with the single exception of the allusions to the anonymous enemies

of pleasure, and the teachers of the flux, there are none.


  The  omission  of  the  doctrine  of  recollection,  derived  from  a  previous

state  of  existence,  is  a  note  of  progress  in  the  philosophy  of  Plato.  The

transcendental theory of pre-existent ideas, which is chiefly discussed by him

in the Meno, the Phaedo, and the Phaedrus, has given way to a psychological

one. The omission is rendered more significant by his having occasion to

speak of memory as the basis of desire. Of the ideas he treats in the same

sceptical spirit which appears in his criticism of them in the Parmenides. He

touches on the same difficulties and he gives no answer to them. His mode of

speaking of the analytical and synthetical processes may be compared with

his discussion of the same subject in the Phaedrus; here he dwells on the

importance of dividing the genera into all the species, while in the Phaedrushe conveys the same truth in a figure, when he speaks of carving the whole,

which  is  described  under  the  image  of  a  victim,  into  parts  or  members,

'according to their natural articulation, without breaking any of them.' There

is also a difference, which may be noted, between the two dialogues. For

whereas  in  the  Phaedrus,  and  also  in  the  Symposium,  the  dialectician  is

described as a sort of enthusiast or lover, in the Philebus, as in all the later

writings of Plato, the element of love is wanting; the topic is only introduced,

as in the Republic, by way of illustration. On other subjects of which they

treat in common, such as the nature and kinds of pleasure, true and false

opinion, the nature of the good, the order and relation of the sciences, the

Republic is less advanced than the Philebus, which contains, perhaps, more

metaphysical  truth  more  obscurely  expressed  than  any  other  Platonic

dialogue. Here, as Plato expressly tells us, he is 'forging weapons of another

make,' i.e. new categories and modes of conception, though 'some of the old

ones might do again.'


  But if superior in thought and dialectical power, the Philebus falls very

far short of the Republic in fancy and feeling. The development of the reason

undisturbed by the emotions seems to be the ideal at which Plato aims in his

later dialogues. There is no mystic enthusiasm or rapturous contemplation of

ideas. Whether we attribute this change to the greater feebleness of age, or to

the development of the quarrel between philosophy and poetry in Plato's own

mind, or perhaps, in some degree, to a carelessness about artistic effect, when

he was absorbed in abstract ideas, we can hardly be wrong in assuming, amid

such a variety of indications, derived from style as well as subject, that the

Philebus belongs to the later period of his life and authorship. But in this, as

in  all  the  later  writings  of  Plato,  there  are  not  wanting  thoughts  and

expressions in which he rises to his highest level.


  The plan is complicated, or rather, perhaps, the want of plan renders the

progress of the dialogue difficult to follow. A few leading ideas seem to

emerge: the relation of the one and many, the four original elements, the

kinds of pleasure, the kinds of knowledge, the scale of goods. These are only

partially  connected  with  one  another.  The  dialogue  is  not  rightly  entitled

'Concerning pleasure' or 'Concerning good,' but should rather be described as

treating of the relations of pleasure and knowledge, after they have been duly

analyzed, to the good. (1) The question is asked, whether pleasure or wisdomis the chief good, or some nature higher than either; and if the latter, how

pleasure and wisdom are related to this higher good. (2) Before we can reply

with  exactness,  we  must  know  the  kinds  of  pleasure  and  the  kinds  of

knowledge. (3) But still we may affirm generally, that the combined life of

pleasure and wisdom or knowledge has more of the character of the good

than either of them when isolated. (4) to determine which of them partakes

most of the higher nature, we must know under which of the four unities or

elements they respectively fall. These are, first, the infinite; secondly, the

finite; thirdly, the union of the two; fourthly, the cause of the union. Pleasure

is of the first, wisdom or knowledge of the third class, while reason or mind

is akin to the fourth or highest.


  (5)  Pleasures  are  of  two  kinds,  the  mixed  and  unmixed.  Of  mixed

pleasures there are three classes--(a) those in which both the pleasures and

pains are corporeal, as in eating and hunger; (b) those in which there is a pain

of  the  body  and  pleasure  of  the  mind,  as  when  you  are  hungry  and  are

looking forward to a feast; (c) those in which the pleasure and pain are both

mental. Of unmixed pleasures there are four kinds: those of sight, hearing,

smell, knowledge.


  (6) The sciences are likewise divided into two classes, theoretical and

productive: of the latter, one part is pure, the other impure. The pure part

consists  of  arithmetic,  mensuration,  and  weighing.  Arts  like  carpentering,

which have an exact measure, are to be regarded as higher than music, which

for the most part is mere guess-work. But there is also a higher arithmetic,

and a higher mensuration, which is exclusively theoretical; and a dialectical

science, which is higher still and the truest and purest knowledge.


  (7) We are now able to determine the composition of the perfect life.

First, we admit the pure pleasures and the pure sciences; secondly, the impure

sciences,  but  not  the  impure  pleasures.  We  have  next  to  discover  what

element of goodness is contained in this mixture. There are three criteria of

goodness--beauty, symmetry, truth. These are clearly more akin to reason

than to pleasure, and will enable us to fix the places of both of them in the

scale of good. First in the scale is measure; the second place is assigned to

symmetry; the third, to reason and wisdom; the fourth, to knowledge and true

opinion; the fifth, to pure pleasures; and here the Muse says 'Enough.'  'Bidding farewell to Philebus and Socrates,' we may now consider the

metaphysical  conceptions  which  are  presented  to  us.  These  are  (I)  the

paradox of unity and plurality; (II) the table of categories or elements; (III)

the kinds of pleasure; (IV) the kinds of knowledge; (V) the conception of the

good. We may then proceed to examine (VI) the relation of the Philebus to

the Republic, and to other dialogues.


  I. The paradox of the one and many originated in the restless dialectic of

Zeno, who sought to prove the absolute existence of the one by showing the

contradictions  that  are  involved  in  admitting  the  existence  of  the  many

(compare Parm.). Zeno illustrated the contradiction by well-known examples

taken from outward objects. But Socrates seems to intimate that the time had

arrived for discarding these hackneyed illustrations; such difficulties had long

been  solved  by  common  sense  ('solvitur  ambulando');  the  fact  of  the  co-

existence of opposites was a sufficient answer to them. He will leave them to

Cynics  and  Eristics;  the  youth  of  Athens  may  discourse  of  them  to  their

parents. To no rational man could the circumstance that the body is one, but

has many members, be any longer a stumbling-block.


  Plato's  difficulty  seems  to  begin  in  the  region  of  ideas.  He  cannot

understand how an absolute unity, such as the Eleatic Being, can be broken

up into a number of individuals, or be in and out of them at once. Philosophy

had so deepened or intensified the nature of one or Being, by the thoughts of

successive generations, that the mind could no longer imagine 'Being' as in a

state of change or division. To say that the verb of existence is the copula, or

that unity is a mere unit, is to us easy; but to the Greek in a particular stage of

thought  such  an  analysis  involved  the  same  kind  of  difficulty  as  the

conception of God existing both in and out of the world would to ourselves.

Nor was he assisted by the analogy of sensible objects. The sphere of mind

was dark and mysterious to him; but instead of being illustrated by sense, the

greatest light appeared to be thrown on the nature of ideas when they were

contrasted with sense.


  Both here and in the Parmenides, where similar difficulties are raised,

Plato seems prepared to desert his ancient ground. He cannot tell the relation

in which abstract ideas stand to one another, and therefore he transfers the

one and many out of his transcendental world, and proceeds to lay downpractical rules for their application to different branches of knowledge. As in

the Republic he supposes the philosopher to proceed by regular steps, until he

arrives at the idea of good; as in the Sophist and Politicus he insists that in

dividing the whole into its parts we should bisect in the middle in the hope of

finding  species;  as  in  the  Phaedrus  (see  above)  he  would  have  'no  limb

broken'  of  the  organism  of  knowledge;--  so  in  the  Philebus  he  urges  the

necessity  of  filling  up  all  the  intermediate  links  which  occur  (compare

Bacon's 'media axiomata') in the passage from unity to infinity. With him the

idea of science may be said to anticipate science; at a time when the sciences

were  not  yet  divided,  he  wants  to  impress  upon  us  the  importance  of

classification;  neither  neglecting  the  many  individuals,  nor  attempting  to

count them all, but finding the genera and species under which they naturally

fall.  Here,  then,  and  in  the  parallel  passages  of  the  Phaedrus  and  of  the

Sophist, is found the germ of the most fruitful notion of modern science.


  Plato describes with ludicrous exaggeration the influence exerted by the

one  and  many  on  the  minds  of  young  men  in  their  first  fervour  of

metaphysical enthusiasm (compare Republic). But they are none the less an

everlasting quality of reason or reasoning which never grows old in us. At

first  we  have  but  a  confused  conception  of  them,  analogous  to  the  eyes

blinking at the light in the Republic. To this Plato opposes the revelation

from Heaven of the real relations of them, which some Prometheus, who

gave the true fire from heaven, is supposed to have imparted to us. Plato is

speaking of two things--(1) the crude notion of the one and many, which

powerfully affects the ordinary mind when first beginning to think; (2) the

same notion when cleared up by the help of dialectic.


  To us the problem of the one and many has lost its chief interest and

perplexity. We readily acknowledge that a whole has many parts, that the

continuous is also the divisible, that in all objects of sense there is a one and

many,  and  that  a  like  principle  may  be  applied  to  analogy  to  purely

intellectual conceptions. If we attend to the meaning of the words, we are

compelled  to  admit  that  two  contradictory  statements  are  true.  But  the

antinomy is so familiar as to be scarcely observed by us. Our sense of the

contradiction, like Plato's, only begins in a higher sphere, when we speak of

necessity  and  free-will,  of  mind  and  body,  of  Three  Persons  and  One

Substance, and the like. The world of knowledge is always dividing more andmore; every truth is at first the enemy of every other truth. Yet without this

division there can be no truth; nor any complete truth without the reunion of

the parts into a whole. And hence the coexistence of opposites in the unity of

the idea is regarded by Hegel as the supreme principle of philosophy; and the

law  of  contradiction,  which  is  affirmed  by  logicians  to  be  an  ultimate

principle of the human mind, is displaced by another law, which asserts the

coexistence of contradictories as imperfect and divided elements of the truth.

Without entering further into the depths of Hegelianism, we may remark that

this and all similar attempts to reconcile antinomies have their origin in the

old Platonic problem of the 'One and Many.'


  II. 1. The first of Plato's categories or elements is the infinite. This is the

negative  of  measure  or  limit;  the  unthinkable,  the  unknowable;  of  which

nothing can be affirmed; the mixture or chaos which preceded distinct kinds

in the creation of the world; the first vague impression of sense; the more or

less which refuses to be reduced to rule, having certain affinities with evil,

with pleasure, with ignorance, and which in the scale of being is farthest

removed from the beautiful and good. To a Greek of the age of Plato, the idea

of an infinite mind would have been an absurdity. He would have insisted

that 'the good is of the nature of the finite,' and that the infinite is a mere

negative, which is on the level of sensation, and not of thought. He was aware

that there was a distinction between the infinitely great and the infinitely

small, but he would have equally denied the claim of either to true existence.

Of that positive infinity, or infinite reality, which we attribute to God, he had

no conception.


  The Greek conception of the infinite would be more truly described, in

our  way  of  speaking,  as  the  indefinite.  To  us,  the  notion  of  infinity  is

subsequent rather than prior to the finite, expressing not absolute vacancy or

negation, but only the removal of limit or restraint, which we suppose to exist

not before but after we have already set bounds to thought and matter, and

divided them after their kinds. From different points of view, either the finite

or infinite may be looked upon respectively both as positive and negative

(compare 'Omnis determinatio est negatio')' and the conception of the one

determines that of the other. The Greeks and the moderns seem to be nearly

at  the  opposite  poles  in  their  manner  of  regarding  them.  And  both  are

surprised when they make the discovery, as Plato has done in the Sophist,how large an element negation forms in the framework of their thoughts.


  2, 3. The finite element which mingles with and regulates the infinite is

best expressed to us by the word 'law.' It is that which measures all things and

assigns to them their limit; which preserves them in their natural state, and

brings them within the sphere of human cognition. This is described by the

terms harmony, health, order, perfection, and the like. All things, in as far as

they are good, even pleasures, which are for the most part indefinite, partake

of this element. We should be wrong in attributing to Plato the conception of

laws of nature derived from observation and experiment. And yet he has as

intense a conviction as any modern philosopher that nature does not proceed

by  chance.  But  observing  that  the  wonderful  construction  of  number  and

figure, which he had within himself, and which seemed to be prior to himself,

explained a part of the phenomena of the external world, he extended their

principles to the whole, finding in them the true type both of human life and

of the order of nature.


  Two other points may be noticed respecting the third class. First, that

Plato seems to be unconscious of any interval or chasm which separates the

finite from the infinite. The one is in various ways and degrees working in the

other. Hence he has implicitly answered the difficulty with which he started,

of how the one could remain one and yet be divided among many individuals,

or 'how ideas could be in and out of themselves,' and the like. Secondly, that

in this mixed class we find the idea of beauty. Good, when exhibited under

the aspect of measure or symmetry, becomes beauty. And if we translate his

language  into  corresponding  modern  terms,  we  shall  not  be  far  wrong  in

saying that here, as well as in the Republic, Plato conceives beauty under the

idea of proportion.


  4. Last and highest in the list of principles or elements is the cause of the

union of the finite and infinite, to which Plato ascribes the order of the world.

Reasoning from man to the universe, he argues that as there is a mind in the

one, there must be a mind in the other, which he identifies with the royal

mind of Zeus. This is the first cause of which 'our ancestors spoke,' as he

says, appealing to tradition, in the Philebus as well as in the Timaeus. The

'one and many' is also supposed to have been revealed by tradition. For the

mythical element has not altogether disappeared.  Some characteristic differences may here be noted, which distinguish the

ancient from the modern mode of conceiving God.


  a. To Plato, the idea of God or mind is both personal and impersonal. Nor

in ascribing, as appears to us, both these attributes to him, and in speaking of

God  both  in  the  masculine  and  neuter  gender,  did  he  seem  to  himself

inconsistent. For the difference between the personal and impersonal was not

marked to him as to ourselves. We make a fundamental distinction between a

thing  and  a  person,  while  to  Plato,  by  the  help  of  various  intermediate

abstractions, such as end, good, cause, they appear almost to meet in one, or

to be two aspects of the same. Hence, without any reconciliation or even

remark, in the Republic he speaks at one time of God or Gods, and at another

time of the Good. So in the Phaedrus he seems to pass unconsciously from

the concrete to the abstract conception of the Ideas in the same dialogue. Nor

in the Philebus is he careful to show in what relation the idea of the divine

mind stands to the supreme principle of measure.


  b. Again, to us there is a strongly-marked distinction between a first cause

and a final cause. And we should commonly identify a first cause with God,

and the final cause with the world, which is His work. But Plato, though not a

Pantheist,  and  very  far  from  confounding  God  with  the  world,  tends  to

identify the first with the final cause. The cause of the union of the finite and

infinite might be described as a higher law; the final measure which is the

highest expression of the good may also be described as the supreme law.

Both these conceptions are realized chiefly by the help of the material world;

and  therefore  when  we  pass  into  the  sphere  of  ideas  can  hardly  be

distinguished.


  The  four  principles  are  required  for  the  determination  of  the  relative

places of pleasure and wisdom. Plato has been saying that we should proceed

by regular steps from the one to the many. Accordingly, before assigning the

precedence either to good or pleasure, he must first find out and arrange in

order the general principles of things. Mind is ascertained to be akin to the

nature of the cause, while pleasure is found in the infinite or indefinite class.

We may now proceed to divide pleasure and knowledge after their kinds.


  III. 1. Plato speaks of pleasure as indefinite, as relative, as a generation,and in all these points of view as in a category distinct from good. For again

we must repeat, that to the Greek 'the good is of the nature of the finite,' and,

like  virtue,  either  is,  or  is  nearly  allied  to,  knowledge.  The  modern

philosopher would remark that the indefinite is equally real with the definite.

Health  and  mental  qualities  are  in  the  concrete  undefined;  they  are

nevertheless real goods, and Plato rightly regards them as falling under the

finite class. Again, we are able to define objects or ideas, not in so far as they

are  in  the  mind,  but  in  so  far  as  they  are  manifested  externally,  and  can

therefore  be  reduced  to  rule  and  measure.  And  if  we  adopt  the  test  of

definiteness, the pleasures of the body are more capable of being defined than

any other pleasures. As in art and knowledge generally, we proceed from

without inwards, beginning with facts of sense, and passing to the more ideal

conceptions of mental pleasure, happiness, and the like.


  2. Pleasure is depreciated as relative, while good is exalted as absolute.

But this distinction seems to arise from an unfair mode of regarding them; the

abstract idea of the one is compared with the concrete experience of the other.

For all pleasure and all knowledge may be viewed either abstracted from the

mind, or in relation to the mind (compare Aristot. Nic. Ethics). The first is an

idea only, which may be conceived as absolute and unchangeable, and then

the  abstract  idea  of  pleasure  will  be  equally  unchangeable  with  that  of

knowledge.  But  when  we  come  to  view  either  as  phenomena  of

consciousness,  the  same  defects  are  for  the  most  part  incident  to  both  of

them. Our hold upon them is equally transient and uncertain; the mind cannot

be always in a state of intellectual tension, any more than capable of feeling

pleasure always. The knowledge which is at one time clear and distinct, at

another seems to fade away, just as the pleasure of health after sickness, or of

eating after hunger, soon passes into a neutral state of unconsciousness and

indifference. Change and alternation are necessary for the mind as well as for

the body; and in this is to be acknowledged, not an element of evil, but rather

a  law  of  nature.  The  chief  difference  between  subjective  pleasure  and

subjective knowledge in respect of permanence is that the latter, when our

feeble  faculties  are  able  to  grasp  it,  still  conveys  to  us  an  idea  of

unchangeableness which cannot be got rid of.


  3. In the language of ancient philosophy, the relative character of pleasure

is described as becoming or generation. This is relative to Being or Essence,and  from  one  point  of  view  may  be  regarded  as  the  Heraclitean  flux  in

contrast with the Eleatic Being; from another, as the transient enjoyment of

eating and drinking compared with the supposed permanence of intellectual

pleasures. But to us the distinction is unmeaning, and belongs to a stage of

philosophy which has passed away. Plato himself seems to have suspected

that the continuance or life of things is quite as much to be attributed to a

principle  of  rest  as  of  motion  (compare  Charm.  Cratyl.).  A  later  view  of

pleasure is found in Aristotle, who agrees with Plato in many points, e.g. in

his view of pleasure as a restoration to nature, in his distinction between

bodily and mental, between necessary and non-necessary pleasures. But he is

also in advance of Plato; for he affirms that pleasure is not in the body at all;

and hence not even the bodily pleasures are to be spoken of as generations,

but only as accompanied by generation (Nic. Eth.).


  4. Plato attempts to identify vicious pleasures with some form of error,

and insists that the term false may be applied to them: in this he appears to be

carrying  out  in  a  confused  manner  the  Socratic  doctrine,  that  virtue  is

knowledge,  vice  ignorance.  He  will  allow  of  no  distinction  between  the

pleasures and the erroneous opinions on which they are founded, whether

arising out of the illusion of distance or not. But to this we naturally reply

with Protarchus, that the pleasure is what it is, although the calculation may

be false, or the after-effects painful. It is difficult to acquit Plato, to use his

own  language,  of  being  a  'tyro  in  dialectics,'  when  he  overlooks  such  a

distinction. Yet, on the other hand, we are hardly fair judges of confusions of

thought in those who view things differently from ourselves.


  5. There appears also to be an incorrectness in the notion which occurs

both  here  and  in  the  Gorgias,  of  the  simultaneousness  of  merely  bodily

pleasures and pains. We may, perhaps, admit, though even this is not free

from doubt, that the feeling of pleasureable hope or recollection is, or rather

may  be,  simultaneous  with  acute  bodily  suffering.  But  there  is  no  such

coexistence of the pain of thirst with the pleasures of drinking; they are not

really simultaneous, for the one expels the other. Nor does Plato seem to have

considered  that  the  bodily  pleasures,  except  in  certain  extreme  cases,  are

unattended with pain. Few philosophers will deny that a degree of pleasure

attends eating and drinking; and yet surely we might as well speak of the

pains of digestion which follow, as of the pains of hunger and thirst whichprecede them. Plato's conception is derived partly from the extreme case of a

man suffering pain from hunger or thirst, partly from the image of a full and

empty vessel. But the truth is rather, that while the gratification of our bodily

desires constantly affords some degree of pleasure, the antecedent pains are

scarcely perceived by us, being almost done away with by use and regularity.


  6. The desire to classify pleasures as accompanied or not accompanied by

antecedent pains, has led Plato to place under one head the pleasures of smell

and  sight,  as  well  as  those  derived  from  sounds  of  music  and  from

knowledge.  He  would  have  done  better  to  make  a  separate  class  of  the

pleasures of smell, having no association of mind, or perhaps to have divided

them into natural and artificial. The pleasures of sight and sound might then

have been regarded as being the expression of ideas. But this higher and truer

point  of  view  never  appears  to  have  occurred  to  Plato.  Nor  has  he  any

distinction between the fine arts and the mechanical; and, neither here nor

anywhere, an adequate conception of the beautiful in external things.


  7. Plato agrees partially with certain 'surly or fastidious' philosophers, as

he terms them, who defined pleasure to be the absence of pain. They are also

described as eminent in physics. There is unfortunately no school of Greek

philosophy  known  to  us  which  combined  these  two  characteristics.

Antisthenes, who was an enemy of pleasure, was not a physical philosopher;

the atomists, who were physical philosophers, were not enemies of pleasure.

Yet  such  a  combination  of  opinions  is  far  from  being  impossible.  Plato's

omission  to  mention  them  by  name  has  created  the  same  uncertainty

respecting them which also occurs respecting the 'friends of the ideas' and the

'materialists' in the Sophist.


  On  the  whole,  this  discussion  is  one  of  the  least  satisfactory  in  the

dialogues  of  Plato.  While  the  ethical  nature  of  pleasure  is  scarcely

considered, and the merely physical phenomenon imperfectly analysed, too

much weight is given to ideas of measure and number, as the sole principle of

good. The comparison of pleasure and knowledge is really a comparison of

two  elements,  which  have  no  common  measure,  and  which  cannot  be

excluded from each other. Feeling is not opposed to knowledge, and in all

consciousness  there  is  an  element  of  both.  The  most  abstract  kinds  of

knowledge are inseparable from some pleasure or pain, which accompaniesthe acquisition or possession of them: the student is liable to grow weary of

them, and soon discovers that continuous mental energy is not granted to

men. The most sensual pleasure, on the other hand, is inseparable from the

consciousness  of  pleasure;  no  man  can  be  happy  who,  to  borrow  Plato's

illustration, is leading the life of an oyster. Hence (by his own confession) the

main thesis is not worth determining; the real interest lies in the incidental

discussion.  We  can  no  more  separate  pleasure  from  knowledge  in  the

Philebus than we can separate justice from happiness in the Republic.


  IV. An interesting account is given in the Philebus of the rank and order

of the sciences or arts, which agrees generally with the scheme of knowledge

in the Sixth Book of the Republic. The chief difference is, that the position of

the arts is more exactly defined. They are divided into an empirical part and a

scientific  part,  of  which  the  first  is  mere  guess-  work,  the  second  is

determined by rule and measure. Of the more empirical arts, music is given

as  an  example;  this,  although  affirmed  to  be  necessary  to  human  life,  is

depreciated. Music is regarded from a point of view entirely opposite to that

of the Republic, not as a sublime science, coordinate with astronomy, but as

full of doubt and conjecture. According to the standard of accuracy which is

here adopted, it is rightly placed lower in the scale than carpentering, because

the latter is more capable of being reduced to measure.


  The theoretical element of the arts may also become a purely abstract

science,  when  separated  from  matter,  and  is  then  said  to  be  pure  and

unmixed. The distinction which Plato here makes seems to be the same as

that between pure and applied mathematics, and may be expressed in the

modern  formula--science  is  art  theoretical,  art  is  science  practical.  In  the

reason which he gives for the superiority of the pure science of number over

the mixed or applied, we can only agree with him in part. He says that the

numbers which the philosopher employs are always the same, whereas the

numbers which are used in practice represent different sizes or quantities. He

does not see that this power of expressing different quantities by the same

symbol is the characteristic and not the defect of numbers, and is due to their

abstract nature;--although we admit of course what Plato seems to feel in his

distinctions between pure and impure knowledge, that the imperfection of

matter enters into the applications of them.  Above the other sciences, as in the Republic, towers dialectic, which is

the science of eternal Being, apprehended by the purest mind and reason. The

lower sciences, including the mathematical, are akin to opinion rather than to

reason, and are placed together in the fourth class of goods. The relation in

which they stand to dialectic is obscure in the Republic, and is not cleared up

in the Philebus.


  V. Thus far we have only attained to the vestibule or ante-chamber of the

good; for there is a good exceeding knowledge, exceeding essence, which,

like Glaucon in the Republic, we find a difficulty in apprehending. This good

is  now  to  be  exhibited  to  us  under  various  aspects  and  gradations.  The

relative dignity of pleasure and knowledge has been determined; but they

have  not  yet  received  their  exact  position  in  the  scale  of  goods.  Some

difficulties occur to us in the enumeration: First, how are we to distinguish

the  first  from  the  second  class  of  goods,  or  the  second  from  the  third?

Secondly, why is there no mention of the supreme mind? Thirdly, the nature

of the fourth class. Fourthly, the meaning of the allusion to a sixth class,

which is not further investigated.


  (I) Plato seems to proceed in his table of goods, from the more abstract to

the less abstract; from the subjective to the objective; until at the lower end of

the scale we fairly descend into the region of human action and feeling. To

him, the greater the abstraction the greater the truth, and he is always tending

to  see  abstractions  within  abstractions;  which,  like  the  ideas  in  the

Parmenides,  are  always  appearing  one  behind  another.  Hence  we  find  a

difficulty in following him into the sphere of thought which he is seeking to

attain. First in his scale of goods he places measure, in which he finds the

eternal nature: this would be more naturally expressed in modern language as

eternal law, and seems to be akin both to the finite and to the mind or cause,

which were two of the elements in the former table. Like the supreme nature

in the Timaeus, like the ideal beauty in the Symposium or the Phaedrus, or

like the ideal good in the Republic, this is the absolute and unapproachable

being. But this being is manifested in symmetry and beauty everywhere, in

the order of nature and of mind, in the relations of men to one another. For

the word 'measure' he now substitutes the word 'symmetry,' as if intending to

express measure conceived as relation. He then proceeds to regard the good

no longer in an objective form, but as the human reason seeking to attaintruth by the aid of dialectic; such at least we naturally infer to be his meaning,

when we consider that both here and in the Republic the sphere of nous or

mind  is  assigned  to  dialectic.  (2)  It  is  remarkable  (see  above)  that  this

personal conception of mind is confined to the human mind, and not extended

to the divine. (3) If we may be allowed to interpret one dialogue of Plato by

another, the sciences of figure and number are probably classed with the arts

and  true  opinions,  because  they  proceed  from  hypotheses  (compare

Republic). (4) The sixth class, if a sixth class is to be added, is playfully set

aside by a quotation from Orpheus: Plato means to say that a sixth class, if

there be such a class, is not worth considering, because pleasure, having only

gained the fifth place in the scale of goods, is already out of the running.


  VI. We may now endeavour to ascertain the relation of the Philebus to the

other dialogues. Here Plato shows the same indifference to his own doctrine

of Ideas which he has already manifested in the Parmenides and the Sophist.

The principle of the one and many of which he here speaks, is illustrated by

examples in the Sophist and Statesman. Notwithstanding the differences of

style, many resemblances may be noticed between the Philebus and Gorgias.

The theory of the simultaneousness of pleasure and pain is common to both

of them (Phil. Gorg.); there is also a common tendency in them to take up

arms against pleasure, although the view of the Philebus, which is probably

the later of the two dialogues, is the more moderate. There seems to be an

allusion  to  the  passage  in  the  Gorgias,  in  which  Socrates  dilates  on  the

pleasures of itching and scratching. Nor is there any real discrepancy in the

manner in which Gorgias and his art are spoken of in the two dialogues. For

Socrates is far from implying that the art of rhetoric has a real sphere of

practical  usefulness:  he  only  means  that  the  refutation  of  the  claims  of

Gorgias  is  not  necessary  for  his  present  purpose.  He  is  saying  in  effect:

'Admit, if you please, that rhetoric is the greatest and usefullest of sciences:--

this does not prove that dialectic is not the purest and most exact.' From the

Sophist and Statesman we know that his hostility towards the sophists and

rhetoricians was not mitigated in later life; although both in the Statesman

and Laws he admits of a higher use of rhetoric.


  Reasons have been already given for assigning a late date to the Philebus.

That  the  date  is  probably  later  than  that  of  the  Republic,  may  be  further

argued on the following grounds:--1. The general resemblance to the laterdialogues and to the Laws: 2. The more complete account of the nature of

good  and  pleasure:  3.  The  distinction  between  perception,  memory,

recollection, and opinion which indicates a great progress in psychology; also

between understanding and imagination, which is described under the figure

of  the  scribe  and  the  painter.  A  superficial  notion  may  arise  that  Plato

probably wrote shorter dialogues, such as the Philebus, the Sophist, and the

Statesman,  as  studies  or  preparations  for  longer  ones.  This  view  may  be

natural; but on further reflection is seen to be fallacious, because these three

dialogues are found to make an advance upon the metaphysical conceptions

of the Republic. And we can more easily suppose that Plato composed shorter

writings after longer ones, than suppose that he lost hold of further points of

view which he had once attained.


  It is more easy to find traces of the Pythagoreans, Eleatics, Megarians,

Cynics, Cyrenaics and of the ideas of Anaxagoras, in the Philebus, than to

say how much is due to each of them. Had we fuller records of those old

philosophers,  we  should  probably  find  Plato  in  the  midst  of  the  fray

attempting to combine Eleatic and Pythagorean doctrines, and seeking to find

a  truth  beyond  either  Being  or  number;  setting  up  his  own  concrete

conception of good against the abstract practical good of the Cynics, or the

abstract intellectual good of the Megarians, and his own idea of classification

against  the  denial  of  plurality  in  unity  which  is  also  attributed  to  them;

warring against the Eristics as destructive of truth, as he had formerly fought

against the Sophists; taking up a middle position between the Cynics and

Cyrenaics in his doctrine of pleasure; asserting with more consistency than

Anaxagoras  the  existence  of  an  intelligent  mind  and  cause.  Of  the

Heracliteans, whom he is said by Aristotle to have cultivated in his youth, he

speaks in the Philebus, as in the Theaetetus and Cratylus, with irony and

contempt. But we have not the knowledge which would enable us to pursue

further the line of reflection here indicated; nor can we expect to find perfect

clearness or order in the first efforts of mankind to understand the working of

their own minds. The ideas which they are attempting to analyse, they are

also in process of creating; the abstract universals of which they are seeking

to adjust the relations have been already excluded by them from the category

of relation.


  ...  The Philebus, like the Cratylus, is supposed to be the continuation of a

previous  discussion.  An  argument  respecting  the  comparative  claims  of

pleasure and wisdom to rank as the chief good has been already carried on

between  Philebus  and  Socrates.  The  argument  is  now  transferred  to

Protarchus, the son of Callias, a noble Athenian youth, sprung from a family

which had spent 'a world of money' on the Sophists (compare Apol.; Crat.;

Protag.). Philebus, who appears to be the teacher, or elder friend, and perhaps

the  lover,  of  Protarchus,  takes  no  further  part  in  the  discussion  beyond

asserting in the strongest manner his adherence, under all circumstances, to

the cause of pleasure.


  Socrates suggests that they shall have a first and second palm of victory.

For there may be a good higher than either pleasure or wisdom, and then

neither of them will gain the first prize, but whichever of the two is more akin

to this higher good will have a right to the second. They agree, and Socrates

opens the game by enlarging on the diversity and opposition which exists

among pleasures. For there are pleasures of all kinds, good and bad, wise and

foolish--pleasures of the temperate as well as of the intemperate. Protarchus

replies that although pleasures may be opposed in so far as they spring from

opposite  sources,  nevertheless  as  pleasures  they  are  alike.  Yes,  retorts

Socrates, pleasure is like pleasure, as figure is like figure and colour like

colour; yet we all know that there is great variety among figures and colours.

Protarchus does not see the drift of this remark; and Socrates proceeds to ask

how he can have a right to attribute a new predicate (i.e. 'good') to pleasures

in  general,  when  he  cannot  deny  that  they  are  different?  What  common

property in all of them does he mean to indicate by the term 'good'? If he

continues to assert that there is some trivial sense in which pleasure is one,

Socrates may retort by saying that knowledge is one, but the result will be

that such merely verbal and trivial conceptions, whether of knowledge or

pleasure, will spoil the discussion, and will prove the incapacity of the two

disputants. In order to avoid this danger, he proposes that they shall beat a

retreat, and, before they proceed, come to an understanding about the 'high

argument' of the one and the many.


    Protarchus agrees to the proposal, but he is under the impression that

Socrates means to discuss the common question--how a sensible object can

be one, and yet have opposite attributes, such as 'great' and 'small,' 'light' and'heavy,'  or  how  there  can  be  many  members  in  one  body,  and  the  like

wonders. Socrates has long ceased to see any wonder in these phenomena; his

difficulties begin with the application of number to abstract unities (e.g.'man,'

'good') and with the attempt to divide them. For have these unities of idea any

real  existence?  How,  if  imperishable,  can  they  enter  into  the  world  of

generation? How, as units, can they be divided and dispersed among different

objects? Or do they exist in their entirety in each object? These difficulties

are but imperfectly answered by Socrates in what follows.


  We speak of a one and many, which is ever flowing in and out of all

things,  concerning  which  a  young  man  often  runs  wild  in  his  first

metaphysical enthusiasm, talking about analysis and synthesis to his father

and mother and the neighbours, hardly sparing even his dog. This 'one in

many' is a revelation of the order of the world, which some Prometheus first

made known to our ancestors; and they, who were better men and nearer the

gods than we are, have handed it down to us. To know how to proceed by

regular steps from one to many, and from many to one, is just what makes the

difference between eristic and dialectic. And the right way of proceeding is to

look for one idea or class in all things, and when you have found one to look

for more than one, and for all that there are, and when you have found them

all and regularly divided a particular field of knowledge into classes, you may

leave the further consideration of individuals. But you must not pass at once

either from unity to infinity, or from infinity to unity. In music, for example,

you may begin with the most general notion, but this alone will not make you

a musician: you must know also the number and nature of the intervals, and

the systems which are framed out of them, and the rhythms of the dance

which correspond to them. And when you have a similar knowledge of any

other subject, you may be said to know that subject. In speech again there are

infinite varieties of sound, and some one who was a wise man, or more than

man,  comprehended  them  all  in  the  classes  of  mutes,  vowels,  and

semivowels, and gave to each of them a name, and assigned them to the art of

grammar.


  'But whither, Socrates, are you going? And what has this to do with the

comparative eligibility of pleasure and wisdom:' Socrates replies, that before

we can adjust their respective claims, we want to know the number and kinds

of  both  of  them.  What  are  they?  He  is  requested  to  answer  the  questionhimself. That he will, if he may be allowed to make one or two preliminary

remarks. In the first place he has a dreamy recollection of hearing that neither

pleasure nor knowledge is the highest good, for the good should be perfect

and sufficient. But is the life of pleasure perfect and sufficient, when deprived

of memory, consciousness, anticipation? Is not this the life of an oyster? Or is

the life of mind sufficient, if devoid of any particle of pleasure? Must not the

union of the two be higher and more eligible than either separately? And is

not the element which makes this mixed life eligible more akin to mind than

to pleasure? Thus pleasure is rejected and mind is rejected. And yet there may

be a life of mind, not human but divine, which conquers still.


  But, if we are to pursue this argument further, we shall require some new

weapons; and by this, I mean a new classification of existence. (1) There is a

finite element of existence, and (2) an infinite, and (3) the union of the two,

and (4) the cause of the union. More may be added if they are wanted, but at

present we can do without them. And first of the infinite or indefinite:--That

is the class which is denoted by the terms more or less, and is always in a

state  of  comparison.  All  words  or  ideas  to  which  the  words  'gently,'

'extremely,' and other comparative expressions are applied, fall under this

class.  The  infinite  would  be  no  longer  infinite,  if  limited  or  reduced  to

measure by number and quantity. The opposite class is the limited or finite,

and includes all things which have number and quantity. And there is a third

class of generation into essence by the union of the finite and infinite, in

which  the  finite  gives  law  to  the  infinite;--under  this  are  comprehended

health,  strength,  temperate  seasons,  harmony,  beauty,  and  the  like.  The

goddess of beauty saw the universal wantonness of all things, and gave law

and order to be the salvation of the soul. But no effect can be generated

without a cause, and therefore there must be a fourth class, which is the cause

of generation; for the cause or agent is not the same as the patient or effect.


  And now, having obtained our classes, we may determine in which our

conqueror life is to be placed: Clearly in the third or mixed class, in which

the finite gives law to the infinite. And in which is pleasure to find a place?

As clearly in the infinite or indefinite, which alone, as Protarchus thinks (who

seems  to  confuse  the  infinite  with  the  superlative),  gives  to  pleasure  the

character of the absolute good. Yes, retorts Socrates, and also to pain the

character of absolute evil. And therefore the infinite cannot be that whichimparts to pleasure the nature of the good. But where shall we place mind?

That is a very serious and awful question, which may be prefaced by another.

Is mind or chance the lord of the universe? All philosophers will say the first,

and  yet,  perhaps,  they  may  be  only  magnifying  themselves.  And  for  this

reason I should like to consider the matter a little more deeply, even though

some lovers of disorder in the world should ridicule my attempt.


  Now the elements earth, air, fire, water, exist in us, and they exist in the

cosmos; but they are purer and fairer in the cosmos than they are in us, and

they come to us from thence. And as we have a soul as well as a body, in like

manner the elements of the finite, the infinite, the union of the two, and the

cause, are found to exist in us. And if they, like the elements, exist in us, and

the three first exist in the world, must not the fourth or cause which is the

noblest of them, exist in the world? And this cause is wisdom or mind, the

royal mind of Zeus, who is the king of all, as there are other gods who have

other noble attributes. Observe how well this agrees with the testimony of

men of old, who affirmed mind to be the ruler of the universe. And remember

that mind belongs to the class which we term the cause, and pleasure to the

infinite or indefinite class. We will examine the place and origin of both.


  What is the origin of pleasure? Her natural seat is the mixed class, in

which health and harmony were placed. Pain is the violation, and pleasure the

restoration of limit. There is a natural union of finite and infinite, which in

hunger, thirst, heat, cold, is impaired--this is painful, but the return to nature,

in which the elements are restored to their normal proportions, is pleasant.

Here is our first class of pleasures. And another class of pleasures and pains

are  hopes  and  fears;  these  are  in  the  mind  only.  And  inasmuch  as  the

pleasures are unalloyed by pains and the pains by pleasures, the examination

of them may show us whether all pleasure is to be desired, or whether this

entire  desirableness  is  not  rather  the  attribute  of  another  class.  But  if

pleasures and pains consist in the violation and restoration of limit, may there

not be a neutral state, in which there is neither dissolution nor restoration?

That is a further question, and admitting, as we must, the possibility of such a

state, there seems to be no reason why the life of wisdom should not exist in

this  neutral  state,  which  is,  moreover,  the  state  of  the  gods,  who  cannot,

without indecency, be supposed to feel either joy or sorrow.  The  second  class  of  pleasures  involves  memory.  There  are  affections

which are extinguished before they reach the soul, and of these there is no

consciousness, and therefore no memory. And there are affections which the

body and soul feel together, and this feeling is termed consciousness. And

memory  is  the  preservation  of  consciousness,  and  reminiscence  is  the

recovery of consciousness. Now the memory of pleasure, when a man is in

pain, is the memory of the opposite of his actual bodily state, and is therefore

not in the body, but in the mind. And there may be an intermediate state, in

which a person is balanced between pleasure and pain; in his body there is

want which is a cause of pain, but in his mind a sure hope of replenishment,

which is pleasant. (But if the hope be converted into despair, he has two pains

and not a balance of pain and pleasure.) Another question is raised: May not

pleasures, like opinions, be true and false? In the sense of being real, both

must be admitted to be true: nor can we deny that to both of them qualities

may be attributed; for pleasures as well as opinions may be described as good

or bad. And though we do not all of us allow that there are true and false

pleasures, we all acknowledge that there are some pleasures associated with

right opinion, and others with falsehood and ignorance. Let us endeavour to

analyze the nature of this association.


  Opinion is based on perception, which may be correct or mistaken. You

may see a figure at a distance, and say first of all, 'This is a man,' and then

say, 'No, this is an image made by the shepherds.' And you may affirm this in

a proposition to your companion, or make the remark mentally to yourself.

Whether the words are actually spoken or not, on such occasions there is a

scribe within who registers them, and a painter who paints the images of the

things which the scribe has written down in the soul,--at least that is my own

notion of the process; and the words and images which are inscribed by them

may be either true or false; and they may represent either past, present, or

future. And, representing the future, they must also represent the pleasures

and pains of anticipation--the visions of gold and other fancies which are

never wanting in the mind of man. Now these hopes, as they are termed, are

propositions, which are sometimes true, and sometimes false; for the good,

who are the friends of the gods, see true pictures of the future, and the bad

false ones. And as there may be opinion about things which are not, were not,

and will not be, which is opinion still, so there may be pleasure about things

which are not, were not, and will not be, which is pleasure still,--that is tosay,  false  pleasure;  and  only  when  false,  can  pleasure,  like  opinion,  be

vicious. Against this conclusion Protarchus reclaims.


  Leaving his denial for the present, Socrates proceeds to show that some

pleasures are false from another point of view. In desire, as we admitted, the

body  is  divided  from  the  soul,  and  hence  pleasures  and  pains  are  often

simultaneous. And we further admitted that both of them belonged to the

infinite class. How, then, can we compare them? Are we not liable, or rather

certain, as in the case of sight, to be deceived by distance and relation? In this

case the pleasures and pains are not false because based upon false opinion,

but are themselves false. And there is another illusion: pain has often been

said by us to arise out of the derangement-- pleasure out of the restoration--of

our nature. But in passing from one to the other, do we not experience neutral

states, which although they appear pleasureable or painful are really neither?

For even if we admit, with the wise man whom Protarchus loves (and only a

wise man could have ever entertained such a notion), that all things are in a

perpetual flux, still these changes are often unconscious, and devoid either of

pleasure or pain. We assume, then, that there are three states--pleasureable,

painful, neutral; we may embellish a little by calling them gold, silver, and

that which is neither.


  But there are certain natural philosophers who will not admit a third state.

Their instinctive dislike to pleasure leads them to affirm that pleasure is only

the absence of pain. They are noble fellows, and, although we do not agree

with them, we may use them as diviners who will indicate to us the right

track.  They  will  say,  that  the  nature  of  anything  is  best  known  from  the

examination  of  extreme  cases,  e.g.  the  nature  of  hardness  from  the

examination of the hardest things; and that the nature of pleasure will be best

understood from an examination of the most intense pleasures. Now these are

the pleasures of the body, not of the mind; the pleasures of disease and not of

health,  the  pleasures  of  the  intemperate  and  not  of  the  temperate.  I  am

speaking, not of the frequency or continuance, but only of the intensity of

such pleasures, and this is given them by contrast with the pain or sickness of

body which precedes them. Their morbid nature is illustrated by the lesser

instances of itching and scratching, respecting which I swear that I cannot tell

whether  they  are  a  pleasure  or  a  pain.  (1)  Some  of  these  arise  out  of  a

transition from one state of the body to another, as from cold to hot; (2)others are caused by the contrast of an internal pain and an external pleasure

in the body: sometimes the feeling of pain predominates, as in itching and

tingling,  when  they  are  relieved  by  scratching;  sometimes  the  feeling  of

pleasure: or the pleasure which they give may be quite overpowering, and is

then accompanied by all sorts of unutterable feelings which have a death of

delights in them. But there are also mixed pleasures which are in the mind

only. For are not love and sorrow as well as anger 'sweeter than honey,' and

also full of pain? Is there not a mixture of feelings in the spectator of tragedy?

and of comedy also? 'I do not understand that last.' Well, then, with the view

of lighting up the obscurity of these mixed feelings, let me ask whether envy

is painful. 'Yes.' And yet the envious man finds something pleasing in the

misfortunes of others? 'True.' And ignorance is a misfortune? 'Certainly.' And

one form of ignorance is self-conceit--a man may fancy himself richer, fairer,

better, wiser than he is? 'Yes.' And he who thus deceives himself may be

strong or weak? 'He may.' And if he is strong we fear him, and if he is weak

we laugh at him, which is a pleasure, and yet we envy him, which is a pain?

These mixed feelings are the rationale of tragedy and comedy, and equally

the rationale of the greater drama of human life. (There appears to be some

confusion in this passage. There is no difficulty in seeing that in comedy, as

in tragedy, the spectator may view the performance with mixed feelings of

pain as well as of pleasure; nor is there any difficulty in understanding that

envy is a mixed feeling, which rejoices not without pain at the misfortunes of

others, and laughs at their ignorance of themselves. But Plato seems to think

further  that  he  has  explained  the  feeling  of  the  spectator  in  comedy

sufficiently by a theory which only applies to comedy in so far as in comedy

we laugh at the conceit or weakness of others. He has certainly given a very

partial explanation of the ridiculous.) Having shown how sorrow, anger, envy

are  feelings  of  a  mixed  nature,  I  will  reserve  the  consideration  of  the

remainder for another occasion.


  Next follow the unmixed pleasures; which, unlike the philosophers of

whom I was speaking, I believe to be real. These unmixed pleasures are: (1)

The pleasures derived from beauty of form, colour, sound, smell, which are

absolutely pure; and in general those which are unalloyed with pain: (2) The

pleasures derived from the acquisition of knowledge, which in themselves are

pure, but may be attended by an accidental pain of forgetting; this, however,

arises from a subsequent act of reflection, of which we need take no account.At the same time, we admit that the latter pleasures are the property of a very

few. To these pure and unmixed pleasures we ascribe measure, whereas all

others belong to the class of the infinite, and are liable to every species of

excess.  And  here  several  questions  arise  for  consideration:--What  is  the

meaning of pure and impure, of moderate and immoderate? We may answer

the question by an illustration: Purity of white paint consists in the clearness

or quality of the white, and this is distinct from the quantity or amount of

white paint; a little pure white is fairer than a great deal which is impure. But

there is another question:--Pleasure is affirmed by ingenious philosophers to

be a generation; they say that there are two natures--one self-existent, the

other dependent; the one noble and majestic, the other failing in both these

qualities. 'I do not understand.' There are lovers and there are loves. 'Yes, I

know, but what is the application?' The argument is in play, and desires to

intimate that there are relatives and there are absolutes, and that the relative is

for the sake of the absolute; and generation is for the sake of essence. Under

relatives I class all things done with a view to generation; and essence is of

the class of good. But if essence is of the class of good, generation must be of

some other class; and our friends, who affirm that pleasure is a generation,

would laugh at the notion that pleasure is a good; and at that other notion,

that  pleasure  is  produced  by  generation,  which  is  only  the  alternative  of

destruction. Who would prefer such an alternation to the equable life of pure

thought? Here is one absurdity, and not the only one, to which the friends of

pleasure are reduced. For is there not also an absurdity in affirming that good

is of the soul only; or in declaring that the best of men, if he be in pain, is

bad?


  And  now,  from  the  consideration  of  pleasure,  we  pass  to  that  of

knowledge. Let us reflect that there are two kinds of knowledge--the one

creative or productive, and the other educational and philosophical. Of the

creative arts, there is one part purer or more akin to knowledge than the other.

There is an element of guess-work and an element of number and measure in

them.  In  music,  for  example,  especially  in  flute-playing,  the  conjectural

element prevails; while in carpentering there is more application of rule and

measure. Of the creative arts, then, we may make two classes--the less exact

and the more exact. And the exacter part of all of them is really arithmetic

and mensuration. But arithmetic and mensuration again may be subdivided

with reference either to their use in the concrete, or to their nature in theabstract--as  they  are  regarded  popularly  in  building  and  binding,  or

theoretically by philosophers. And, borrowing the analogy of pleasure, we

may say that the philosophical use of them is purer than the other. Thus we

have two arts of arithmetic, and two of mensuration. And truest of all in the

estimation of every rational man is dialectic, or the science of being, which

will forget and disown us, if we forget and disown her.


  'But, Socrates, I have heard Gorgias say that rhetoric is the greatest and

usefullest of arts; and I should not like to quarrel either with him or you.'

Neither is there any inconsistency, Protarchus, with his statement in what I

am now saying; for I am not maintaining that dialectic is the greatest or

usefullest, but only that she is the truest of arts; my remark is not quantitative

but qualitative, and refers not to the advantage or repetition of either, but to

the degree of truth which they attain--here Gorgias will not care to compete;

this is what we affirm to be possessed in the highest degree by dialectic. And

do not let us appeal to Gorgias or Philebus or Socrates, but ask, on behalf of

the argument, what are the highest truths which the soul has the power of

attaining. And is not this the science which has a firmer grasp of them than

any other? For the arts generally are only occupied with matters of opinion,

and with the production and action and passion of this sensible world. But the

highest  truth  is  that  which  is  eternal  and  unchangeable.  And  reason  and

wisdom are concerned with the eternal; and these are the very claimants, if

not for the first, at least for the second place, whom I propose as rivals to

pleasure.


  And  now,  having  the  materials,  we  may  proceed  to  mix  them--first

recapitulating the question at issue.


  Philebus affirmed pleasure to be the good, and assumed them to be one

nature; I affirmed that they were two natures, and declared that knowledge

was more akin to the good than pleasure. I said that the two together were

more  eligible  than  either  taken  singly;  and  to  this  we  adhere.  Reason

intimates, as at first, that we should seek the good not in the unmixed life, but

in the mixed.


  The cup is ready, waiting to be mingled, and here are two fountains, one

of honey, the other of pure water, out of which to make the fairest possiblemixture. There are pure and impure pleasures--pure and impure sciences. Let

us consider the sections of each which have the most of purity and truth; to

admit them all indiscriminately would be dangerous. First we will take the

pure sciences; but shall we mingle the impure--the art which uses the false

rule and the false measure? That we must, if we are any of us to find our way

home; man cannot live upon pure mathematics alone. And must I include

music, which is admitted to be guess-work? 'Yes, you must, if human life is

to have any humanity.' Well, then, I will open the door and let them all in;

they shall mingle in an Homeric 'meeting of the waters.' And now we turn to

the  pleasures;  shall  I  admit  them?  'Admit  first  of  all  the  pure  pleasures;

secondly, the necessary.' And what shall we say about the rest? First, ask the

pleasures--they will be too happy to dwell with wisdom. Secondly, ask the

arts and sciences--they reply that the excesses of intemperance are the ruin of

them;  and  that  they  would  rather  only  have  the  pleasures  of  health  and

temperance, which are the handmaidens of virtue. But still we want truth?

That is now added; and so the argument is complete, and may be compared to

an incorporeal law, which is to hold fair rule over a living body. And now we

are at the vestibule of the good, in which there are three chief elements--truth,

symmetry, and beauty. These will be the criterion of the comparative claims

of pleasure and wisdom.


  Which has the greater share of truth? Surely wisdom; for pleasure is the

veriest impostor in the world, and the perjuries of lovers have passed into a

proverb.


  Which  of  symmetry?  Wisdom  again;  for  nothing  is  more  immoderate

than pleasure.


  Which of beauty? Once more, wisdom; for pleasure is often unseemly,

and the greatest pleasures are put out of sight.


  Not  pleasure,  then,  ranks  first  in  the  scale  of  good,  but  measure,  and

eternal harmony.


    Second comes the symmetrical and beautiful and perfect.


  Third, mind and wisdom.  Fourth, sciences and arts and true opinions.


  Fifth, painless pleasures.


  Of a sixth class, I have no more to say. Thus, pleasure and mind may both

renounce the claim to the first place. But mind is ten thousand times nearer to

the chief good than pleasure. Pleasure ranks fifth and not first, even though

all the animals in the world assert the contrary.


  ...


  From the days of Aristippus and Epicurus to our own times the nature of

pleasure has occupied the attention of philosophers. 'Is pleasure an evil? a

good?  the  only  good?'  are  the  simple  forms  which  the  enquiry  assumed

among the Socratic schools. But at an early stage of the controversy another

question was asked: 'Do pleasures differ in kind? and are some bad, some

good, and some neither bad nor good?' There are bodily and there are mental

pleasures,  which  were  at  first  confused  but  afterwards  distinguished.  A

distinction was also made between necessary and unnecessary pleasures; and

again  between  pleasures  which  had  or  had  not  corresponding  pains.  The

ancient philosophers were fond of asking, in the language of their age, 'Is

pleasure a "becoming" only, and therefore transient and relative, or do some

pleasures  partake  of  truth  and  Being?'  To  these  ancient  speculations  the

moderns have added a further question:-- 'Whose pleasure? The pleasure of

yourself, or of your neighbour,--of the individual, or of the world?' This little

addition has changed the whole aspect of the discussion: the same word is

now supposed to include two principles as widely different as benevolence

and self-love. Some modern writers have also distinguished between pleasure

the test, and pleasure the motive of actions. For the universal test of right

actions (how I know them) may not always be the highest or best motive of

them (why I do them).


  Socrates,  as  we  learn  from  the  Memorabilia  of  Xenophon,  first  drew

attention to the consequences of actions. Mankind were said by him to act

rightly when they knew what they were doing, or, in the language of the

Gorgias,  'did  what  they  would.'  He  seems  to  have  been  the  first  who

maintained  that  the  good  was  the  useful  (Mem.).  In  his  eagerness  forgeneralization,  seeking,  as  Aristotle  says,  for  the  universal  in  Ethics

(Metaph.),  he  took  the  most  obvious  intellectual  aspect  of  human  action

which  occurred  to  him.  He  meant  to  emphasize,  not  pleasure,  but  the

calculation of pleasure; neither is he arguing that pleasure is the chief good,

but that we should have a principle of choice. He did not intend to oppose 'the

useful' to some higher conception, such as the Platonic ideal, but to chance

and caprice. The Platonic Socrates pursues the same vein of thought in the

Protagoras, where he argues against the so-called sophist that pleasure and

pain  are  the  final  standards  and  motives  of  good  and  evil,  and  that  the

salvation of human life depends upon a right estimate of pleasures greater or

less when seen near and at a distance. The testimony of Xenophon is thus

confirmed by that of Plato, and we are therefore justified in calling Socrates

the first utilitarian; as indeed there is no side or aspect of philosophy which

may not with reason be ascribed to him-- he is Cynic and Cyrenaic, Platonist

and Aristotelian in one. But in the Phaedo the Socratic has already passed

into a more ideal point of view; and he, or rather Plato speaking in his person,

expressly repudiates the notion that the exchange of a less pleasure for a

greater can be an exchange of virtue. Such virtue is the virtue of ordinary

men who live in the world of appearance; they are temperate only that they

may  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  intemperance,  and  courageous  from  fear  of

danger.  Whereas  the  philosopher  is  seeking  after  wisdom  and  not  after

pleasure, whether near or distant: he is the mystic, the initiated, who has

learnt to despise the body and is yearning all his life long for a truth which

will hereafter be revealed to him. In the Republic the pleasures of knowledge

are affirmed to be superior to other pleasures, because the philosopher so

estimates them; and he alone has had experience of both kinds. (Compare a

similar argument urged by one of the latest defenders of Utilitarianism, Mill's

Utilitarianism). In the Philebus, Plato, although he regards the enemies of

pleasure with complacency, still further modifies the transcendentalism of the

Phaedo. For he is compelled to confess, rather reluctantly, perhaps, that some

pleasures, i.e. those which have no antecedent pains, claim a place in the

scale of goods.


  There have been many reasons why not only Plato but mankind in general

have been unwilling to acknowledge that 'pleasure is the chief good.' Either

they have heard a voice calling to them out of another world; or the life and

example of some great teacher has cast their thoughts of right and wrong inanother mould; or the word 'pleasure' has been associated in their mind with

merely animal enjoyment. They could not believe that what they were always

striving to overcome, and the power or principle in them which overcame,

were of the same nature. The pleasure of doing good to others and of bodily

self-indulgence, the pleasures of intellect and the pleasures of sense, are so

different:--Why then should they be called by a common name? Or, if the

equivocal or metaphorical use of the word is justified by custom (like the use

of other words which at first referred only to the body, and then by a figure

have been transferred to the mind), still, why should we make an ambiguous

word  the  corner-stone  of  moral  philosophy?  To  the  higher  thinker  the

Utilitarian or hedonist mode of speaking has been at variance with religion

and with any higher conception both of politics and of morals. It has not

satisfied their imagination; it has offended their taste. To elevate pleasure,

'the most fleeting of all things,' into a general idea seems to such men a

contradiction. They do not desire to bring down their theory to the level of

their practice. The simplicity of the 'greatest happiness' principle has been

acceptable to philosophers, but the better part of the world has been slow to

receive it.


  Before proceeding, we may make a few admissions which will narrow the

field of dispute; and we may as well leave behind a few prejudices, which

intelligent opponents of Utilitarianism have by this time 'agreed to discard'.

We admit that Utility is coextensive with right, and that no action can be right

which does not tend to the happiness of mankind; we acknowledge that a

large class of actions are made right or wrong by their consequences only; we

say  further  that  mankind  are  not  too  mindful,  but  that  they  are  far  too

regardless of consequences, and that they need to have the doctrine of utility

habitually inculcated on them. We recognize the value of a principle which

can supply a connecting link between Ethics and Politics, and under which all

human actions are or may be included. The desire to promote happiness is no

mean preference of expediency to right, but one of the highest and noblest

motives by which human nature can be animated. Neither in referring actions

to the test of utility have we to make a laborious calculation, any more than in

trying  them  by  other  standards  of  morals.  For  long  ago  they  have  been

classified  sufficiently  for  all  practical  purposes  by  the  thinker,  by  the

legislator, by the opinion of the world. Whatever may be the hypothesis on

which they are explained, or which in doubtful cases may be applied to theregulation of them, we are very rarely, if ever, called upon at the moment of

performing them to determine their effect upon the happiness of mankind.


  There is a theory which has been contrasted with Utility by Paley and

others--the theory of a moral sense: Are our ideas of right and wrong innate

or derived from experience? This, perhaps, is another of those speculations

which  intelligent  men  might  'agree  to  discard.'  For  it  has  been  worn

threadbare; and either alternative is equally consistent with a transcendental

or with an eudaemonistic system of ethics, with a greatest happiness principle

or with Kant's law of duty. Yet to avoid misconception, what appears to be

the truth about the origin of our moral ideas may be shortly summed up as

follows:--To  each  of  us  individually  our  moral  ideas  come  first  of  all  in

childhood  through  the  medium  of  education,  from  parents  and  teachers,

assisted by the unconscious influence of language; they are impressed upon a

mind which at first is like a waxen tablet, adapted to receive them; but they

soon  become  fixed  or  set,  and  in  after  life  are  strengthened,  or  perhaps

weakened  by  the  force  of  public  opinion.  They  may  be  corrected  and

enlarged by experience, they may be reasoned about, they may be brought

home to us by the circumstances of our lives, they may be intensified by

imagination,  by  reflection,  by  a  course  of  action  likely  to  confirm  them.

Under the influence of religious feeling or by an effort of thought, any one

beginning with the ordinary rules of morality may create out of them for

himself ideals of holiness and virtue. They slumber in the minds of most men,

yet in all of us there remains some tincture of affection, some desire of good,

some sense of truth, some fear of the law. Of some such state or process each

individual is conscious in himself, and if he compares his own experience

with that of others he will find the witness of their consciences to coincide

with that of his own. All of us have entered into an inheritance which we

have the power of appropriating and making use of. No great effort of mind is

required on our part; we learn morals, as we learn to talk, instinctively, from

conversing with others, in an enlightened age, in a civilized country, in a

good  home.  A  well-educated  child  of  ten  years  old  already  knows  the

essentials of morals: 'Thou shalt not steal,' 'thou shalt speak the truth,' 'thou

shalt love thy parents,' 'thou shalt fear God.' What more does he want?


  But  whence  comes  this  common  inheritance  or  stock  of  moral  ideas?

Their beginning, like all other beginnings of human things, is obscure, and isthe least important part of them. Imagine, if you will, that Society originated

in the herding of brutes, in their parental instincts, in their rude attempts at

self-preservation:--Man is not man in that he resembles, but in that he differs

from them. We must pass into another cycle of existence, before we can

discover in him by any evidence accessible to us even the germs of our moral

ideas. In the history of the world, which viewed from within is the history of

the human mind, they have been slowly created by religion, by poetry, by

law, having their foundation in the natural affections and in the necessity of

some degree of truth and justice in a social state; they have been deepened

and  enlarged  by  the  efforts  of  great  thinkers  who  have  idealized  and

connected them--by the lives of saints and prophets who have taught and

exemplified them. The schools of ancient philosophy which seem so far from

us--Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, the Stoics, the Epicureans, and a few modern

teachers, such as Kant and Bentham, have each of them supplied 'moments'

of  thought  to  the  world.  The  life  of  Christ  has  embodied  a  divine  love,

wisdom,  patience,  reasonableness.  For  his  image,  however  imperfectly

handed down to us, the modern world has received a standard more perfect in

idea  than  the  societies  of  ancient  times,  but  also  further  removed  from

practice.  For  there  is  certainly  a  greater  interval  between  the  theory  and

practice of Christians than between the theory and practice of the Greeks and

Romans; the ideal is more above us, and the aspiration after good has often

lent a strange power to evil. And sometimes, as at the Reformation, or French

Revolution,  when  the  upper  classes  of  a  so-called  Christian  country  have

become  corrupted  by  priestcraft,  by  casuistry,  by  licentiousness,  by

despotism,  the  lower  have  risen  up  and  re-asserted  the  natural  sense  of

religion and right.


  We may further remark that our moral ideas, as the world grows older,

perhaps as we grow older ourselves, unless they have been undermined in us

by false philosophy or the practice of mental analysis, or infected by the

corruption  of  society  or  by  some  moral  disorder  in  the  individual,  are

constantly assuming a more natural and necessary character. The habit of the

mind, the opinion of the world, familiarizes them to us; and they take more

and more the form of immediate intuition. The moral sense comes last and

not first in the order of their development, and is the instinct which we have

inherited or acquired, not the nobler effort of reflection which created them

and  which  keeps  them  alive.  We  do  not  stop  to  reason  about  commonhonesty.  Whenever  we  are  not  blinded  by  self-deceit,  as  for  example  in

judging the actions of others, we have no hesitation in determining what is

right and wrong. The principles of morality, when not at variance with some

desire or worldly interest of our own, or with the opinion of the public, are

hardly perceived by us; but in the conflict of reason and passion they assert

their authority and are not overcome without remorse.


  Such is a brief outline of the history of our moral ideas. We have to

distinguish, first of all, the manner in which they have grown up in the world

from the manner in which they have been communicated to each of us. We

may represent them to ourselves as flowing out of the boundless ocean of

language and thought in little rills, which convey them to the heart and brain

of each individual. But neither must we confound the theories or aspects of

morality  with  the  origin  of  our  moral  ideas.  These  are  not  the  roots  or

'origines' of morals, but the latest efforts of reflection, the lights in which the

whole moral world has been regarded by different thinkers and successive

generations of men. If we ask: Which of these many theories is the true one?

we may answer: All of them--moral sense, innate ideas, a priori, a posteriori

notions, the philosophy of experience, the philosophy of intuition--all of them

have added something to our conception of Ethics; no one of them is the

whole truth. But to decide how far our ideas of morality are derived from one

source  or  another;  to  determine  what  history,  what  philosophy  has

contributed to them; to distinguish the original, simple elements from the

manifold and complex applications of them, would be a long enquiry too far

removed from the question which we are now pursuing.


  Bearing in mind the distinction which we have been seeking to establish

between our earliest and our most mature ideas of morality, we may now

proceed to state the theory of Utility, not exactly in the words, but in the spirit

of one of its ablest and most moderate supporters (Mill's Utilitarianism):--

'That which alone makes actions either right or desirable is their utility, or

tendency to promote the happiness of mankind, or, in other words, to increase

the sum of pleasure in the world. But all pleasures are not the same: they

differ in quality as well as in quantity, and the pleasure which is superior in

quality  is  incommensurable  with  the  inferior.  Neither  is  the  pleasure  or

happiness,  which  we  seek,  our  own  pleasure,  but  that  of  others,--of  our

family, of our country, of mankind. The desire of this, and even the sacrificeof our own interest to that of other men, may become a passion to a rightly

educated nature. The Utilitarian finds a place in his system for this virtue and

for every other.'


  Good or happiness or pleasure is thus regarded as the true and only end of

human life. To this all our desires will be found to tend, and in accordance

with this all the virtues, including justice, may be explained. Admitting that

men rest for a time in inferior ends, and do not cast their eyes beyond them,

these ends are really dependent on the greater end of happiness, and would

not  be  pursued,  unless  in  general  they  had  been  found  to  lead  to  it.  The

existence of such an end is proved, as in Aristotle's time, so in our own, by

the universal fact that men desire it. The obligation to promote it is based

upon the social nature of man; this sense of duty is shared by all of us in

some degree, and is capable of being greatly fostered and strengthened. So

far from being inconsistent with religion, the greatest happiness principle is

in the highest degree agreeable to it. For what can be more reasonable than

that God should will the happiness of all his creatures? and in working out

their happiness we may be said to be 'working together with him.' Nor is it

inconceivable that a new enthusiasm of the future, far stronger than any old

religion, may be based upon such a conception.


  But then for the familiar phrase of the 'greatest happiness principle,' it

seems  as  if  we  ought  now  to  read  'the  noblest  happiness  principle,'  'the

happiness of others principle'--the principle not of the greatest, but of the

highest pleasure, pursued with no more regard to our own immediate interest

than  is  required  by  the  law  of  self-preservation.  Transfer  the  thought  of

happiness to another life, dropping the external circumstances which form so

large a part of our idea of happiness in this, and the meaning of the word

becomes  indistinguishable  from  holiness,  harmony,  wisdom,  love.  By  the

slight addition 'of others,' all the associations of the word are altered; we

seem to have passed over from one theory of morals to the opposite. For

allowing that the happiness of others is reflected on ourselves, and also that

every man must live before he can do good to others, still the last limitation is

a  very  trifling  exception,  and  the  happiness  of  another  is  very  far  from

compensating for the loss of our own. According to Mr. Mill, he would best

carry out the principle of utility who sacrificed his own pleasure most to that

of his fellow-men. But if so, Hobbes and Butler, Shaftesbury and Hume, arenot so far apart as they and their followers imagine. The thought of self and

the thought of others are alike superseded in the more general notion of the

happiness  of  mankind  at  large.  But  in  this  composite  good,  until  society

becomes perfected, the friend of man himself has generally the least share,

and may be a great sufferer.


  And  now  what  objection  have  we  to  urge  against  a  system  of  moral

philosophy so beneficent, so enlightened, so ideal, and at the same time so

practical,--so Christian, as we may say without exaggeration,--and which has

the  further  advantage  of  resting  morality  on  a  principle  intelligible  to  all

capacities? Have we not found that which Socrates and Plato 'grew old in

seeking'? Are we not desirous of happiness, at any rate for ourselves and our

friends, if not for all mankind? If, as is natural, we begin by thinking of

ourselves first, we are easily led on to think of others; for we cannot help

acknowledging that what is right for us is the right and inheritance of others.

We  feel  the  advantage  of  an  abstract  principle  wide  enough  and  strong

enough to override all the particularisms of mankind; which acknowledges a

universal good, truth, right; which is capable of inspiring men like a passion,

and is the symbol of a cause for which they are ready to contend to their life's

end.


  And  if  we  test  this  principle  by  the  lives  of  its  professors,  it  would

certainly  appear  inferior  to  none  as  a  rule  of  action.  From  the  days  of

Eudoxus (Arist. Ethics) and Epicurus to our own, the votaries of pleasure

have gained belief for their principles by their practice. Two of the noblest

and most disinterested men who have lived in this century, Bentham and J. S.

Mill, whose lives were a long devotion to the service of their fellows, have

been among the most enthusiastic supporters of utility; while among their

contemporaries, some who were of a more mystical turn of mind, have ended

rather in aspiration than in action, and have been found unequal to the duties

of life. Looking back on them now that they are removed from the scene, we

feel that mankind has been the better for them. The world was against them

while they lived; but this is rather a reason for admiring than for depreciating

them.  Nor  can  any  one  doubt  that  the  influence  of  their  philosophy  on

politics--especially on foreign politics, on law, on social life, has been upon

the whole beneficial. Nevertheless, they will never have justice done to them,

for they do not agree either with the better feeling of the multitude or with theidealism of more refined thinkers. Without Bentham, a great word in the

history of philosophy would have remained unspoken. Yet to this day it is

rare to hear his name received with any mark of respect such as would be

freely granted to the ambiguous memory of some father of the Church. The

odium which attached to him when alive has not been removed by his death.

For he shocked his contemporaries by egotism and want of taste; and this

generation  which  has  reaped  the  benefit  of  his  labours  has  inherited  the

feeling of the last. He was before his own age, and is hardly remembered in

this.


  While acknowledging the benefits which the greatest happiness principle

has  conferred  upon  mankind,  the  time  appears  to  have  arrived,  not  for

denying its claims, but for criticizing them and comparing them with other

principles which equally claim to lie at the foundation of ethics. Any one who

adds a general principle to knowledge has been a benefactor to the world. But

there  is  a  danger  that,  in  his  first  enthusiasm,  he  may  not  recognize  the

proportions or limitations to which his truth is subjected; he does not see how

far he has given birth to a truism, or how that which is a truth to him is a

truism to the rest of the world; or may degenerate in the next generation. He

believes  that  to  be  the  whole  which  is  only  a  part,--to  be  the  necessary

foundation which is really only a valuable aspect of the truth. The systems of

all  philosophers  require  the  criticism  of  'the  morrow,'  when  the  heat  of

imagination which forged them has cooled, and they are seen in the temperate

light of day. All of them have contributed to enrich the mind of the civilized

world;  none  of  them  occupy  that  supreme  or  exclusive  place  which  their

authors would have assigned to them.


  We may preface the criticism with a few preliminary remarks:--


  Mr.  Mill,  Mr.  Austin,  and  others,  in  their  eagerness  to  maintain  the

doctrine of utility, are fond of repeating that we are in a lamentable state of

uncertainty  about  morals.  While  other  branches  of  knowledge  have  made

extraordinary progress, in moral philosophy we are supposed by them to be

no better than children, and with few exceptions--that is to say, Bentham and

his followers--to be no further advanced than men were in the age of Socrates

and Plato, who, in their turn, are deemed to be as backward in ethics as they

necessarily  were  in  physics.  But  this,  though  often  asserted,  is  recantedalmost in a breath by the same writers who speak thus depreciatingly of our

modern ethical philosophy. For they are the first to acknowledge that we have

not now to begin classifying actions under the head of utility; they would not

deny  that  about  the  general  conceptions  of  morals  there  is  a  practical

agreement. There is no more doubt that falsehood is wrong than that a stone

falls to the ground, although the first does not admit of the same ocular proof

as the second. There is no greater uncertainty about the duty of obedience to

parents  and  to  the  law  of  the  land  than  about  the  properties  of  triangles.

Unless we are looking for a new moral world which has no marrying and

giving in marriage, there is no greater disagreement in theory about the right

relations of the sexes than about the composition of water. These and a few

other simple principles, as they have endless applications in practice, so also

may be developed in theory into counsels of perfection.


  To  what  then  is  to  be  attributed  this  opinion  which  has  been  often

entertained  about  the  uncertainty  of  morals?  Chiefly  to  this,--that

philosophers have not always distinguished the theoretical and the casuistical

uncertainty of morals from the practical certainty. There is an uncertainty

about  details,--whether,  for  example,  under  given  circumstances  such  and

such a moral principle is to be enforced, or whether in some cases there may

not be a conflict of duties: these are the exceptions to the ordinary rules of

morality, important, indeed, but not extending to the one thousandth or one

ten-thousandth  part  of  human  actions.  This  is  the  domain  of  casuistry.

Secondly, the aspects under which the most general principles of morals may

be presented to us are many and various. The mind of man has been more

than  usually  active  in  thinking  about  man.  The  conceptions  of  harmony,

happiness, right, freedom, benevolence, self-love, have all of them seemed to

some philosopher or other the truest and most comprehensive expression of

morality. There is no difference, or at any rate no great difference, of opinion

about the right and wrong of actions, but only about the general notion which

furnishes the best explanation or gives the most comprehensive view of them.

This, in the language of Kant, is the sphere of the metaphysic of ethics. But

these two uncertainties at either end, en tois malista katholou and en tois kath

ekasta, leave space enough for an intermediate principle which is practically

certain.


  The rule of human life is not dependent on the theories of philosophers:we know what our duties are for the most part before we speculate about

them. And the use of speculation is not to teach us what we already know, but

to inspire in our minds an interest about morals in general, to strengthen our

conception of the virtues by showing that they confirm one another, to prove

to us, as Socrates would have said, that they are not many, but one. There is

the same kind of pleasure and use in reducing morals, as in reducing physics,

to a few very simple truths. And not unfrequently the more general principle

may  correct  prejudices  and  misconceptions,  and  enable  us  to  regard  our

fellow-men in a larger and more generous spirit.


  The two qualities which seem to be most required in first principles of

ethics are, (1) that they should afford a real explanation of the facts, (2) that

they should inspire the mind,--should harmonize, strengthen, settle us. We

can hardly estimate the influence which a simple principle such as 'Act so as

to promote the happiness of mankind,' or 'Act so that the rule on which thou

actest may be adopted as a law by all rational beings,' may exercise on the

mind of an individual. They will often seem to open a new world to him, like

the religious conceptions of faith or the spirit of God. The difficulties of

ethics disappear when we do not suffer ourselves to be distracted between

different  points  of  view.  But  to  maintain  their  hold  on  us,  the  general

principles  must  also  be  psychologically  true--they  must  agree  with  our

experience, they must accord with the habits of our minds.


  When we are told that actions are right or wrong only in so far as they

tend towards happiness, we naturally ask what is meant by 'happiness.' For

the  term  in  the  common  use  of  language  is  only  to  a  certain  extent

commensurate with moral good and evil. We should hardly say that a good

man could be utterly miserable (Arist. Ethics), or place a bad man in the first

rank of happiness. But yet, from various circumstances, the measure of a

man's happiness may be out of all proportion to his desert. And if we insist on

calling the good man alone happy, we shall be using the term in some new

and transcendental sense, as synonymous with well-being. We have already

seen that happiness includes the happiness of others as well as our own; we

must now comprehend unconscious as well as conscious happiness under the

same word. There is no harm in this extension of the meaning, but a word

which  admits  of  such  an  extension  can  hardly  be  made  the  basis  of  a

philosophical system. The exactness which is required in philosophy will notallow us to comprehend under the same term two ideas so different as the

subjective feeling of pleasure or happiness and the objective reality of a state

which receives our moral approval.


  Like Protarchus in the Philebus, we can give no answer to the question,

'What  is  that  common  quality  which  in  all  states  of  human  life  we  call

happiness? which includes the lower and the higher kind of happiness, and is

the aim of the noblest, as well as of the meanest of mankind?' If we say 'Not

pleasure, not virtue, not wisdom, nor yet any quality which we can abstract

from these'--what then? After seeming to hover for a time on the verge of a

great truth, we have gained only a truism.


  Let us ask the question in another form. What is that which constitutes

happiness, over and above the several ingredients of health, wealth, pleasure,

virtue, knowledge, which are included under it? Perhaps we answer, 'The

subjective feeling of them.' But this is very far from being coextensive with

right.  Or  we  may  reply  that  happiness  is  the  whole  of  which  the  above-

mentioned are the parts. Still the question recurs, 'In what does the whole

differ from all the parts?' And if we are unable to distinguish them, happiness

will be the mere aggregate of the goods of life.


  Again,  while  admitting  that  in  all  right  action  there  is  an  element  of

happiness, we cannot help seeing that the utilitarian theory supplies a much

easier  explanation  of  some  virtues  than  of  others.  Of  many  patriotic  or

benevolent actions we can give a straightforward account by their tendency to

promote happiness. For the explanation of justice, on the other hand, we have

to go a long way round. No man is indignant with a thief because he has not

promoted the greatest happiness of the greatest number, but because he has

done  him  a  wrong.  There  is  an  immeasurable  interval  between  a  crime

against property or life, and the omission of an act of charity or benevolence.

Yet of this interval the utilitarian theory takes no cognizance. The greatest

happiness principle strengthens our sense of positive duties towards others,

but weakens our recognition of their rights. To promote in every way possible

the happiness of others may be a counsel of perfection, but hardly seems to

offer any ground for a theory of obligation. For admitting that our ideas of

obligation are partly derived from religion and custom, yet they seem also to

contain other essential elements which cannot be explained by the tendencyof actions to promote happiness. Whence comes the necessity of them? Why

are some actions rather than others which equally tend to the happiness of

mankind imposed upon us with the authority of law? 'You ought' and 'you

had better' are fundamental distinctions in human thought; and having such

distinctions, why should we seek to efface and unsettle them?


    Bentham and Mr. Mill are earnest in maintaining that happiness includes

the happiness of others as well as of ourselves. But what two notions can be

more opposed in many cases than these? Granting that in a perfect state of the

world my own happiness and that of all other men would coincide, in the

imperfect  state  they  often  diverge,  and  I  cannot  truly  bridge  over  the

difficulty  by  saying  that  men  will  always  find  pleasure  in  sacrificing

themselves or in suffering for others. Upon the greatest happiness principle it

is admitted that I am to have a share, and in consistency I should pursue my

own happiness as impartially as that of my neighbour. But who can decide

what proportion should be mine and what his, except on the principle that I

am most likely to be deceived in my own favour, and had therefore better

give the larger share, if not all, to him?


  Further,  it  is  admitted  that  utility  and  right  coincide,  not  in  particular

instances, but in classes of actions. But is it not distracting to the conscience

of a man to be told that in the particular case they are opposed? Happiness is

said to be the ground of moral obligation, yet he must not do what clearly

conduces to his own happiness if it is at variance with the good of the whole.

Nay, further, he will be taught that when utility and right are in apparent

conflict any amount of utility does not alter by a hair's-breadth the morality of

actions, which cannot be allowed to deviate from established law or usage;

and that the non-detection of an immoral act, say of telling a lie, which may

often make the greatest difference in the consequences, not only to himself,

but to all the world, makes none whatever in the act itself.


  Again, if we are concerned not with particular actions but with classes of

actions, is the tendency of actions to happiness a principle upon which we

can  classify  them?  There  is  a  universal  law  which  imperatively  declares

certain acts to be right or wrong:--can there be any universality in the law

which measures actions by their tendencies towards happiness? For an act

which  is  the  cause  of  happiness  to  one  person  may  be  the  cause  ofunhappiness to another; or an act which if performed by one person may

increase the happiness of mankind may have the opposite effect if performed

by  another.  Right  can  never  be  wrong,  or  wrong  right,  that  there  are  no

actions which tend to the happiness of mankind which may not under other

circumstances tend to their unhappiness. Unless we say not only that all right

actions tend to happiness, but that they tend to happiness in the same degree

in  which  they  are  right  (and  in  that  case  the  word  'right'  is  plainer),  we

weaken the absoluteness of our moral standard; we reduce differences in kind

to differences in degree; we obliterate the stamp which the authority of ages

has set upon vice and crime.


  Once more: turning from theory to practice we feel the importance of

retaining the received distinctions of morality. Words such as truth, justice,

honesty, virtue, love, have a simple meaning; they have become sacred to us,-

-'the word of God' written on the human heart: to no other words can the

same  associations  be  attached.  We  cannot  explain  them  adequately  on

principles  of  utility;  in  attempting  to  do  so  we  rob  them  of  their  true

character.  We  give  them  a  meaning  often  paradoxical  and  distorted,  and

generally weaker than their signification in common language. And as words

influence  men's  thoughts,  we  fear  that  the  hold  of  morality  may  also  be

weakened, and the sense of duty impaired, if virtue and vice are explained

only as the qualities which do or do not contribute to the pleasure of the

world. In that very expression we seem to detect a false ring, for pleasure is

individual not universal; we speak of eternal and immutable justice, but not

of eternal and immutable pleasure; nor by any refinement can we avoid some

taint of bodily sense adhering to the meaning of the word.


  Again: the higher the view which men take of life, the more they lose

sight of their own pleasure or interest. True religion is not working for a

reward only, but is ready to work equally without a reward. It is not 'doing

the will of God for the sake of eternal happiness,' but doing the will of God

because  it  is  best,  whether  rewarded  or  unrewarded.  And  this  applies  to

others as well as to ourselves. For he who sacrifices himself for the good of

others, does not sacrifice himself that they may be saved from the persecution

which he endures for their sakes, but rather that they in their turn may be able

to undergo similar sufferings, and like him stand fast in the truth. To promote

their happiness is not his first object, but to elevate their moral nature. Bothin his own case and that of others there may be happiness in the distance, but

if there were no happiness he would equally act as he does. We are speaking

of the highest and noblest natures; and a passing thought naturally arises in

our minds, 'Whether that can be the first principle of morals which is hardly

regarded in their own case by the greatest benefactors of mankind?'


  The admissions that pleasures differ in kind, and that actions are already

classified;  the  acknowledgment  that  happiness  includes  the  happiness  of

others, as well as of ourselves; the confusion (not made by Aristotle) between

conscious and unconscious happiness, or between happiness the energy and

happiness the result of the energy, introduce uncertainty and inconsistency

into the whole enquiry. We reason readily and cheerfully from a greatest

happiness  principle.  But  we  find  that  utilitarians  do  not  agree  among

themselves about the meaning of the word. Still less can they impart to others

a common conception or conviction of the nature of happiness. The meaning

of the word is always insensibly slipping away from us, into pleasure, out of

pleasure,  now  appearing  as  the  motive,  now  as  the  test  of  actions,  and

sometimes  varying  in  successive  sentences.  And  as  in  a  mathematical

demonstration an error in the original number disturbs the whole calculation

which follows, this fundamental uncertainty about the word vitiates all the

applications of it. Must we not admit that a notion so uncertain in meaning,

so void of content, so at variance with common language and opinion, does

not comply adequately with either of our two requirements? It can neither

strike the imaginative faculty, nor give an explanation of phenomena which is

in accordance with our individual experience. It is indefinite; it supplies only

a  partial  account  of  human  actions:  it  is  one  among  many  theories  of

philosophers. It may be compared with other notions, such as the chief good

of Plato, which may be best expressed to us under the form of a harmony, or

with Kant's obedience to law, which may be summed up under the word

'duty,' or with the Stoical 'Follow nature,' and seems to have no advantage

over them. All of these present a certain aspect of moral truth. None of them

are, or indeed profess to be, the only principle of morals.


  And this brings us to speak of the most serious objection to the utilitarian

system--its exclusiveness. There is no place for Kant or Hegel, for Plato and

Aristotle alongside of it. They do not reject the greatest happiness principle,

but it rejects them. Now the phenomena of moral action differ, and some arebest  explained  upon  one  principle  and  some  upon  another:  the  virtue  of

justice seems to be naturally connected with one theory of morals, the virtues

of temperance and benevolence with another. The characters of men also

differ;  and  some  are  more  attracted  by  one  aspect  of  the  truth,  some  by

another. The firm stoical nature will conceive virtue under the conception of

law, the philanthropist under that of doing good, the quietist under that of

resignation, the enthusiast under that of faith or love. The upright man of the

world will desire above all things that morality should be plain and fixed, and

should  use  language  in  its  ordinary  sense.  Persons  of  an  imaginative

temperament  will  generally  be  dissatisfied  with  the  words  'utility'  or

'pleasure': their principle of right is of a far higher character--what or where

to be found they cannot always distinctly tell;--deduced from the laws of

human nature, says one; resting on the will of God, says another; based upon

some transcendental idea which animates more worlds than one, says a third:


  on nomoi prokeintai upsipodes, ouranian di aithera teknothentes.


  To satisfy an imaginative nature in any degree, the doctrine of utility must

be so transfigured that it becomes altogether different and loses all simplicity.


  But why, since there are different characters among men, should we not

allow them to envisage morality accordingly, and be thankful to the great

men who have provided for all of us modes and instruments of thought?

Would the world have been better if there had been no Stoics or Kantists, no

Platonists or Cartesians? No more than if the other pole of moral philosophy

had been excluded. All men have principles which are above their practice;

they admit premises which, if carried to their conclusions, are a sufficient

basis of morals. In asserting liberty of speculation we are not encouraging

individuals to make right or wrong for themselves, but only conceding that

they may choose the form under which they prefer to contemplate them. Nor

do we say that one of these aspects is as true and good as another; but that

they all of them, if they are not mere sophisms and illusions, define and bring

into relief some part of the truth which would have been obscure without

their light. Why should we endeavour to bind all men within the limits of a

single  metaphysical  conception?  The  necessary  imperfection  of  language

seems to require that we should view the same truth under more than one

aspect.  We  are  living  in  the  second  age  of  utilitarianism,  when  the  charm  of

novelty and the fervour of the first disciples has passed away. The doctrine is

no longer stated in the forcible paradoxical manner of Bentham, but has to be

adapted to meet objections; its corners are rubbed off, and the meaning of its

most characteristic expressions is softened. The array of the enemy melts

away when we approach him. The greatest happiness of the greatest number

was a great original idea when enunciated by Bentham, which leavened a

generation and has left its mark on thought and civilization in all succeeding

times. His grasp of it had the intensity of genius. In the spirit of an ancient

philosopher he would have denied that pleasures differed in kind, or that by

happiness he meant anything but pleasure. He would perhaps have revolted

us by his thoroughness. The 'guardianship of his doctrine' has passed into

other hands; and now we seem to see its weak points, its ambiguities, its want

of  exactness  while  assuming  the  highest  exactness,  its  one-sidedness,  its

paradoxical explanation of several of the virtues. No philosophy has ever

stood this criticism of the next generation, though the founders of all of them

have imagined that they were built upon a rock. And the utilitarian system,

like others, has yielded to the inevitable analysis. Even in the opinion of 'her

admirers she has been terribly damaged' (Phil.), and is no longer the only

moral philosophy, but one among many which have contributed in various

degrees to the intellectual progress of mankind.


  But because the utilitarian philosophy can no longer claim 'the prize,' we

must  not  refuse  to  acknowledge  the  great  benefits  conferred  by  it  on  the

world. All philosophies are refuted in their turn, says the sceptic, and he

looks  forward  to  all  future  systems  sharing  the  fate  of  the  past.  All

philosophies remain, says the thinker; they have done a great work in their

own  day,  and  they  supply  posterity  with  aspects  of  the  truth  and  with

instruments of thought. Though they may be shorn of their glory, they retain

their place in the organism of knowledge.


  And still there remain many rules of morals which are better explained

and more forcibly inculcated on the principle of utility than on any other. The

question Will such and such an action promote the happiness of myself, my

family,  my  country,  the  world?  may  check  the  rising  feeling  of  pride  or

honour which would cause a quarrel, an estrangement, a war. 'How can I

contribute to the greatest happiness of others?' is another form of the questionwhich will be more attractive to the minds of many than a deduction of the

duty of benevolence from a priori principles. In politics especially hardly any

other argument can be allowed to have weight except the happiness of a

people. All parties alike profess to aim at this, which though often used only

as the disguise of self-interest has a great and real influence on the minds of

statesmen. In religion, again, nothing can more tend to mitigate superstition

than the belief that the good of man is also the will of God. This is an easy

test  to  which  the  prejudices  and  superstitions  of  men  may  be  brought:--

whatever does not tend to the good of men is not of God. And the ideal of the

greatest happiness of mankind, especially if believed to be the will of God,

when compared with the actual fact, will be one of the strongest motives to

do good to others.


  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  temptation  is  to  speak  falsely,  to  be

dishonest or unjust, or in any way to interfere with the rights of others, the

argument  that  these  actions  regarded  as  a  class  will  not  conduce  to  the

happiness of mankind, though true enough, seems to have less force than the

feeling which is already implanted in the mind by conscience and authority.

To resolve this feeling into the greatest happiness principle takes away from

its sacred and authoritative character. The martyr will not go to the stake in

order that he may promote the happiness of mankind, but for the sake of the

truth: neither will the soldier advance to the cannon's mouth merely because

he believes military discipline to be for the good of mankind. It is better for

him to know that he will be shot, that he will be disgraced, if he runs away--

he has no need to look beyond military honour, patriotism, 'England expects

every  man  to  do  his  duty.'  These  are  stronger  motives  than  the  greatest

happiness of the greatest number, which is the thesis of a philosopher, not the

watchword of an army. For in human actions men do not always require

broad principles; duties often come home to us more when they are limited

and defined, and sanctioned by custom and public opinion.


  Lastly, if we turn to the history of ethics, we shall find that our moral

ideas have originated not in utility but in religion, in law, in conceptions of

nature, of an ideal good, and the like. And many may be inclined to think that

this conclusively disproves the claim of utility to be the basis of morals. But

the utilitarian will fairly reply (see above) that we must distinguish the origin

of  ethics  from  the  principles  of  them--  the  historical  germ  from  the  latergrowth of reflection. And he may also truly add that for two thousand years

and more, utility, if not the originating, has been the great corrective principle

in law, in politics, in religion, leading men to ask how evil may be diminished

and  good  increased--by  what  course  of  policy  the  public  interest  may  be

promoted, and to understand that God wills the happiness, not of some of his

creatures and in this world only, but of all of them and in every stage of their

existence.


  'What  is  the  place  of  happiness  or  utility  in  a  system  of  moral

philosophy?' is analogous to the question asked in the Philebus, 'What rank

does pleasure hold in the scale of goods?' Admitting the greatest happiness

principle to be true and valuable, and the necessary foundation of that part of

morals which relates to the consequences of actions, we still have to consider

whether this or some other general notion is the highest principle of human

life.  We  may  try  them  in  this  comparison  by  three  tests--definiteness,

comprehensiveness, and motive power.


  There are three subjective principles of morals,--sympathy, benevolence,

self-love.  But  sympathy  seems  to  rest  morality  on  feelings  which  differ

widely even in good men; benevolence and self-love torture one half of our

virtuous  actions  into  the  likeness  of  the  other.  The  greatest  happiness

principle,  which  includes  both,  has  the  advantage  over  all  these  in

comprehensiveness,  but  the  advantage  is  purchased  at  the  expense  of

definiteness.


  Again,  there  are  the  legal  and  political  principles  of  morals--freedom,

equality, rights of persons; 'Every man to count for one and no man for more

than one,' 'Every man equal in the eye of the law and of the legislator.' There

is also the other sort of political morality, which if not beginning with 'Might

is right,' at any rate seeks to deduce our ideas of justice from the necessities

of the state and of society. According to this view the greatest good of men is

obedience to law: the best human government is a rational despotism, and the

best idea which we can form of a divine being is that of a despot acting not

wholly without regard to law and order. To such a view the present mixed

state  of  the  world,  not  wholly  evil  or  wholly  good,  is  supposed  to  be  a

witness.  More  we  might  desire  to  have,  but  are  not  permitted.  Though  a

human  tyrant  would  be  intolerable,  a  divine  tyrant  is  a  very  tolerablegovernor of the universe. This is the doctrine of Thrasymachus adapted to the

public opinion of modern times.


  There is yet a third view which combines the two:--freedom is obedience

to the law, and the greatest order is also the greatest freedom; 'Act so that thy

action may be the law of every intelligent being.' This view is noble and

elevating; but it seems to err, like other transcendental principles of ethics, in

being too abstract. For there is the same difficulty in connecting the idea of

duty with particular duties as in bridging the gulf between phainomena and

onta; and when, as in the system of Kant, this universal idea or law is held to

be  independent  of  space  and  time,  such  a  mataion  eidos  becomes  almost

unmeaning.


  Once more there are the religious principles of morals:--the will of God

revealed in Scripture and in nature. No philosophy has supplied a sanction

equal in authority to this, or a motive equal in strength to the belief in another

life. Yet about these too we must ask What will of God? how revealed to us,

and  by  what  proofs?  Religion,  like  happiness,  is  a  word  which  has  great

influence apart from any consideration of its content: it may be for great good

or for great evil. But true religion is the synthesis of religion and morality,

beginning with divine perfection in which all human perfection is embodied.

It moves among ideas of holiness, justice, love, wisdom, truth; these are to

God, in whom they are personified, what the Platonic ideas are to the idea of

good. It is the consciousness of the will of God that all men should be as he

is. It lives in this world and is known to us only through the phenomena of

this  world,  but  it  extends  to  worlds  beyond.  Ordinary  religion  which  is

alloyed with motives of this world may easily be in excess, may be fanatical,

may  be  interested,  may  be  the  mask  of  ambition,  may  be  perverted  in  a

thousand ways. But of that religion which combines the will of God with our

highest  ideas  of  truth  and  right  there  can  never  be  too  much.  This

impossibility of excess is the note of divine moderation.


  So then, having briefly passed in review the various principles of moral

philosophy, we may now arrange our goods in order, though, like the reader

of the Philebus, we have a difficulty in distinguishing the different aspects of

them from one another, or defining the point at which the human passes into

the divine.  First,  the  eternal  will  of  God  in  this  world  and  in  another,--justice,

holiness, wisdom, love, without succession of acts (ouch e genesis prosestin),

which is known to us in part only, and reverenced by us as divine perfection.


  Secondly, human perfection, or the fulfilment of the will of God in this

world,  and  co-operation  with  his  laws  revealed  to  us  by  reason  and

experience, in nature, history, and in our own minds.


    Thirdly, the elements of human perfection,--virtue, knowledge, and right

opinion.


  Fourthly, the external conditions of perfection,--health and the goods of

life.


  Fifthly,  beauty  and  happiness,--the  inward  enjoyment  of  that  which  is

best and fairest in this world and in the human soul.


  ...


  The Philebus is probably the latest in time of the writings of Plato with

the exception of the Laws. We have in it therefore the last development of his

philosophy.  The  extreme  and  one-sided  doctrines  of  the  Cynics  and

Cyrenaics  are  included  in  a  larger  whole;  the  relations  of  pleasure  and

knowledge to each other and to the good are authoritatively determined; the

Eleatic  Being  and  the  Heraclitean  Flux  no  longer  divide  the  empire  of

thought; the Mind of Anaxagoras has become the Mind of God and of the

World. The great distinction between pure and applied science for the first

time has a place in philosophy; the natural claim of dialectic to be the Queen

of the Sciences is once more affirmed. This latter is the bond of union which

pervades the whole or nearly the whole of the Platonic writings. And here as

in several other dialogues (Phaedrus, Republic, etc.) it is presented to us in a

manner playful yet also serious, and sometimes as if the thought of it were

too great for human utterance and came down from heaven direct. It is the

organization of knowledge wonderful to think of at a time when knowledge

itself could hardly be said to exist. It is this more than any other element

which distinguishes Plato, not only from the presocratic philosophers, but

from Socrates himself.  We  have  not  yet  reached  the  confines  of  Aristotle,  but  we  make  a

somewhat nearer approach to him in the Philebus than in the earlier Platonic

writings.  The  germs  of  logic  are  beginning  to  appear,  but  they  are  not

collected into a whole, or made a separate science or system. Many thinkers

of many different schools have to be interposed between the Parmenides or

Philebus  of  Plato,  and  the  Physics  or  Metaphysics  of  Aristotle.  It  is  this

interval upon which we have to fix our minds if we would rightly understand

the character of the transition from one to the other. Plato and Aristotle do not

dovetail into one another; nor does the one begin where the other ends; there

is a gulf between them not to be measured by time, which in the fragmentary

state of our knowledge it is impossible to bridge over. It follows that the one

cannot be interpreted by the other. At any rate, it is not Plato who is to be

interpreted by Aristotle, but Aristotle by Plato. Of all philosophy and of all

art the true understanding is to be sought not in the afterthoughts of posterity,

but in the elements out of which they have arisen. For the previous stage is a

tendency towards the ideal at which they are aiming; the later is a declination

or deviation from them, or even a perversion of them. No man's thoughts

were ever so well expressed by his disciples as by himself.


  But  although  Plato  in  the  Philebus  does  not  come  into  any  close

connexion with Aristotle, he is now a long way from himself and from the

beginnings of his own philosophy. At the time of his death he left his system

still incomplete; or he may be more truly said to have had no system, but to

have  lived  in  the  successive  stages  or  moments  of  metaphysical  thought

which presented themselves from time to time. The earlier discussions about

universal ideas and definitions seem to have died away; the correlation of

ideas has taken their place. The flowers of rhetoric and poetry have lost their

freshness and charm; and a technical language has begun to supersede and

overgrow them. But the power of thinking tends to increase with age, and the

experience  of  life  to  widen  and  deepen.  The  good  is  summed  up  under

categories which are not summa genera, but heads or gradations of thought.

The question of pleasure and the relation of bodily pleasures to mental, which

is hardly treated of elsewhere in Plato, is here analysed with great subtlety.

The mean or measure is now made the first principle of good. Some of these

questions  reappear  in  Aristotle,  as  does  also  the  distinction  between

metaphysics and mathematics. But there are many things in Plato which have

been lost in Aristotle; and many things in Aristotle not to be found in Plato.The  most  remarkable  deficiency  in  Aristotle  is  the  disappearance  of  the

Platonic  dialectic,  which  in  the  Aristotelian  school  is  only  used  in  a

comparatively unimportant and trivial sense. The most remarkable additions

are  the  invention  of  the  Syllogism,  the  conception  of  happiness  as  the

foundation of morals, the reference of human actions to the standard of the

better mind of the world, or of the one 'sensible man' or 'superior person.' His

conception of ousia, or essence, is not an advance upon Plato, but a return to

the poor and meagre abstractions of the Eleatic philosophy. The dry attempt

to reduce the presocratic philosophy by his own rather arbitrary standard of

the four causes, contrasts unfavourably with Plato's general discussion of the

same subject (Sophist). To attempt further to sum up the differences between

the two great philosophers would be out of place here. Any real discussion of

their relation to one another must be preceded by an examination into the

nature and character of the Aristotelian writings and the form in which they

have  come  down  to  us.  This  enquiry  is  not  really  separable  from  an

investigation of Theophrastus as well as Aristotle and of the remains of other

schools of philosophy as well as of the Peripatetics. But, without entering on

this  wide  field,  even  a  superficial  consideration  of  the  logical  and

metaphysical  works  which  pass  under  the  name  of  Aristotle,  whether  we

suppose them to have come directly from his hand or to be the tradition of his

school,  is  sufficient  to  show  how  great  was  the  mental  activity  which

prevailed  in  the  latter  half  of  the  fourth  century  B.C.;  what  eddies  and

whirlpools  of  controversies  were  surging  in  the  chaos  of  thought,  what

transformations of the old philosophies were taking place everywhere, what

eclecticisms and syncretisms and realisms and nominalisms were affecting

the mind of Hellas. The decline of philosophy during this period is no less

remarkable than the loss of freedom; and the two are not unconnected with

each other. But of the multitudinous sea of opinions which were current in

the  age  of  Aristotle  we  have  no  exact  account.  We  know  of  them  from

allusions  only.  And  we  cannot  with  advantage  fill  up  the  void  of  our

knowledge by conjecture: we can only make allowance for our ignorance.


  There are several passages in the Philebus which are very characteristic of

Plato, and which we shall do well to consider not only in their connexion, but

apart from their connexion as inspired sayings or oracles which receive their

full interpretation only from the history of philosophy in later ages. The more

serious attacks on traditional beliefs which are often veiled under an unusualsimplicity or irony are of this kind. Such, for example, is the excessive and

more than human awe which Socrates expresses about the names of the gods,

which  may  be  not  unaptly  compared  with  the  importance  attached  by

mankind  to  theological  terms  in  other  ages;  for  this  also  may  be

comprehended under the satire of Socrates. Let us observe the religious and

intellectual enthusiasm which shines forth in the following, 'The power and

faculty of loving the truth, and of doing all things for the sake of the truth': or,

again,  the  singular  acknowledgment  which  may  be  regarded  as  the

anticipation  of  a  new  logic,  that  'In  going  to  war  for  mind  I  must  have

weapons of a different make from those which I used before, although some

of the old ones may do again.' Let us pause awhile to reflect on a sentence

which is full of meaning to reformers of religion or to the original thinker of

all ages: 'Shall we then agree with them of old time, and merely reassert the

notions of others without risk to ourselves; or shall we venture also to share

in the risk and bear the reproach which will await us': i.e. if we assert mind to

be the author of nature. Let us note the remarkable words, 'That in the divine

nature of Zeus there is the soul and mind of a King, because there is in him

the  power  of  the  cause,'  a  saying  in  which  theology  and  philosophy  are

blended and reconciled; not omitting to observe the deep insight into human

nature which is shown by the repetition of the same thought 'All philosophers

are  agreed  that  mind  is  the  king  of  heaven  and  earth'  with  the  ironical

addition,  'in  this  way  truly  they  magnify  themselves.'  Nor  let  us  pass

unheeded the indignation felt by the generous youth at the 'blasphemy' of

those  who  say  that  Chaos  and  Chance  Medley  created  the  world;  or  the

significance of the words 'those who said of old time that mind rules the

universe'; or the pregnant observation that 'we are not always conscious of

what we are doing or of what happens to us,' a chance expression to which if

philosophers  had  attended  they  would  have  escaped  many  errors  in

psychology. We may contrast the contempt which is poured upon the verbal

difficulty  of  the  one  and  many,  and  the  seriousness  with  the  unity  of

opposites  is  regarded  from  the  higher  point  of  view  of  abstract  ideas:  or

compare the simple manner in which the question of cause and effect and

their mutual dependence is regarded by Plato (to which modern science has

returned in Mill and Bacon), and the cumbrous fourfold division of causes in

the Physics and Metaphysics of Aristotle, for which it has puzzled the world

to find a use in so many centuries. When we consider the backwardness of

knowledge in the age of Plato, the boldness with which he looks forward intothe distance, the many questions of modern philosophy which are anticipated

in  his  writings,  may  we  not  truly  describe  him  in  his  own  words  as  a

'spectator of all time and of all existence'?Philebus


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettPERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: Socrates, Protarchus, Philebus.


SOCRATES: Observe, Protarchus, the nature of the position which you are

now going to take from Philebus, and what the other position is which I

maintain, and which, if you do not approve of it, is to be controverted by you.

Shall you and I sum up the two sides?


PROTARCHUS: By all means.


SOCRATES: Philebus was saying that enjoyment and pleasure and delight,

and  the  class  of  feelings  akin  to  them,  are  a  good  to  every  living  being,

whereas I contend, that not these, but wisdom and intelligence and memory,

and  their  kindred,  right  opinion  and  true  reasoning,  are  better  and  more

desirable than pleasure for all who are able to partake of them, and that to all

such who are or ever will be they are the most advantageous of all things.

Have I not given, Philebus, a fair statement of the two sides of the argument?


PHILEBUS: Nothing could be fairer, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And do you, Protarchus, accept the position which is assigned

to you?


PROTARCHUS: I cannot do otherwise, since our excellent Philebus has left

the field.


SOCRATES: Surely the truth about these matters ought, by all means, to be

ascertained.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Shall we further agree--


PROTARCHUS: To what?


SOCRATES:  That  you  and  I  must  now  try  to  indicate  some  state  and

disposition of the soul, which has the property of making all men happy.PROTARCHUS: Yes, by all means.


SOCRATES: And you say that pleasure, and I say that wisdom, is such a

state?


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: And what if there be a third state, which is better than either?

Then both of us are vanquished--are we not? But if this life, which really has

the power of making men happy, turn out to be more akin to pleasure than to

wisdom, the life of pleasure may still have the advantage over the life of

wisdom.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: Or suppose that the better life is more nearly allied to wisdom,

then wisdom conquers, and pleasure is defeated;--do you agree?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And what do you say, Philebus?


PHILEBUS: I say, and shall always say, that pleasure is easily the conqueror;

but you must decide for yourself, Protarchus.


PROTARCHUS: You, Philebus, have handed over the argument to me, and

have no longer a voice in the matter?


PHILEBUS: True enough. Nevertheless I would clear myself and deliver my

soul of you; and I call the goddess herself to witness that I now do so.


PROTARCHUS: You may appeal to us; we too will be the witnesses of your

words. And now, Socrates, whether Philebus is pleased or displeased, we will

proceed with the argument.


SOCRATES: Then let us begin with the goddess herself, of whom Philebus

says that she is called Aphrodite, but that her real name is Pleasure.PROTARCHUS: Very good.


SOCRATES: The awe which I always feel, Protarchus, about the names of

the gods is more than human--it exceeds all other fears. And now I would not

sin against Aphrodite by naming her amiss; let her be called what she pleases.

But Pleasure I know to be manifold, and with her, as I was just now saying,

we  must  begin,  and  consider  what  her  nature  is.  She  has  one  name,  and

therefore you would imagine that she is one; and yet surely she takes the

most varied and even unlike forms. For do we not say that the intemperate

has pleasure, and that the temperate has pleasure in his very temperance,--that

the fool is pleased when he is full of foolish fancies and hopes, and that the

wise man has pleasure in his wisdom? and how foolish would any one be

who affirmed that all these opposite pleasures are severally alike!


PROTARCHUS: Why, Socrates, they are opposed in so far as they spring

from opposite sources, but they are not in themselves opposite. For must not

pleasure be of all things most absolutely like pleasure,--that is, like itself?


SOCRATES: Yes, my good friend, just as colour is like colour;--in so far as

colours are colours, there is no difference between them; and yet we all know

that black is not only unlike, but even absolutely opposed to white: or again,

as figure is like figure, for all figures are comprehended under one class; and

yet particular figures may be absolutely opposed to one another, and there is

an infinite diversity of them. And we might find similar examples in many

other things; therefore do not rely upon this argument, which would go to

prove the unity of the most extreme opposites. And I suspect that we shall

find a similar opposition among pleasures.


PROTARCHUS: Very likely; but how will this invalidate the argument?


SOCRATES: Why, I shall reply, that dissimilar as they are, you apply to

them a new predicate, for you say that all pleasant things are good; now

although no one can argue that pleasure is not pleasure, he may argue, as we

are doing, that pleasures are oftener bad than good; but you call them all

good, and at the same time are compelled, if you are pressed, to acknowledge

that they are unlike. And so you must tell us what is the identical quality

existing alike in good and bad pleasures, which makes you designate all ofthem as good.


PROTARCHUS: What do you mean, Socrates? Do you think that any one

who  asserts  pleasure  to  be  the  good,  will  tolerate  the  notion  that  some

pleasures are good and others bad?


SOCRATES: And yet you will acknowledge that they are different from one

another, and sometimes opposed?


PROTARCHUS: Not in so far as they are pleasures.


SOCRATES: That is a return to the old position, Protarchus, and so we are to

say (are we?) that there is no difference in pleasures, but that they are all

alike; and the examples which have just been cited do not pierce our dull

minds,  but  we  go  on  arguing  all  the  same,  like  the  weakest  and  most

inexperienced reasoners? (Probably corrupt.)


PROTARCHUS: What do you mean?


SOCRATES: Why, I mean to say, that in self-defence I may, if I like, follow

your example, and assert boldly that the two things most unlike are most

absolutely alike; and the result will be that you and I will prove ourselves to

be very tyros in the art of disputing; and the argument will be blown away

and  lost.  Suppose  that  we  put  back,  and  return  to  the  old  position;  then

perhaps we may come to an understanding with one another.


PROTARCHUS: How do you mean?


SOCRATES: Shall I, Protarchus, have my own question asked of me by you?


PROTARCHUS: What question?


SOCRATES: Ask me whether wisdom and science and mind, and those other

qualities which I, when asked by you at first what is the nature of the good,

affirmed to be good, are not in the same case with the pleasures of which you

spoke.


PROTARCHUS: What do you mean?SOCRATES: The sciences are a numerous class, and will be found to present

great  differences.  But  even  admitting  that,  like  the  pleasures,  they  are

opposite as well as different, should I be worthy of the name of dialectician

if,  in  order  to  avoid  this  difficulty,  I  were  to  say  (as  you  are  saying  of

pleasure) that there is no difference between one science and another;--would

not the argument founder and disappear like an idle tale, although we might

ourselves escape drowning by clinging to a fallacy?


PROTARCHUS: May none of this befal us, except the deliverance! Yet I like

the  even-handed  justice  which  is  applied  to  both  our  arguments.  Let  us

assume,  then,  that  there  are  many  and  diverse  pleasures,  and  many  and

different sciences.


SOCRATES: And let us have no concealment, Protarchus, of the differences

between my good and yours; but let us bring them to the light in the hope

that, in the process of testing them, they may show whether pleasure is to be

called the good, or wisdom, or some third quality; for surely we are not now

simply contending in order that my view or that yours may prevail, but I

presume that we ought both of us to be fighting for the truth.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly we ought.


SOCRATES: Then let us have a more definite understanding and establish

the principle on which the argument rests.


PROTARCHUS: What principle?


SOCRATES: A principle about which all men are always in a difficulty, and

some men sometimes against their will.


PROTARCHUS: Speak plainer.


SOCRATES: The principle which has just turned up, which is a marvel of

nature; for that one should be many or many one, are wonderful propositions;

and he who affirms either is very open to attack.


PROTARCHUS: Do you mean, when a person says that I, Protarchus, am bynature one and also many, dividing the single 'me' into many 'me's,' and even

opposing them as great and small, light and heavy, and in ten thousand other

ways?


SOCRATES:  Those,  Protarchus,  are  the  common  and  acknowledged

paradoxes about the one and many, which I may say that everybody has by

this time agreed to dismiss as childish and obvious and detrimental to the true

course of thought; and no more favour is shown to that other puzzle, in which

a person proves the members and parts of anything to be divided, and then

confessing  that  they  are  all  one,  says  laughingly  in  disproof  of  his  own

words: Why, here is a miracle, the one is many and infinite, and the many are

only one.


PROTARCHUS: But what, Socrates, are those other marvels connected with

this  subject  which,  as  you  imply,  have  not  yet  become  common  and

acknowledged?


SOCRATES: When, my boy, the one does not belong to the class of things

that are born and perish, as in the instances which we were giving, for in

those  cases,  and  when  unity  is  of  this  concrete  nature,  there  is,  as  I  was

saying,  a  universal  consent  that  no  refutation  is  needed;  but  when  the

assertion is made that man is one, or ox is one, or beauty one, or the good

one,  then  the  interest  which  attaches  to  these  and  similar  unities  and  the

attempt which is made to divide them gives birth to a controversy.


PROTARCHUS: Of what nature?


SOCRATES:  In  the  first  place,  as  to  whether  these  unities  have  a  real

existence; and then how each individual unity, being always the same, and

incapable either of generation or of destruction, but retaining a permanent

individuality,  can  be  conceived  either  as  dispersed  and  multiplied  in  the

infinity of the world of generation, or as still entire and yet divided from

itself, which latter would seem to be the greatest impossibility of all, for how

can one and the same thing be at the same time in one and in many things?

These, Protarchus, are the real difficulties, and this is the one and many to

which they relate; they are the source of great perplexity if ill decided, and

the right determination of them is very helpful.PROTARCHUS: Then, Socrates, let us begin by clearing up these questions.


SOCRATES: That is what I should wish.


PROTARCHUS: And I am sure that all my other friends will be glad to hear

them discussed; Philebus, fortunately for us, is not disposed to move, and we

had better not stir him up with questions.


SOCRATES: Good; and where shall we begin this great and multifarious

battle, in which such various points are at issue? Shall we begin thus?


PROTARCHUS: How?


SOCRATES: We say that the one and many become identified by thought,

and that now, as in time past, they run about together, in and out of every

word which is uttered, and that this union of them will never cease, and is not

now beginning, but is, as I believe, an everlasting quality of thought itself,

which never grows old. Any young man, when he first tastes these subtleties,

is delighted, and fancies that he has found a treasure of wisdom; in the first

enthusiasm of his joy he leaves no stone, or rather no thought unturned, now

rolling up the many into the one, and kneading them together, now unfolding

and  dividing  them;  he  puzzles  himself  first  and  above  all,  and  then  he

proceeds to puzzle his neighbours, whether they are older or younger, or of

his own age--that makes no difference; neither father nor mother does he

spare; no human being who has ears is safe from him, hardly even his dog,

and a barbarian would have no chance of escaping him, if an interpreter could

only be found.


PROTARCHUS: Considering, Socrates, how many we are, and that all of us

are young men, is there not a danger that we and Philebus may all set upon

you, if you abuse us? We understand what you mean; but is there no charm

by which we may dispel all this confusion, no more excellent way of arriving

at the truth? If there is, we hope that you will guide us into that way, and we

will do our best to follow, for the enquiry in which we are engaged, Socrates,

is not unimportant.


SOCRATES: The reverse of unimportant, my boys, as Philebus calls you,and there neither is nor ever will be a better than my own favourite way,

which has nevertheless already often deserted me and left me helpless in the

hour of need.


PROTARCHUS: Tell us what that is.


SOCRATES: One which may be easily pointed out, but is by no means easy

of application; it is the parent of all the discoveries in the arts.


PROTARCHUS: Tell us what it is.


SOCRATES: A gift of heaven, which, as I conceive, the gods tossed among

men by the hands of a new Prometheus, and therewith a blaze of light; and

the ancients, who were our betters and nearer the gods than we are, handed

down the tradition, that whatever things are said to be are composed of one

and many, and have the finite and infinite implanted in them: seeing, then,

that such is the order of the world, we too ought in every enquiry to begin by

laying down one idea of that which is the subject of enquiry; this unity we

shall find in everything. Having found it, we may next proceed to look for

two,  if  there  be  two,  or,  if  not,  then  for  three  or  some  other  number,

subdividing each of these units, until at last the unity with which we began is

seen not only to be one and many and infinite, but also a definite number; the

infinite must not be suffered to approach the many until the entire number of

the species intermediate between unity and infinity has been discovered,--

then,  and  not  till  then,  we  may  rest  from  division,  and  without  further

troubling ourselves about the endless individuals may allow them to drop into

infinity. This, as I was saying, is the way of considering and learning and

teaching one another, which the gods have handed down to us. But the wise

men of our time are either too quick or too slow in conceiving plurality in

unity. Having no method, they make their one and many anyhow, and from

unity pass at once to infinity; the intermediate steps never occur to them. And

this,  I  repeat,  is  what  makes  the  difference  between  the  mere  art  of

disputation and true dialectic.


PROTARCHUS: I think that I partly understand you Socrates, but I should

like to have a clearer notion of what you are saying.SOCRATES:  I  may  illustrate  my  meaning  by  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,

Protarchus, which you were made to learn as a child.


PROTARCHUS: How do they afford an illustration?


SOCRATES:  The  sound  which  passes  through  the  lips  whether  of  an

individual or of all men is one and yet infinite.


PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: And yet not by knowing either that sound is one or that sound

is  infinite  are  we  perfect  in  the  art  of  speech,  but  the  knowledge  of  the

number and nature of sounds is what makes a man a grammarian.


PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: And the knowledge which makes a man a musician is of the

same kind.


PROTARCHUS: How so?


SOCRATES: Sound is one in music as well as in grammar?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And there is a higher note and a lower note, and a note of equal

pitch:--may we affirm so much?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: But you would not be a real musician if this was all that you

knew; though if you did not know this you would know almost nothing of

music.


PROTARCHUS: Nothing.


SOCRATES: But when you have learned what sounds are high and what low,

and the number and nature of the intervals and their limits or proportions, andthe systems compounded out of them, which our fathers discovered, and have

handed down to us who are their descendants under the name of harmonies;

and the affections corresponding to them in the movements of the human

body, which when measured by numbers ought, as they say, to be called

rhythms and measures; and they tell us that the same principle should be

applied to every one and many;--when, I say, you have learned all this, then,

my dear friend, you are perfect; and you may be said to understand any other

subject, when you have a similar grasp of it. But the infinity of kinds and the

infinity of individuals which there is in each of them, when not classified,

creates in every one of us a state of infinite ignorance; and he who never

looks for number in anything, will not himself be looked for in the number of

famous men.


PROTARCHUS:  I  think  that  what  Socrates  is  now  saying  is  excellent,

Philebus.


PHILEBUS: I think so too, but how do his words bear upon us and upon the

argument?


SOCRATES: Philebus is right in asking that question of us, Protarchus.


PROTARCHUS: Indeed he is, and you must answer him.


SOCRATES: I will; but you must let me make one little remark first about

these matters; I was saying, that he who begins with any individual unity,

should proceed from that, not to infinity, but to a definite number, and now I

say conversely, that he who has to begin with infinity should not jump to

unity,  but  he  should  look  about  for  some  number  representing  a  certain

quantity,  and  thus  out  of  all  end  in  one.  And  now  let  us  return  for  an

illustration of our principle to the case of letters.


PROTARCHUS: What do you mean?


SOCRATES: Some god or divine man, who in the Egyptian legend is said to

have  been  Theuth,  observing  that  the  human  voice  was  infinite,  first

distinguished  in  this  infinity  a  certain  number  of  vowels,  and  then  other

letters which had sound, but were not pure vowels (i.e., the semivowels);these too exist in a definite number; and lastly, he distinguished a third class

of letters which we now call mutes, without voice and without sound, and

divided these, and likewise the two other classes of vowels and semivowels,

into the individual sounds, and told the number of them, and gave to each and

all of them the name of letters; and observing that none of us could learn any

one of them and not learn them all, and in consideration of this common bond

which in a manner united them, he assigned to them all a single art, and this

he called the art of grammar or letters.


PHILEBUS: The illustration, Protarchus, has assisted me in understanding

the  original  statement,  but  I  still  feel  the  defect  of  which  I  just  now

complained.


SOCRATES: Are you going to ask, Philebus, what this has to do with the

argument?


PHILEBUS: Yes, that is a question which Protarchus and I have been long

asking.


SOCRATES:  Assuredly  you  have  already  arrived  at  the  answer  to  the

question which, as you say, you have been so long asking?


PHILEBUS: How so?


SOCRATES: Did we not begin by enquiring into the comparative eligibility

of pleasure and wisdom?


PHILEBUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And we maintain that they are each of them one?


PHILEBUS: True.


SOCRATES:  And  the  precise  question  to  which  the  previous  discussion

desires an answer is, how they are one and also many (i.e., how they have one

genus and many species), and are not at once infinite, and what number of

species is to be assigned to either of them before they pass into infinity (i.e.

into the infinite number of individuals).PROTARCHUS: That is a very serious question, Philebus, to which Socrates

has ingeniously brought us round, and please to consider which of us shall

answer  him;  there  may  be  something  ridiculous  in  my  being  unable  to

answer, and therefore imposing the task upon you, when I have undertaken

the whole charge of the argument, but if neither of us were able to answer,

the result methinks would be still more ridiculous. Let us consider, then, what

we are to do:--Socrates, if I understood him rightly, is asking whether there

are not kinds of pleasure, and what is the number and nature of them, and the

same of wisdom.


SOCRATES: Most true, O son of Callias; and the previous argument showed

that if we are not able to tell the kinds of everything that has unity, likeness,

sameness, or their opposites, none of us will be of the smallest use in any

enquiry.


PROTARCHUS:  That  seems  to  be  very  near  the  truth,  Socrates.  Happy

would the wise man be if he knew all things, and the next best thing for him

is that he should know himself. Why do I say so at this moment? I will tell

you. You, Socrates, have granted us this opportunity of conversing with you,

and are ready to assist us in determining what is the best of human goods. For

when Philebus said that pleasure and delight and enjoyment and the like were

the chief good, you answered--No, not those, but another class of goods; and

we are constantly reminding ourselves of what you said, and very properly, in

order that we may not forget to examine and compare the two. And these

goods, which in your opinion are to be designated as superior to pleasure, and

are the true objects of pursuit, are mind and knowledge and understanding

and art, and the like. There was a dispute about which were the best, and we

playfully threatened that you should not be allowed to go home until the

question was settled; and you agreed, and placed yourself at our disposal.

And now, as children say, what has been fairly given cannot be taken back;

cease then to fight against us in this way.


SOCRATES: In what way?


PHILEBUS: Do not perplex us, and keep asking questions of us to which we

have not as yet any sufficient answer to give; let us not imagine that a generalpuzzling of us all is to be the end of our discussion, but if we are unable to

answer, do you answer, as you have promised. Consider, then, whether you

will divide pleasure and knowledge according to their kinds; or you may let

the  matter  drop,  if  you  are  able  and  willing  to  find  some  other  mode  of

clearing up our controversy.


SOCRATES: If you say that, I have nothing to apprehend, for the words 'if

you  are  willing'  dispel  all  my  fear;  and,  moreover,  a  god  seems  to  have

recalled something to my mind.


PHILEBUS: What is that?


SOCRATES: I remember to have heard long ago certain discussions about

pleasure and wisdom, whether awake or in a dream I cannot tell; they were to

the effect that neither the one nor the other of them was the good, but some

third thing, which was different from them, and better than either. If this be

clearly established, then pleasure will lose the victory, for the good will cease

to be identified with her:--Am I not right?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And there will cease to be any need of distinguishing the kinds

of pleasures, as I am inclined to think, but this will appear more clearly as we

proceed.


PROTARCHUS: Capital, Socrates; pray go on as you propose.


SOCRATES: But, let us first agree on some little points.


PROTARCHUS: What are they?


SOCRATES: Is the good perfect or imperfect?


PROTARCHUS: The most perfect, Socrates, of all things.


SOCRATES: And is the good sufficient?


PROTARCHUS: Yes, certainly, and in a degree surpassing all other things.SOCRATES: And no one can deny that all percipient beings desire and hunt

after good, and are eager to catch and have the good about them, and care not

for the attainment of anything which is not accompanied by good.


PROTARCHUS: That is undeniable.


SOCRATES: Now let us part off the life of pleasure from the life of wisdom,

and pass them in review.


PROTARCHUS: How do you mean?


SOCRATES: Let there be no wisdom in the life of pleasure, nor any pleasure

in the life of wisdom, for if either of them is the chief good, it cannot be

supposed to want anything, but if either is shown to want anything, then it

cannot really be the chief good.


PROTARCHUS: Impossible.


SOCRATES: And will you help us to test these two lives?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Then answer.


PROTARCHUS: Ask.


SOCRATES: Would you choose, Protarchus, to live all your life long in the

enjoyment of the greatest pleasures?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly I should.


SOCRATES: Would you consider that there was still anything wanting to

you if you had perfect pleasure?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES:  Reflect;  would  you  not  want  wisdom  and  intelligence  and

forethought, and similar qualities? would you not at any rate want sight?PROTARCHUS: Why should I? Having pleasure I should have all things.


SOCRATES: Living thus, you would always throughout your life enjoy the

greatest pleasures?


PROTARCHUS: I should.


SOCRATES: But if you had neither mind, nor memory, nor knowledge, nor

true opinion, you would in the first place be utterly ignorant of whether you

were pleased or not, because you would be entirely devoid of intelligence.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And similarly, if you had no memory you would not recollect

that you had ever been pleased, nor would the slightest recollection of the

pleasure which you feel at any moment remain with you; and if you had no

true opinion you would not think that you were pleased when you were; and

if you had no power of calculation you would not be able to calculate on

future pleasure, and your life would be the life, not of a man, but of an oyster

or 'pulmo marinus.' Could this be otherwise?


PROTARCHUS: No.


SOCRATES: But is such a life eligible?


PROTARCHUS:  I  cannot  answer  you,  Socrates;  the  argument  has  taken

away from me the power of speech.


SOCRATES: We must keep up our spirits;--let us now take the life of mind

and examine it in turn.


PROTARCHUS: And what is this life of mind?


SOCRATES: I want to know whether any one of us would consent to live,

having  wisdom  and  mind  and  knowledge  and  memory  of  all  things,  but

having no sense of pleasure or pain, and wholly unaffected by these and the

like feelings?PROTARCHUS: Neither life, Socrates, appears eligible to me, nor is likely,

as I should imagine, to be chosen by any one else.


SOCRATES: What would you say, Protarchus, to both of these in one, or to

one that was made out of the union of the two?


PROTARCHUS:  Out  of  the  union,  that  is,  of  pleasure  with  mind  and

wisdom?


SOCRATES: Yes, that is the life which I mean.


PROTARCHUS: There can be no difference of opinion; not some but all

would surely choose this third rather than either of the other two, and in

addition to them.


SOCRATES: But do you see the consequence?


PROTARCHUS: To be sure I do. The consequence is, that two out of the

three lives which have been proposed are neither sufficient nor eligible for

man or for animal.


SOCRATES: Then now there can be no doubt that neither of them has the

good, for the one which had would certainly have been sufficient and perfect

and eligible for every living creature or thing that was able to live such a life;

and if any of us had chosen any other, he would have chosen contrary to the

nature of the truly eligible, and not of his own free will, but either through

ignorance or from some unhappy necessity.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly that seems to be true.


SOCRATES: And now have I not sufficiently shown that Philebus' goddess

is not to be regarded as identical with the good?


PHILEBUS: Neither is your 'mind' the good, Socrates, for that will be open

to the same objections.


SOCRATES: Perhaps, Philebus, you may be right in saying so of my 'mind';

but of the true, which is also the divine mind, far otherwise. However, I willnot at present claim the first place for mind as against the mixed life; but we

must come to some understanding about the second place. For you might

affirm pleasure and I mind to be the cause of the mixed life; and in that case

although neither of them would be the good, one of them might be imagined

to  be  the  cause  of  the  good.  And  I  might  proceed  further  to  argue  in

opposition to Philebus, that the element which makes this mixed life eligible

and good, is more akin and more similar to mind than to pleasure. And if this

is true, pleasure cannot be truly said to share either in the first or second

place, and does not, if I may trust my own mind, attain even to the third.


PROTARCHUS: Truly, Socrates, pleasure appears to me to have had a fall;

in fighting for the palm, she has been smitten by the argument, and is laid

low.  I  must  say  that  mind  would  have  fallen  too,  and  may  therefore  be

thought to show discretion in not putting forward a similar claim. And if

pleasure  were  deprived  not  only  of  the  first  but  of  the  second  place,  she

would be terribly damaged in the eyes of her admirers, for not even to them

would she still appear as fair as before.


SOCRATES: Well, but had we not better leave her now, and not pain her by

applying the crucial test, and finally detecting her?


PROTARCHUS: Nonsense, Socrates.


SOCRATES:  Why?  because  I  said  that  we  had  better  not  pain  pleasure,

which is an impossibility?


PROTARCHUS: Yes, and more than that, because you do not seem to be

aware  that  none  of  us  will  let  you  go  home  until  you  have  finished  the

argument.


SOCRATES: Heavens! Protarchus, that will be a tedious business, and just at

present not at all an easy one. For in going to war in the cause of mind, who

is aspiring to the second prize, I ought to have weapons of another make from

those which I used before; some, however, of the old ones may do again. And

must I then finish the argument?


PROTARCHUS: Of course you must.SOCRATES: Let us be very careful in laying the foundation.


PROTARCHUS: What do you mean?


SOCRATES: Let us divide all existing things into two, or rather, if you do

not object, into three classes.


PROTARCHUS: Upon what principle would you make the division?


SOCRATES: Let us take some of our newly-found notions.


PROTARCHUS: Which of them?


SOCRATES:  Were  we  not  saying  that  God  revealed  a  finite  element  of

existence, and also an infinite?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Let us assume these two principles, and also a third, which is

compounded out of them; but I fear that I am ridiculously clumsy at these

processes of division and enumeration.


PROTARCHUS: What do you mean, my good friend?


SOCRATES: I say that a fourth class is still wanted.


PROTARCHUS: What will that be?


SOCRATES: Find the cause of the third or compound, and add this as a

fourth class to the three others.


PROTARCHUS:  And  would  you  like  to  have  a  fifth  class  or  cause  of

resolution as well as a cause of composition?


SOCRATES: Not, I think, at present; but if I want a fifth at some future time

you shall allow me to have it.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.SOCRATES: Let us begin with the first three; and as we find two out of the

three greatly divided and dispersed, let us endeavour to reunite them, and see

how in each of them there is a one and many.


PROTARCHUS:  If  you  would  explain  to  me  a  little  more  about  them,

perhaps I might be able to follow you.


SOCRATES: Well, the two classes are the same which I mentioned before,

one the finite, and the other the infinite; I will first show that the infinite is in

a certain sense many, and the finite may be hereafter discussed.


PROTARCHUS: I agree.


SOCRATES: And now consider well; for the question to which I invite your

attention is difficult and controverted. When you speak of hotter and colder,

can you conceive any limit in those qualities? Does not the more and less,

which dwells in their very nature, prevent their having any end? for if they

had an end, the more and less would themselves have an end.


PROTARCHUS: That is most true.


SOCRATES: Ever, as we say, into the hotter and the colder there enters a

more and a less.


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then, says the argument, there is never any end of them, and

being endless they must also be infinite.


PROTARCHUS: Yes, Socrates, that is exceedingly true.


SOCRATES: Yes, my dear Protarchus, and your answer reminds me that

such an expression as 'exceedingly,' which you have just uttered, and also the

term 'gently,' have the same significance as more or less; for whenever they

occur  they  do  not  allow  of  the  existence  of  quantity--they  are  always

introducing degrees into actions, instituting a comparison of a more or a less

excessive or a more or a less gentle, and at each creation of more or less,

quantity disappears. For, as I was just now saying, if quantity and measuredid not disappear, but were allowed to intrude in the sphere of more and less

and  the  other  comparatives,  these  last  would  be  driven  out  of  their  own

domain. When definite quantity is once admitted, there can be no longer a

'hotter' or a 'colder' (for these are always progressing, and are never in one

stay);  but  definite  quantity  is  at  rest,  and  has  ceased  to  progress.  Which

proves that comparatives, such as the hotter and the colder, are to be ranked

in the class of the infinite.


PROTARCHUS: Your remark certainly has the look of truth, Socrates; but

these subjects, as you were saying, are difficult to follow at first. I think

however, that if I could hear the argument repeated by you once or twice,

there would be a substantial agreement between us.


SOCRATES: Yes, and I will try to meet your wish; but, as I would rather not

waste time in the enumeration of endless particulars, let me know whether I

may not assume as a note of the infinite--


PROTARCHUS: What?


SOCRATES: I want to know whether such things as appear to us to admit of

more or less, or are denoted by the words 'exceedingly,' 'gently,' 'extremely,'

and the like, may not be referred to the class of the infinite, which is their

unity,  for,  as  was  asserted  in  the  previous  argument,  all  things  that  were

divided and dispersed should be brought together, and have the mark or seal

of some one nature, if possible, set upon them--do you remember?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And all things which do not admit of more or less, but admit

their opposites, that is to say, first of all, equality, and the equal, or again, the

double, or any other ratio of number and measure--all these may, I think, be

rightly reckoned by us in the class of the limited or finite; what do you say?


PROTARCHUS: Excellent, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And now what nature shall we ascribe to the third or compound

kind?PROTARCHUS: You, I think, will have to tell me that.


SOCRATES: Rather God will tell you, if there be any God who will listen to

my prayers.


PROTARCHUS: Offer up a prayer, then, and think.


SOCRATES: I am thinking, Protarchus, and I believe that some God has

befriended us.


PROTARCHUS: What do you mean, and what proof have you to offer of

what you are saying?


SOCRATES: I will tell you, and do you listen to my words.


PROTARCHUS: Proceed.


SOCRATES: Were we not speaking just now of hotter and colder?


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: Add to them drier, wetter, more, less, swifter, slower, greater,

smaller, and all that in the preceding argument we placed under the unity of

more and less.


PROTARCHUS: In the class of the infinite, you mean?


SOCRATES: Yes; and now mingle this with the other.


PROTARCHUS: What is the other.


SOCRATES: The class of the finite which we ought to have brought together

as we did the infinite; but, perhaps, it will come to the same thing if we do so

now;--when the two are combined, a third will appear.


PROTARCHUS: What do you mean by the class of the finite?


SOCRATES: The class of the equal and the double, and any class which putsan  end  to  difference  and  opposition,  and  by  introducing  number  creates

harmony and proportion among the different elements.


PROTARCHUS:  I  understand;  you  seem  to  me  to  mean  that  the  various

opposites, when you mingle with them the class of the finite, takes certain

forms.


SOCRATES: Yes, that is my meaning.


PROTARCHUS: Proceed.


SOCRATES:  Does  not  the  right  participation  in  the  finite  give  health--in

disease, for instance?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES:  And  whereas  the  high  and  low,  the  swift  and  the  slow  are

infinite  or  unlimited,  does  not  the  addition  of  the  principles  aforesaid

introduce a limit, and perfect the whole frame of music?


PROTARCHUS: Yes, certainly.


SOCRATES: Or, again, when cold and heat prevail, does not the introduction

of  them  take  away  excess  and  indefiniteness,  and  infuse  moderation  and

harmony?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And from a like admixture of the finite and infinite come the

seasons, and all the delights of life?


PROTARCHUS: Most true.


SOCRATES: I omit ten thousand other things, such as beauty and health and

strength,  and  the  many  beauties  and  high  perfections  of  the  soul:  O  my

beautiful Philebus, the goddess, methinks, seeing the universal wantonness

and wickedness of all things, and that there was in them no limit to pleasures

and self-indulgence, devised the limit of law and order, whereby, as you say,Philebus, she torments, or as I maintain, delivers the soul.-- What think you,

Protarchus?


PROTARCHUS: Her ways are much to my mind, Socrates.


SOCRATES: You will observe that I have spoken of three classes?


PROTARCHUS: Yes, I think that I understand you: you mean to say that the

infinite is one class, and that the finite is a second class of existences; but

what you would make the third I am not so certain.


SOCRATES: That is because the amazing variety of the third class is too

much  for  you,  my  dear  friend;  but  there  was  not  this  difficulty  with  the

infinite, which also comprehended many classes, for all of them were sealed

with the note of more and less, and therefore appeared one.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: And the finite or limit had not many divisions, and we readily

acknowledged it to be by nature one?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Yes, indeed; and when I speak of the third class, understand me

to mean any offspring of these, being a birth into true being, effected by the

measure which the limit introduces.


PROTARCHUS: I understand.


SOCRATES: Still there was, as we said, a fourth class to be investigated, and

you must assist in the investigation; for does not everything which comes into

being, of necessity come into being through a cause?


PROTARCHUS: Yes, certainly; for how can there be anything which has no

cause?


SOCRATES: And is not the agent the same as the cause in all except name;

the agent and the cause may be rightly called one?PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: And the same may be said of the patient, or effect; we shall

find that they too differ, as I was saying, only in name--shall we not?


PROTARCHUS: We shall.


SOCRATES: The agent or cause always naturally leads, and the patient or

effect naturally follows it?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Then the cause and what is subordinate to it in generation are

not the same, but different?


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: Did not the things which were generated, and the things out of

which they were generated, furnish all the three classes?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And the creator or cause of them has been satisfactorily proven

to be distinct from them,--and may therefore be called a fourth principle?


PROTARCHUS: So let us call it.


SOCRATES: Quite right; but now, having distinguished the four, I think that

we had better refresh our memories by recapitulating each of them in order.


PROTARCHUS: By all means.


SOCRATES:  Then  the  first  I  will  call  the  infinite  or  unlimited,  and  the

second the finite or limited; then follows the third, an essence compound and

generated; and I do not think that I shall be far wrong in speaking of the

cause of mixture and generation as the fourth.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly not.SOCRATES: And now what is the next question, and how came we hither?

Were we not enquiring whether the second place belonged to pleasure or

wisdom?


PROTARCHUS: We were.


SOCRATES:  And  now,  having  determined  these  points,  shall  we  not  be

better able to decide about the first and second place, which was the original

subject of dispute?


PROTARCHUS: I dare say.


SOCRATES: We said, if you remember, that the mixed life of pleasure and

wisdom was the conqueror--did we not?


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: And we see what is the place and nature of this life and to what

class it is to be assigned?


PROTARCHUS: Beyond a doubt.


SOCRATES: This is evidently comprehended in the third or mixed class;

which  is  not  composed  of  any  two  particular  ingredients,  but  of  all  the

elements of infinity, bound down by the finite, and may therefore be truly

said to comprehend the conqueror life.


PROTARCHUS: Most true.


SOCRATES:  And  what  shall  we  say,  Philebus,  of  your  life  which  is  all

sweetness; and in which of the aforesaid classes is that to be placed? Perhaps

you will allow me to ask you a question before you answer?


PHILEBUS: Let me hear.


SOCRATES: Have pleasure and pain a limit, or do they belong to the class

which admits of more and less?PHILEBUS: They belong to the class which admits of more, Socrates; for

pleasure would not be perfectly good if she were not infinite in quantity and

degree.


SOCRATES: Nor would pain, Philebus, be perfectly evil. And therefore the

infinite cannot be that element which imparts to pleasure some degree of

good. But now--admitting, if you like, that pleasure is of the nature of the

infinite--in which of the aforesaid classes, O Protarchus and Philebus, can we

without irreverence place wisdom and knowledge and mind? And let us be

careful, for I think that the danger will be very serious if we err on this point.


PHILEBUS: You magnify, Socrates, the importance of your favourite god.


SOCRATES:  And  you,  my  friend,  are  also  magnifying  your  favourite

goddess; but still I must beg you to answer the question.


PROTARCHUS: Socrates is quite right, Philebus, and we must submit to

him.


PHILEBUS: And did not you, Protarchus, propose to answer in my place?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly I did; but I am now in a great strait, and I must

entreat  you,  Socrates,  to  be  our  spokesman,  and  then  we  shall  not  say

anything wrong or disrespectful of your favourite.


SOCRATES: I must obey you, Protarchus; nor is the task which you impose

a difficult one; but did I really, as Philebus implies, disconcert you with my

playful  solemnity,  when  I  asked  the  question  to  what  class  mind  and

knowledge belong?


PROTARCHUS: You did, indeed, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Yet the answer is easy, since all philosophers assert with one

voice  that  mind  is  the  king  of  heaven  and  earth--in  reality  they  are

magnifying themselves. And perhaps they are right. But still I should like to

consider the class of mind, if you do not object, a little more fully.


PHILEBUS: Take your own course, Socrates, and never mind length; weshall not tire of you.


SOCRATES: Very good; let us begin then, Protarchus, by asking a question.


PROTARCHUS: What question?


SOCRATES:  Whether  all  this  which  they  call  the  universe  is  left  to  the

guidance of unreason and chance medley, or, on the contrary, as our fathers

have  declared,  ordered  and  governed  by  a  marvellous  intelligence  and

wisdom.


PROTARCHUS: Wide asunder are the two assertions, illustrious Socrates,

for that which you were just now saying to me appears to be blasphemy; but

the other assertion, that mind orders all things, is worthy of the aspect of the

world, and of the sun, and of the moon, and of the stars and of the whole

circle of the heavens; and never will I say or think otherwise.


SOCRATES: Shall we then agree with them of old time in maintaining this

doctrine,--not  merely  reasserting  the  notions  of  others,  without  risk  to

ourselves,--but shall we share in the danger, and take our part of the reproach

which  will  await  us,  when  an  ingenious  individual  declares  that  all  is

disorder?


PROTARCHUS: That would certainly be my wish.


SOCRATES: Then now please to consider the next stage of the argument.


PROTARCHUS: Let me hear.


SOCRATES: We see that the elements which enter into the nature of the

bodies of all animals, fire, water, air, and, as the storm-tossed sailor cries,

'land' (i.e., earth), reappear in the constitution of the world.


PROTARCHUS:  The  proverb  may  be  applied  to  us;  for  truly  the  storm

gathers over us, and we are at our wit's end.


SOCRATES:  There  is  something  to  be  remarked  about  each  of  these

elements.PROTARCHUS: What is it?


SOCRATES: Only a small fraction of any one of them exists in us, and that

of a mean sort, and not in any way pure, or having any power worthy of its

nature. One instance will prove this of all of them; there is fire within us, and

in the universe.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: And is not our fire small and weak and mean? But the fire in

the universe is wonderful in quantity and beauty, and in every power that fire

has.


PROTARCHUS: Most true.


SOCRATES: And is the fire in the universe nourished and generated and

ruled by the fire in us, or is the fire in you and me, and in other animals,

dependent on the universal fire?


PROTARCHUS: That is a question which does not deserve an answer.


SOCRATES: Right; and you would say the same, if I am not mistaken, of the

earth which is in animals and the earth which is in the universe, and you

would give a similar reply about all the other elements?


PROTARCHUS: Why, how could any man who gave any other be deemed in

his senses?


SOCRATES: I do not think that he could--but now go on to the next step.

When we saw those elements of which we have been speaking gathered up in

one, did we not call them a body?


PROTARCHUS: We did.


SOCRATES: And the same may be said of the cosmos, which for the same

reason  may  be  considered  to  be  a  body,  because  made  up  of  the  same

elements.PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: But is our body nourished wholly by this body, or is this body

nourished by our body, thence deriving and having the qualities of which we

were just now speaking?


PROTARCHUS: That again, Socrates, is a question which does not deserve

to be asked.


SOCRATES: Well, tell me, is this question worth asking?


PROTARCHUS: What question?


SOCRATES: May our body be said to have a soul?


PROTARCHUS: Clearly.


SOCRATES: And whence comes that soul, my dear Protarchus, unless the

body of the universe, which contains elements like those in our bodies but in

every way fairer, had also a soul? Can there be another source?


PROTARCHUS: Clearly, Socrates, that is the only source.


SOCRATES: Why, yes, Protarchus; for surely we cannot imagine that of the

four classes, the finite, the infinite, the composition of the two, and the cause,

the fourth, which enters into all things, giving to our bodies souls, and the art

of self-management, and of healing disease, and operating in other ways to

heal and organize, having too all the attributes of wisdom;--we cannot, I say,

imagine that whereas the self-same elements exist, both in the entire heaven

and in great provinces of the heaven, only fairer and purer, this last should

not also in that higher sphere have designed the noblest and fairest things?


PROTARCHUS: Such a supposition is quite unreasonable.


SOCRATES: Then if this be denied, should we not be wise in adopting the

other view and maintaining that there is in the universe a mighty infinite and

an adequate limit, of which we have often spoken, as well as a presiding

cause of no mean power, which orders and arranges years and seasons andmonths, and may be justly called wisdom and mind?


PROTARCHUS: Most justly.


SOCRATES: And wisdom and mind cannot exist without soul?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: And in the divine nature of Zeus would you not say that there is

the soul and mind of a king, because there is in him the power of the cause?

And other gods have other attributes, by which they are pleased to be called.


PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: Do not then suppose that these words are rashly spoken by us,

O Protarchus, for they are in harmony with the testimony of those who said

of old time that mind rules the universe.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: And they furnish an answer to my enquiry; for they imply that

mind is the parent of that class of the four which we called the cause of all;

and I think that you now have my answer.


PROTARCHUS:  I  have  indeed,  and  yet  I  did  not  observe  that  you  had

answered.


SOCRATES: A jest is sometimes refreshing, Protarchus, when it interrupts

earnest.


PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: I think, friend, that we have now pretty clearly set forth the

class to which mind belongs and what is the power of mind.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: And the class to which pleasure belongs has also been long agodiscovered?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And let us remember, too, of both of them, (1) that mind was

akin to the cause and of this family; and (2) that pleasure is infinite and

belongs  to  the  class  which  neither  has,  nor  ever  will  have  in  itself,  a

beginning, middle, or end of its own.


PROTARCHUS: I shall be sure to remember.


SOCRATES:  We  must  next  examine  what  is  their  place  and  under  what

conditions they are generated. And we will begin with pleasure, since her

class was first examined; and yet pleasure cannot be rightly tested apart from

pain.


PROTARCHUS: If this is the road, let us take it.


SOCRATES: I wonder whether you would agree with me about the origin of

pleasure and pain.


PROTARCHUS: What do you mean?


SOCRATES: I mean to say that their natural seat is in the mixed class.


PROTARCHUS: And would you tell me again, sweet Socrates, which of the

aforesaid classes is the mixed one?


SOCRATES: I will, my fine fellow, to the best of my ability.


PROTARCHUS: Very good.


SOCRATES: Let us then understand the mixed class to be that which we

placed third in the list of four.


PROTARCHUS:  That  which  followed  the  infinite  and  the  finite;  and  in

which you ranked health, and, if I am not mistaken, harmony.SOCRATES:  Capital;  and  now  will  you  please  to  give  me  your  best

attention?


PROTARCHUS: Proceed; I am attending.


SOCRATES: I say that when the harmony in animals is dissolved, there is

also a dissolution of nature and a generation of pain.


PROTARCHUS: That is very probable.


SOCRATES:  And  the  restoration  of  harmony  and  return  to  nature  is  the

source of pleasure, if I may be allowed to speak in the fewest and shortest

words about matters of the greatest moment.


PROTARCHUS: I believe that you are right, Socrates; but will you try to be

a little plainer?


SOCRATES: Do not obvious and every-day phenomena furnish the simplest

illustration?


PROTARCHUS: What phenomena do you mean?


SOCRATES: Hunger, for example, is a dissolution and a pain.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: Whereas eating is a replenishment and a pleasure?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  Thirst  again  is  a  destruction  and  a  pain,  but  the  effect  of

moisture replenishing the dry place is a pleasure: once more, the unnatural

separation  and  dissolution  caused  by  heat  is  painful,  and  the  natural

restoration and refrigeration is pleasant.


PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: And the unnatural freezing of the moisture in an animal is pain,and  the  natural  process  of  resolution  and  return  of  the  elements  to  their

original state is pleasure. And would not the general proposition seem to you

to hold, that the destroying of the natural union of the finite and infinite,

which, as I was observing before, make up the class of living beings, is pain,

and that the process of return of all things to their own nature is pleasure?


PROTARCHUS: Granted; what you say has a general truth.


SOCRATES:  Here  then  is  one  kind  of  pleasures  and  pains  originating

severally in the two processes which we have described?


PROTARCHUS: Good.


SOCRATES:  Let  us  next  assume  that  in  the  soul  herself  there  is  an

antecedent  hope  of  pleasure  which  is  sweet  and  refreshing,  and  an

expectation of pain, fearful and anxious.


PROTARCHUS: Yes; this is another class of pleasures and pains, which is of

the soul only, apart from the body, and is produced by expectation.


SOCRATES: Right; for in the analysis of these, pure, as I suppose them to

be,  the  pleasures  being  unalloyed  with  pain  and  the  pains  with  pleasure,

methinks that we shall see clearly whether the whole class of pleasure is to be

desired, or whether this quality of entire desirableness is not rather to be

attributed to another of the classes which have been mentioned; and whether

pleasure and pain, like heat and cold, and other things of the same kind, are

not sometimes to be desired and sometimes not to be desired, as being not in

themselves good, but only sometimes and in some instances admitting of the

nature of good.


PROTARCHUS:  You  say  most  truly  that  this  is  the  track  which  the

investigation should pursue.


SOCRATES: Well, then, assuming that pain ensues on the dissolution, and

pleasure on the restoration of the harmony, let us now ask what will be the

condition of animated beings who are neither in process of restoration nor of

dissolution. And mind what you say: I ask whether any animal who is in thatcondition can possibly have any feeling of pleasure or pain, great or small?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: Then here we have a third state, over and above that of pleasure

and of pain?


PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: And do not forget that there is such a state; it will make a great

difference in our judgment of pleasure, whether we remember this or not.

And I should like to say a few words about it.


PROTARCHUS: What have you to say?


SOCRATES: Why, you know that if a man chooses the life of wisdom, there

is no reason why he should not live in this neutral state.


PROTARCHUS: You mean that he may live neither rejoicing nor sorrowing?


SOCRATES: Yes; and if I remember rightly, when the lives were compared,

no degree of pleasure, whether great or small, was thought to be necessary to

him who chose the life of thought and wisdom.


PROTARCHUS: Yes, certainly, we said so.


SOCRATES: Then he will live without pleasure; and who knows whether

this may not be the most divine of all lives?


PROTARCHUS: If so, the gods, at any rate, cannot be supposed to have

either joy or sorrow.


SOCRATES:  Certainly  not--there  would  be  a  great  impropriety  in  the

assumption  of  either  alternative.  But  whether  the  gods  are  or  are  not

indifferent to pleasure is a point which may be considered hereafter if in any

way relevant to the argument, and whatever is the conclusion we will place it

to the account of mind in her contest for the second place, should she have to

resign the first.PROTARCHUS: Just so.


SOCRATES: The other class of pleasures, which as we were saying is purely

mental, is entirely derived from memory.


PROTARCHUS: What do you mean?


SOCRATES: I must first of all analyze memory, or rather perception which

is prior to memory, if the subject of our discussion is ever to be properly

cleared up.


PROTARCHUS: How will you proceed?


SOCRATES: Let us imagine affections of the body which are extinguished

before  they  reach  the  soul,  and  leave  her  unaffected;  and  again,  other

affections which vibrate through both soul and body, and impart a shock to

both and to each of them.


PROTARCHUS: Granted.


SOCRATES: And the soul may be truly said to be oblivious of the first but

not of the second?


PROTARCHUS: Quite true.


SOCRATES: When I say oblivious, do not suppose that I mean forgetfulness

in a literal sense; for forgetfulness is the exit of memory, which in this case

has  not  yet  entered;  and  to  speak  of  the  loss  of  that  which  is  not  yet  in

existence, and never has been, is a contradiction; do you see?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then just be so good as to change the terms.


PROTARCHUS: How shall I change them?


SOCRATES: Instead of the oblivion of the soul, when you are describing the

state  in  which  she  is  unaffected  by  the  shocks  of  the  body,  sayunconsciousness.


PROTARCHUS: I see.


SOCRATES: And the union or communion of soul and body in one feeling

and motion would be properly called consciousness?


PROTARCHUS: Most true.


SOCRATES: Then now we know the meaning of the word?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  And  memory  may,  I  think,  be  rightly  described  as  the

preservation of consciousness?


PROTARCHUS: Right.


SOCRATES: But do we not distinguish memory from recollection?


PROTARCHUS: I think so.


SOCRATES: And do we not mean by recollection the power which the soul

has  of  recovering,  when  by  herself,  some  feeling  which  she  experienced

when in company with the body?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And when she recovers of herself the lost recollection of some

consciousness  or  knowledge,  the  recovery  is  termed  recollection  and

reminiscence?


PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: There is a reason why I say all this.


PROTARCHUS: What is it?SOCRATES: I want to attain the plainest possible notion of pleasure and

desire, as they exist in the mind only, apart from the body; and the previous

analysis helps to show the nature of both.


PROTARCHUS: Then now, Socrates, let us proceed to the next point.


SOCRATES: There are certainly many things to be considered in discussing

the  generation  and  whole  complexion  of  pleasure.  At  the  outset  we  must

determine the nature and seat of desire.


PROTARCHUS: Ay; let us enquire into that, for we shall lose nothing.


SOCRATES: Nay, Protarchus, we shall surely lose the puzzle if we find the

answer.


PROTARCHUS: A fair retort; but let us proceed.


SOCRATES: Did we not place hunger, thirst, and the like, in the class of

desires?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And yet they are very different; what common nature have we

in view when we call them by a single name?


PROTARCHUS: By heavens, Socrates, that is a question which is not easily

answered; but it must be answered.


SOCRATES: Then let us go back to our examples.


PROTARCHUS: Where shall we begin?


SOCRATES: Do we mean anything when we say 'a man thirsts'?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: We mean to say that he 'is empty'?PROTARCHUS: Of course.


SOCRATES: And is not thirst desire?


PROTARCHUS: Yes, of drink.


SOCRATES: Would you say of drink, or of replenishment with drink?


PROTARCHUS: I should say, of replenishment with drink.


SOCRATES: Then he who is empty desires, as would appear, the opposite of

what he experiences; for he is empty and desires to be full?


PROTARCHUS: Clearly so.


SOCRATES: But how can a man who is empty for the first time, attain either

by perception or memory to any apprehension of replenishment, of which he

has no present or past experience?


PROTARCHUS: Impossible.


SOCRATES: And yet he who desires, surely desires something?


PROTARCHUS: Of course.


SOCRATES:  He  does  not  desire  that  which  he  experiences,  for  he

experiences thirst, and thirst is emptiness; but he desires replenishment?


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: Then there must be something in the thirsty man which in some

way apprehends replenishment?


PROTARCHUS: There must.


SOCRATES: And that cannot be the body, for the body is supposed to be

emptied?PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: The only remaining alternative is that the soul apprehends the

replenishment by the help of memory; as is obvious, for what other way can

there be?


PROTARCHUS: I cannot imagine any other.


SOCRATES: But do you see the consequence?


PROTARCHUS: What is it?


SOCRATES: That there is no such thing as desire of the body.


PROTARCHUS: Why so?


SOCRATES: Why, because the argument shows that the endeavour of every

animal is to the reverse of his bodily state.


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And the impulse which leads him to the opposite of what he is

experiencing proves that he has a memory of the opposite state.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES:  And  the  argument,  having  proved  that  memory  attracts  us

towards the objects of desire, proves also that the impulses and the desires

and the moving principle in every living being have their origin in the soul.


PROTARCHUS: Most true.


SOCRATES: The argument will not allow that our body either hungers or

thirsts or has any similar experience.


PROTARCHUS: Quite right.


SOCRATES: Let me make a further observation; the argument appears to meto imply that there is a kind of life which consists in these affections.


PROTARCHUS:  Of  what  affections,  and  of  what  kind  of  life,  are  you

speaking?


SOCRATES: I am speaking of being emptied and replenished, and of all that

relates to the preservation and destruction of living beings, as well as of the

pain which is felt in one of these states and of the pleasure which succeeds to

it.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: And what would you say of the intermediate state?


PROTARCHUS: What do you mean by 'intermediate'?


SOCRATES: I mean when a person is in actual suffering and yet remembers

past pleasures which, if they would only return, would relieve him; but as yet

he has them not. May we not say of him, that he is in an intermediate state?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Would you say that he was wholly pained or wholly pleased?


PROTARCHUS: Nay, I should say that he has two pains; in his body there is

the actual experience of pain, and in his soul longing and expectation.


SOCRATES: What do you mean, Protarchus, by the two pains? May not a

man who is empty have at one time a sure hope of being filled, and at other

times be quite in despair?


PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: And has he not the pleasure of memory when he is hoping to be

filled, and yet in that he is empty is he not at the same time in pain?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.SOCRATES: Then man and the other animals have at the same time both

pleasure and pain?


PROTARCHUS: I suppose so.


SOCRATES: But when a man is empty and has no hope of being filled, there

will be the double experience of pain. You observed this and inferred that the

double experience was the single case possible.


PROTARCHUS: Quite true, Socrates.


SOCRATES:  Shall  the  enquiry  into  these  states  of  feeling  be  made  the

occasion of raising a question?


PROTARCHUS: What question?


SOCRATES: Whether we ought to say that the pleasures and pains of which

we are speaking are true or false? or some true and some false?


PROTARCHUS: But how, Socrates, can there be false pleasures and pains?


SOCRATES: And how, Protarchus, can there be true and false fears, or true

and false expectations, or true and false opinions?


PROTARCHUS: I grant that opinions may be true or false, but not pleasures.


SOCRATES: What do you mean? I am afraid that we are raising a very

serious enquiry.


PROTARCHUS: There I agree.


SOCRATES: And yet, my boy, for you are one of Philebus' boys, the point to

be considered, is, whether the enquiry is relevant to the argument.


PROTARCHUS: Surely.


SOCRATES: No tedious and irrelevant discussion can be allowed; what is

said should be pertinent.PROTARCHUS: Right.


SOCRATES: I am always wondering at the question which has now been

raised.


PROTARCHUS: How so?


SOCRATES: Do you deny that some pleasures are false, and others true?


PROTARCHUS: To be sure I do.


SOCRATES: Would you say that no one ever seemed to rejoice and yet did

not rejoice, or seemed to feel pain and yet did not feel pain, sleeping or

waking, mad or lunatic?


PROTARCHUS: So we have always held, Socrates.


SOCRATES: But were you right? Shall we enquire into the truth of your

opinion?


PROTARCHUS: I think that we should.


SOCRATES: Let us then put into more precise terms the question which has

arisen about pleasure and opinion. Is there such a thing as opinion?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And such a thing as pleasure?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And an opinion must be of something?


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: And a man must be pleased by something?


PROTARCHUS: Quite correct.SOCRATES:  And  whether  the  opinion  be  right  or  wrong,  makes  no

difference; it will still be an opinion?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And he who is pleased, whether he is rightly pleased or not,

will always have a real feeling of pleasure?


PROTARCHUS: Yes; that is also quite true.


SOCRATES: Then, how can opinion be both true and false, and pleasure true

only, although pleasure and opinion are both equally real?


PROTARCHUS: Yes; that is the question.


SOCRATES:  You  mean  that  opinion  admits  of  truth  and  falsehood,  and

hence becomes not merely opinion, but opinion of a certain quality; and this

is what you think should be examined?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And further, even if we admit the existence of qualities in other

objects, may not pleasure and pain be simple and devoid of quality?


PROTARCHUS: Clearly.


SOCRATES: But there is no difficulty in seeing that pleasure and pain as

well as opinion have qualities, for they are great or small, and have various

degrees of intensity; as was indeed said long ago by us.


PROTARCHUS: Quite true.


SOCRATES: And if badness attaches to any of them, Protarchus, then we

should speak of a bad opinion or of a bad pleasure?


PROTARCHUS: Quite true, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And if rightness attaches to any of them, should we not speakof a right opinion or right pleasure; and in like manner of the reverse of

rightness?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And if the thing opined be erroneous, might we not say that the

opinion, being erroneous, is not right or rightly opined?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And if we see a pleasure or pain which errs in respect of its

object, shall we call that right or good, or by any honourable name?


PROTARCHUS: Not if the pleasure is mistaken; how could we?


SOCRATES: And surely pleasure often appears to accompany an opinion

which is not true, but false?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly it does; and in that case, Socrates, as we were

saying, the opinion is false, but no one could call the actual pleasure false.


SOCRATES:  How  eagerly,  Protarchus,  do  you  rush  to  the  defence  of

pleasure!


PROTARCHUS: Nay, Socrates, I only repeat what I hear.


SOCRATES: And is there no difference, my friend, between that pleasure

which is associated with right opinion and knowledge, and that which is often

found in all of us associated with falsehood and ignorance?


PROTARCHUS: There must be a very great difference, between them.


SOCRATES: Then, now let us proceed to contemplate this difference.


PROTARCHUS: Lead, and I will follow.


SOCRATES: Well, then, my view is--PROTARCHUS: What is it?


SOCRATES: We agree--do we not?--that there is such a thing as false, and

also such a thing as true opinion?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And pleasure and pain, as I was just now saying, are often

consequent upon these--upon true and false opinion, I mean.


PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES:  And  do  not  opinion  and  the  endeavour  to  form  an  opinion

always spring from memory and perception?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Might we imagine the process to be something of this nature?


PROTARCHUS: Of what nature?


SOCRATES: An object may be often seen at a distance not very clearly, and

the seer may want to determine what it is which he sees.


PROTARCHUS: Very likely.


SOCRATES: Soon he begins to interrogate himself.


PROTARCHUS: In what manner?


SOCRATES: He asks himself--'What is that which appears to be standing by

the rock under the tree?' This is the question which he may be supposed to

put to himself when he sees such an appearance.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES:  To  which  he  may  guess  the  right  answer,  saying  as  if  in  a

whisper to himself--'It is a man.'PROTARCHUS: Very good.


SOCRATES: Or again, he may be misled, and then he will say--'No, it is a

figure made by the shepherds.'


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And if he has a companion, he repeats his thought to him in

articulate  sounds,  and  what  was  before  an  opinion,  has  now  become  a

proposition.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: But if he be walking alone when these thoughts occur to him,

he may not unfrequently keep them in his mind for a considerable time.


PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES:  Well,  now,  I  wonder  whether  you  would  agree  in  my

explanation of this phenomenon.


PROTARCHUS: What is your explanation?


SOCRATES: I think that the soul at such times is like a book.


PROTARCHUS: How so?


SOCRATES:  Memory  and  perception  meet,  and  they  and  their  attendant

feelings  seem  to  almost  to  write  down  words  in  the  soul,  and  when  the

inscribing feeling writes truly, then true opinion and true propositions which

are  the  expressions  of  opinion  come  into  our  souls--but  when  the  scribe

within us writes falsely, the result is false.


PROTARCHUS: I quite assent and agree to your statement.


SOCRATES: I must bespeak your favour also for another artist, who is busy

at the same time in the chambers of the soul.PROTARCHUS: Who is he?


SOCRATES: The painter, who, after the scribe has done his work, draws

images in the soul of the things which he has described.


PROTARCHUS: But when and how does he do this?


SOCRATES: When a man, besides receiving from sight or some other sense

certain opinions or statements, sees in his mind the images of the subjects of

them;--is not this a very common mental phenomenon?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And the images answering to true opinions and words are true,

and to false opinions and words false; are they not?


PROTARCHUS: They are.


SOCRATES: If we are right so far, there arises a further question.


PROTARCHUS: What is it?


SOCRATES: Whether we experience the feeling of which I am speaking

only in relation to the present and the past, or in relation to the future also?


PROTARCHUS: I should say in relation to all times alike.


SOCRATES:  Have  not  purely  mental  pleasures  and  pains  been  described

already as in some cases anticipations of the bodily ones; from which we may

infer that anticipatory pleasures and pains have to do with the future?


PROTARCHUS: Most true.


SOCRATES: And do all those writings and paintings which, as we were

saying a little while ago, are produced in us, relate to the past and present

only, and not to the future?


PROTARCHUS: To the future, very much.SOCRATES: When you say, 'Very much,' you mean to imply that all these

representations are hopes about the future, and that mankind are filled with

hopes in every stage of existence?


PROTARCHUS: Exactly.


SOCRATES: Answer me another question.


PROTARCHUS: What question?


SOCRATES: A just and pious and good man is the friend of the gods; is he

not?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly he is.


SOCRATES: And the unjust and utterly bad man is the reverse?


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: And all men, as we were saying just now, are always filled with

hopes?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And these hopes, as they are termed, are propositions which

exist in the minds of each of us?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And the fancies of hope are also pictured in us; a man may

often  have  a  vision  of  a  heap  of  gold,  and  pleasures  ensuing,  and  in  the

picture there may be a likeness of himself mightily rejoicing over his good

fortune.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: And may we not say that the good, being friends of the gods,

have generally true pictures presented to them, and the bad false pictures?PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: The bad, too, have pleasures painted in their fancy as well as

the good; but I presume that they are false pleasures.


PROTARCHUS: They are.


SOCRATES:  The  bad  then  commonly  delight  in  false  pleasures,  and  the

good in true pleasures?


PROTARCHUS: Doubtless.


SOCRATES: Then upon this view there are false pleasures in the souls of

men which are a ludicrous imitation of the true, and there are pains of a

similar character?


PROTARCHUS: There are.


SOCRATES: And did we not allow that a man who had an opinion at all had

a real opinion, but often about things which had no existence either in the

past, present, or future?


PROTARCHUS: Quite true.


SOCRATES: And this was the source of false opinion and opining; am I not

right?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And must we not attribute to pleasure and pain a similar real

but illusory character?


PROTARCHUS: How do you mean?


SOCRATES: I mean to say that a man must be admitted to have real pleasure

who is pleased with anything or anyhow; and he may be pleased about things

which neither have nor have ever had any real existence, and, more often than

not, are never likely to exist.PROTARCHUS: Yes, Socrates, that again is undeniable.


SOCRATES: And may not the same be said about fear and anger and the

like; are they not often false?


PROTARCHUS: Quite so.


SOCRATES: And can opinions be good or bad except in as far as they are

true or false?


PROTARCHUS: In no other way.


SOCRATES: Nor can pleasures be conceived to be bad except in so far as

they are false.


PROTARCHUS: Nay, Socrates, that is the very opposite of truth; for no one

would call pleasures and pains bad because they are false, but by reason of

some other great corruption to which they are liable.


SOCRATES: Well, of pleasures which are corrupt and caused by corruption

we will hereafter speak, if we care to continue the enquiry; for the present I

would rather show by another argument that there are many false pleasures

existing or coming into existence in us, because this may assist our final

decision.


PROTARCHUS: Very true; that is to say, if there are such pleasures.


SOCRATES: I think that there are, Protarchus; but this is an opinion which

should be well assured, and not rest upon a mere assertion.


PROTARCHUS: Very good.


SOCRATES: Then now, like wrestlers, let us approach and grasp this new

argument.


PROTARCHUS: Proceed.


SOCRATES: We were maintaining a little while since, that when desires, asthey are termed, exist in us, then the body has separate feelings apart from the

soul--do you remember?


PROTARCHUS: Yes, I remember that you said so.


SOCRATES: And the soul was supposed to desire the opposite of the bodily

state,  while  the  body  was  the  source  of  any  pleasure  or  pain  which  was

experienced.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: Then now you may infer what happens in such cases.


PROTARCHUS: What am I to infer?


SOCRATES: That in such cases pleasures and pains come simultaneously;

and there is a juxtaposition of the opposite sensations which correspond to

them, as has been already shown.


PROTARCHUS: Clearly.


SOCRATES: And there is another point to which we have agreed.


PROTARCHUS: What is it?


SOCRATES: That pleasure and pain both admit of more and less, and that

they are of the class of infinites.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly, we said so.


SOCRATES: But how can we rightly judge of them?


PROTARCHUS: How can we?


SOCRATES: Is it our intention to judge of their comparative importance and

intensity,  measuring  pleasure  against  pain,  and  pain  against  pain,  and

pleasure against pleasure?PROTARCHUS:  Yes,  such  is  our  intention,  and  we  shall  judge  of  them

accordingly.


SOCRATES: Well, take the case of sight. Does not the nearness or distance

of magnitudes obscure their true proportions, and make us opine falsely; and

do  we  not  find  the  same  illusion  happening  in  the  case  of  pleasures  and

pains?


PROTARCHUS: Yes, Socrates, and in a degree far greater.


SOCRATES: Then what we are now saying is the opposite of what we were

saying before.


PROTARCHUS: What was that?


SOCRATES:  Then  the  opinions  were  true  and  false,  and  infected  the

pleasures and pains with their own falsity.


PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: But now it is the pleasures which are said to be true and false

because they are seen at various distances, and subjected to comparison; the

pleasures appear to be greater and more vehement when placed side by side

with the pains, and the pains when placed side by side with the pleasures.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly, and for the reason which you mention.


SOCRATES: And suppose you part off from pleasures and pains the element

which makes them appear to be greater or less than they really are: you will

acknowledge that this element is illusory, and you will never say that the

corresponding excess or defect of pleasure or pain is real or true.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: Next let us see whether in another direction we may not find

pleasures and pains existing and appearing in living beings, which are still

more false than these.PROTARCHUS: What are they, and how shall we find them?


SOCRATES: If I am not mistaken, I have often repeated that pains and aches

and suffering and uneasiness of all sorts arise out of a corruption of nature

caused by concretions, and dissolutions, and repletions, and evacuations, and

also by growth and decay?


PROTARCHUS: Yes, that has been often said.


SOCRATES: And we have also agreed that the restoration of the natural state

is pleasure?


PROTARCHUS: Right.


SOCRATES: But now let us suppose an interval of time at which the body

experiences none of these changes.


PROTARCHUS: When can that be, Socrates?


SOCRATES: Your question, Protarchus, does not help the argument.


PROTARCHUS: Why not, Socrates?


SOCRATES: Because it does not prevent me from repeating mine.


PROTARCHUS: And what was that?


SOCRATES: Why, Protarchus, admitting that there is no such interval, I may

ask what would be the necessary consequence if there were?


PROTARCHUS:  You  mean,  what  would  happen  if  the  body  were  not

changed either for good or bad?


SOCRATES: Yes.


PROTARCHUS: Why then, Socrates, I should suppose that there would be

neither pleasure nor pain.SOCRATES: Very good; but still, if I am not mistaken, you do assert that we

must always be experiencing one of them; that is what the wise tell us; for,

say they, all things are ever flowing up and down.


PROTARCHUS: Yes, and their words are of no mean authority.


SOCRATES: Of course, for they are no mean authorities themselves; and I

should like to avoid the brunt of their argument. Shall I tell you how I mean

to escape from them? And you shall be the partner of my flight.


PROTARCHUS: How?


SOCRATES: To them we will say: 'Good; but are we, or living things in

general, always conscious of what happens to us--for example, of our growth,

or the like? Are we not, on the contrary, almost wholly unconscious of this

and similar phenomena?' You must answer for them.


PROTARCHUS: The latter alternative is the true one.


SOCRATES: Then we were not right in saying, just now, that motions going

up and down cause pleasures and pains?


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: A better and more unexceptionable way of speaking will be--


PROTARCHUS: What?


SOCRATES: If we say that the great changes produce pleasures and pains,

but that the moderate and lesser ones do neither.


PROTARCHUS: That, Socrates, is the more correct mode of speaking.


SOCRATES: But if this be true, the life to which I was just now referring

again appears.


PROTARCHUS: What life?SOCRATES: The life which we affirmed to be devoid either of pain or of

joy.


PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: We may assume then that there are three lives, one pleasant,

one painful, and the third which is neither; what say you?


PROTARCHUS: I should say as you do that there are three of them.


SOCRATES:  But  if  so,  the  negation  of  pain  will  not  be  the  same  with

pleasure.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES:  Then  when  you  hear  a  person  saying,  that  always  to  live

without pain is the pleasantest of all things, what would you understand him

to mean by that statement?


PROTARCHUS: I think that by pleasure he must mean the negative of pain.


SOCRATES: Let us take any three things; or suppose that we embellish a

little and call the first gold, the second silver, and there shall be a third which

is neither.


PROTARCHUS: Very good.


SOCRATES: Now, can that which is neither be either gold or silver?


PROTARCHUS: Impossible.


SOCRATES: No more can that neutral or middle life be rightly or reasonably

spoken or thought of as pleasant or painful.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: And yet, my friend, there are, as we know, persons who say

and think so.PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And do they think that they have pleasure when they are free

from pain?


PROTARCHUS: They say so.


SOCRATES:  And  they  must  think  or  they  would  not  say  that  they  have

pleasure.


PROTARCHUS: I suppose not.


SOCRATES: And yet if pleasure and the negation of pain are of distinct

natures, they are wrong.


PROTARCHUS: But they are undoubtedly of distinct natures.


SOCRATES: Then shall we take the view that they are three, as we were just

now saying, or that they are two only--the one being a state of pain, which is

an evil, and the other a cessation of pain, which is of itself a good, and is

called pleasant?


PROTARCHUS: But why, Socrates, do we ask the question at all? I do not

see the reason.


SOCRATES: You, Protarchus, have clearly never heard of certain enemies of

our friend Philebus.


PROTARCHUS: And who may they be?


SOCRATES:  Certain  persons  who  are  reputed  to  be  masters  in  natural

philosophy, who deny the very existence of pleasure.


PROTARCHUS: Indeed!


SOCRATES: They say that what the school of Philebus calls pleasures are all

of them only avoidances of pain.PROTARCHUS: And would you, Socrates, have us agree with them?


SOCRATES: Why, no, I would rather use them as a sort of diviners, who

divine the truth, not by rules of art, but by an instinctive repugnance and

extreme detestation which a noble nature has of the power of pleasure, in

which they think that there is nothing sound, and her seductive influence is

declared by them to be witchcraft, and not pleasure. This is the use which you

may make of them. And when you have considered the various grounds of

their dislike, you shall hear from me what I deem to be true pleasures. Having

thus examined the nature of pleasure from both points of view, we will bring

her up for judgment.


PROTARCHUS: Well said.


SOCRATES: Then let us enter into an alliance with these philosophers and

follow in the track of their dislike. I imagine that they would say something

of this sort; they would begin at the beginning, and ask whether, if we wanted

to know the nature of any quality, such as hardness, we should be more likely

to discover it by looking at the hardest things, rather than at the least hard?

You, Protarchus, shall answer these severe gentlemen as you answer me.


PROTARCHUS: By all means, and I reply to them, that you should look at

the greatest instances.


SOCRATES: Then if we want to see the true nature of pleasures as a class,

we should not look at the most diluted pleasures, but at the most extreme and

most vehement?


PROTARCHUS: In that every one will agree.


SOCRATES: And the obvious instances of the greatest pleasures, as we have

often said, are the pleasures of the body?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And are they felt by us to be or become greater, when we are

sick or when we are in health? And here we must be careful in our answer, orwe shall come to grief.


PROTARCHUS: How will that be?


SOCRATES: Why, because we might be tempted to answer, 'When we are in

health.'


PROTARCHUS: Yes, that is the natural answer.


SOCRATES: Well, but are not those pleasures the greatest of which mankind

have the greatest desires?


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: And do not people who are in a fever, or any similar illness,

feel cold or thirst or other bodily affections more intensely? Am I not right in

saying that they have a deeper want and greater pleasure in the satisfaction of

their want?


PROTARCHUS: That is obvious as soon as it is said.


SOCRATES: Well, then, shall we not be right in saying, that if a person

would wish to see the greatest pleasures he ought to go and look, not at

health, but at disease? And here you must distinguish:--do not imagine that I

mean to ask whether those who are very ill have more pleasures than those

who are well, but understand that I am speaking of the magnitude of pleasure;

I want to know where pleasures are found to be most intense. For, as I say,

we have to discover what is pleasure, and what they mean by pleasure who

deny her very existence.


PROTARCHUS: I think I follow you.


SOCRATES: You will soon have a better opportunity of showing whether

you do or not, Protarchus. Answer now, and tell me whether you see, I will

not say more, but more intense and excessive pleasures in wantonness than in

temperance? Reflect before you speak.


PROTARCHUS: I understand you, and see that there is a great differencebetween them; the temperate are restrained by the wise man's aphorism of

'Never too much,' which is their rule, but excess of pleasure possessing the

minds of fools and wantons becomes madness and makes them shout with

delight.


SOCRATES: Very good, and if this be true, then the greatest pleasures and

pains will clearly be found in some vicious state of soul and body, and not in

a virtuous state.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And ought we not to select some of these for examination, and

see what makes them the greatest?


PROTARCHUS: To be sure we ought.


SOCRATES:  Take  the  case  of  the  pleasures  which  arise  out  of  certain

disorders.


PROTARCHUS: What disorders?


SOCRATES: The pleasures of unseemly disorders, which our severe friends

utterly detest.


PROTARCHUS: What pleasures?


SOCRATES: Such, for example, as the relief of itching and other ailments by

scratching, which is the only remedy required. For what in Heaven's name is

the feeling to be called which is thus produced in us?--Pleasure or pain?


PROTARCHUS: A villainous mixture of some kind, Socrates, I should say.


SOCRATES:  I  did  not  introduce  the  argument,  O  Protarchus,  with  any

personal  reference  to  Philebus,  but  because,  without  the  consideration  of

these and similar pleasures, we shall not be able to determine the point at

issue.


PROTARCHUS:  Then  we  had  better  proceed  to  analyze  this  family  ofpleasures.


SOCRATES: You mean the pleasures which are mingled with pain?


PROTARCHUS: Exactly.


SOCRATES: There are some mixtures which are of the body, and only in the

body, and others which are of the soul, and only in the soul; while there are

other mixtures of pleasures with pains, common both to soul and body, which

in their composite state are called sometimes pleasures and sometimes pains.


PROTARCHUS: How is that?


SOCRATES: Whenever, in the restoration or in the derangement of nature, a

man experiences two opposite feelings; for example, when he is cold and is

growing warm, or again, when he is hot and is becoming cool, and he wants

to have the one and be rid of the other;--the sweet has a bitter, as the common

saying is, and both together fasten upon him and create irritation and in time

drive him to distraction.


PROTARCHUS: That description is very true to nature.


SOCRATES:  And  in  these  sorts  of  mixtures  the  pleasures  and  pains  are

sometimes equal, and sometimes one or other of them predominates?


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: Of cases in which the pain exceeds the pleasure, an example is

afforded by itching, of which we were just now speaking, and by the tingling

which we feel when the boiling and fiery element is within, and the rubbing

and motion only relieves the surface, and does not reach the parts affected;

then if you put them to the fire, and as a last resort apply cold to them, you

may often produce the most intense pleasure or pain in the inner parts, which

contrasts and mingles with the pain or pleasure, as the case may be, of the

outer parts; and this is due to the forcible separation of what is united, or to

the union of what is separated, and to the juxtaposition of pleasure and pain.


PROTARCHUS: Quite so.SOCRATES: Sometimes the element of pleasure prevails in a man, and the

slight undercurrent of pain makes him tingle, and causes a gentle irritation; or

again, the excessive infusion of pleasure creates an excitement in him,--he

even leaps for joy, he assumes all sorts of attitudes, he changes all manner of

colours,  he  gasps  for  breath,  and  is  quite  amazed,  and  utters  the  most

irrational exclamations.


PROTARCHUS: Yes, indeed.


SOCRATES: He will say of himself, and others will say of him, that he is

dying with these delights; and the more dissipated and good-for-nothing he

is, the more vehemently he pursues them in every way; of all pleasures he

declares them to be the greatest; and he reckons him who lives in the most

constant enjoyment of them to be the happiest of mankind.


PROTARCHUS: That, Socrates, is a very true description of the opinions of

the majority about pleasures.


SOCRATES: Yes, Protarchus, quite true of the mixed pleasures, which arise

out of the communion of external and internal sensations in the body; there

are also cases in which the mind contributes an opposite element to the body,

whether  of  pleasure  or  pain,  and  the  two  unite  and  form  one  mixture.

Concerning these I have already remarked, that when a man is empty he

desires to be full, and has pleasure in hope and pain in vacuity. But now I

must further add what I omitted before, that in all these and similar emotions

in which body and mind are opposed (and they are innumerable), pleasure

and pain coalesce in one.


PROTARCHUS: I believe that to be quite true.


SOCRATES: There still remains one other sort of admixture of pleasures and

pains.


PROTARCHUS: What is that?


SOCRATES:  The  union  which,  as  we  were  saying,  the  mind  oftenexperiences of purely mental feelings.


PROTARCHUS: What do you mean?


SOCRATES:  Why,  do  we  not  speak  of  anger,  fear,  desire,  sorrow,  love,

emulation, envy, and the like, as pains which belong to the soul only?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And shall we not find them also full of the most wonderful

pleasures? need I remind you of the anger


'Which stirs even a wise man to violence, And is sweeter than honey and the

honeycomb?'


And  you  remember  how  pleasures  mingle  with  pains  in  lamentation  and

bereavement?


PROTARCHUS: Yes, there is a natural connexion between them.


SOCRATES:  And  you  remember  also  how  at  the  sight  of  tragedies  the

spectators smile through their tears?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly I do.


SOCRATES: And are you aware that even at a comedy the soul experiences

a mixed feeling of pain and pleasure?


PROTARCHUS: I do not quite understand you.


SOCRATES: I admit, Protarchus, that there is some difficulty in recognizing

this mixture of feelings at a comedy.


PROTARCHUS: There is, I think.


SOCRATES: And the greater the obscurity of the case the more desirable is

the examination of it, because the difficulty in detecting other cases of mixed

pleasures and pains will be less.