Persons of the Dialogue: SOCRATES, HERMOGENES, CRATYLUS


HERMOGENES: Suppose that we make Socrates a party to the argument?


CRATYLUS: If you please.


HERMOGENES: I should explain to you, Socrates, that our friend Cratylus

has  been  arguing  about  names;  he  says  that  they  are  natural  and  not

conventional; not a portion of the human voice which men agree to use; but

that there is a truth or correctness in them, which is the same for Hellenes as

for barbarians. Whereupon I ask him, whether his own name of Cratylus is a

true name or not, and he answers 'Yes.' And Socrates? 'Yes.' Then every

man's name, as I tell him, is that which he is called. To this he replies--'If all

the world were to call you Hermogenes, that would not be your name.' And

when  I  am  anxious  to  have  a  further  explanation  he  is  ironical  and

mysterious, and seems to imply that he has a notion of his own about the

matter, if he would only tell, and could entirely convince me, if he chose to

be intelligible. Tell me, Socrates, what this oracle means; or rather tell me, if

you will be so good, what is your own view of the truth or correctness of

names, which I would far sooner hear.


SOCRATES: Son of Hipponicus, there is an ancient saying, that 'hard is the

knowledge  of  the  good.'  And  the  knowledge  of  names  is  a  great  part  of

knowledge. If I had not been poor, I might have heard the fifty-drachma

course of the great Prodicus, which is a complete education in grammar and

language--these are his own words--and then I should have been at once able

to answer your question about the correctness of names. But, indeed, I have

only heard the single-drachma course, and therefore, I do not know the truth

about such matters; I will, however, gladly assist you and Cratylus in the

investigation  of  them.  When  he  declares  that  your  name  is  not  really

Hermogenes, I suspect that he is only making fun of you;--he means to say

that you are no true son of Hermes, because you are always looking after a

fortune  and  never  in  luck.  But,  as  I  was  saying,  there  is  a  good  deal  of

difficulty in this sort of knowledge, and therefore we had better leave the

question open until we have heard both sides.HERMOGENES: I have often talked over this matter, both with Cratylus and

others, and cannot convince myself that there is any principle of correctness

in names other than convention and agreement; any name which you give, in

my opinion, is the right one, and if you change that and give another, the new

name is as correct as the old--we frequently change the names of our slaves,

and the newly-imposed name is as good as the old: for there is no name given

to anything by nature; all is convention and habit of the users;--such is my

view. But if I am mistaken I shall be happy to hear and learn of Cratylus, or

of any one else.


SOCRATES: I dare say that you may be right, Hermogenes: let us see;--Your

meaning is, that the name of each thing is only that which anybody agrees to

call it?


HERMOGENES: That is my notion.


SOCRATES: Whether the giver of the name be an individual or a city?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Well, now, let me take an instance;--suppose that I call a man a

horse or a horse a man, you mean to say that a man will be rightly called a

horse by me individually, and rightly called a man by the rest of the world;

and a horse again would be rightly called a man by me and a horse by the

world:--that is your meaning?


HERMOGENES: He would, according to my view.


SOCRATES: But how about truth, then? you would acknowledge that there

is in words a true and a false?


HERMOGENES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And there are true and false propositions?


HERMOGENES: To be sure.


SOCRATES:  And  a  true  proposition  says  that  which  is,  and  a  falseproposition says that which is not?


HERMOGENES: Yes; what other answer is possible?


SOCRATES: Then in a proposition there is a true and false?


HERMOGENES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: But is a proposition true as a whole only, and are the parts

untrue?


HERMOGENES: No; the parts are true as well as the whole.


SOCRATES: Would you say the large parts and not the smaller ones, or

every part?


HERMOGENES: I should say that every part is true.


SOCRATES: Is a proposition resolvable into any part smaller than a name?


HERMOGENES: No; that is the smallest.


SOCRATES: Then the name is a part of the true proposition?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Yes, and a true part, as you say.


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And is not the part of a falsehood also a falsehood?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then, if propositions may be true and false, names may be true

and false?


HERMOGENES: So we must infer.SOCRATES: And the name of anything is that which any one affirms to be

the name?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And will there be so many names of each thing as everybody

says that there are? and will they be true names at the time of uttering them?


HERMOGENES:  Yes,  Socrates,  I  can  conceive  no  correctness  of  names

other than this; you give one name, and I another; and in different cities and

countries there are different names for the same things; Hellenes differ from

barbarians in their use of names, and the several Hellenic tribes from one

another.


SOCRATES: But would you say, Hermogenes, that the things differ as the

names differ? and are they relative to individuals, as Protagoras tells us? For

he says that man is the measure of all things, and that things are to me as they

appear to me, and that they are to you as they appear to you. Do you agree

with him, or would you say that things have a permanent essence of their

own?


HERMOGENES: There have been times, Socrates, when I have been driven

in my perplexity to take refuge with Protagoras; not that I agree with him at

all.


SOCRATES: What! have you ever been driven to admit that there was no

such thing as a bad man?


HERMOGENES: No, indeed; but I have often had reason to think that there

are very bad men, and a good many of them.


SOCRATES: Well, and have you ever found any very good ones?


HERMOGENES: Not many.


SOCRATES: Still you have found them?


HERMOGENES: Yes.SOCRATES: And would you hold that the very good were the very wise, and

the very evil very foolish? Would that be your view?


HERMOGENES: It would.


SOCRATES: But if Protagoras is right, and the truth is that things are as they

appear to any one, how can some of us be wise and some of us foolish?


HERMOGENES: Impossible.


SOCRATES:  And  if,  on  the  other  hand,  wisdom  and  folly  are  really

distinguishable, you will allow, I think, that the assertion of Protagoras can

hardly be correct. For if what appears to each man is true to him, one man

cannot in reality be wiser than another.


HERMOGENES: He cannot.


SOCRATES:  Nor  will  you  be  disposed  to  say  with  Euthydemus,  that  all

things equally belong to all men at the same moment and always; for neither

on his view can there be some good and others bad, if virtue and vice are

always equally to be attributed to all.


HERMOGENES: There cannot.


SOCRATES: But if neither is right, and things are not relative to individuals,

and all things do not equally belong to all at the same moment and always,

they must be supposed to have their own proper and permanent essence: they

are not in relation to us, or influenced by us, fluctuating according to our

fancy,  but  they  are  independent,  and  maintain  to  their  own  essence  the

relation prescribed by nature.


HERMOGENES: I think, Socrates, that you have said the truth.


SOCRATES: Does what I am saying apply only to the things themselves, or

equally to the actions which proceed from them? Are not actions also a class

of being?


HERMOGENES: Yes, the actions are real as well as the things.SOCRATES: Then the actions also are done according to their proper nature,

and not according to our opinion of them? In cutting, for example, we do not

cut as we please, and with any chance instrument; but we cut with the proper

instrument  only,  and  according  to  the  natural  process  of  cutting;  and  the

natural process is right and will succeed, but any other will fail and be of no

use at all.


HERMOGENES: I should say that the natural way is the right way.


SOCRATES: Again, in burning, not every way is the right way; but the right

way is the natural way, and the right instrument the natural instrument.


HERMOGENES: True.


SOCRATES: And this holds good of all actions?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And speech is a kind of action?


HERMOGENES: True.


SOCRATES: And will a man speak correctly who speaks as he pleases? Will

not the successful speaker rather be he who speaks in the natural way of

speaking, and as things ought to be spoken, and with the natural instrument?

Any other mode of speaking will result in error and failure.


HERMOGENES: I quite agree with you.


SOCRATES: And is not naming a part of speaking? for in giving names men

speak.


HERMOGENES: That is true.


SOCRATES: And if speaking is a sort of action and has a relation to acts, is

not naming also a sort of action?


HERMOGENES: True.SOCRATES: And we saw that actions were not relative to ourselves, but had

a special nature of their own?


HERMOGENES: Precisely.


SOCRATES: Then the argument would lead us to infer that names ought to

be given according to a natural process, and with a proper instrument, and not

at our pleasure: in this and no other way shall we name with success.


HERMOGENES: I agree.


SOCRATES:  But  again,  that  which  has  to  be  cut  has  to  be  cut  with

something?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And that which has to be woven or pierced has to be woven or

pierced with something?


HERMOGENES: Certainly.


SOCRATES:  And  that  which  has  to  be  named  has  to  be  named  with

something?


HERMOGENES: True.


SOCRATES: What is that with which we pierce?


HERMOGENES: An awl.


SOCRATES: And with which we weave?


HERMOGENES: A shuttle.


SOCRATES: And with which we name?


HERMOGENES: A name.SOCRATES: Very good: then a name is an instrument?


HERMOGENES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Suppose that I ask, 'What sort of instrument is a shuttle?' And

you answer, 'A weaving instrument.'


HERMOGENES: Well.


SOCRATES:  And  I  ask  again,  'What  do  we  do  when  we  weave?'--The

answer is, that we separate or disengage the warp from the woof.


HERMOGENES: Very true.


SOCRATES: And may not a similar description be given of an awl, and of

instruments in general?


HERMOGENES: To be sure.


SOCRATES: And now suppose that I ask a similar question about names:

will you answer me? Regarding the name as an instrument, what do we do

when we name?


HERMOGENES: I cannot say.


SOCRATES: Do we not give information to one another, and distinguish

things according to their natures?


HERMOGENES: Certainly we do.


SOCRATES: Then a name is an instrument of teaching and of distinguishing

natures, as the shuttle is of distinguishing the threads of the web.


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And the shuttle is the instrument of the weaver?


HERMOGENES: Assuredly.SOCRATES: Then the weaver will use the shuttle well--and well means like

a weaver? and the teacher will use the name well--and well means like a

teacher?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And when the weaver uses the shuttle, whose work will he be

using well?


HERMOGENES: That of the carpenter.


SOCRATES: And is every man a carpenter, or the skilled only?


HERMOGENES: Only the skilled.


SOCRATES: And when the piercer uses the awl, whose work will he be

using well?


HERMOGENES: That of the smith.


SOCRATES: And is every man a smith, or only the skilled?


HERMOGENES: The skilled only.


SOCRATES: And when the teacher uses the name, whose work will he be

using?


HERMOGENES: There again I am puzzled.


SOCRATES: Cannot you at least say who gives us the names which we use?


HERMOGENES: Indeed I cannot.


SOCRATES: Does not the law seem to you to give us them?


HERMOGENES: Yes, I suppose so.


SOCRATES: Then the teacher, when he gives us a name, uses the work ofthe legislator?


HERMOGENES: I agree.


SOCRATES: And is every man a legislator, or the skilled only?


HERMOGENES: The skilled only.


SOCRATES: Then, Hermogenes, not every man is able to give a name, but

only a maker of names; and this is the legislator, who of all skilled artisans in

the world is the rarest.


HERMOGENES: True.


SOCRATES: And how does the legislator make names? and to what does he

look? Consider this in the light of the previous instances: to what does the

carpenter  look  in  making  the  shuttle?  Does  he  not  look  to  that  which  is

naturally fitted to act as a shuttle?


HERMOGENES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And suppose the shuttle to be broken in making, will he make

another, looking to the broken one? or will he look to the form according to

which he made the other?


HERMOGENES: To the latter, I should imagine.


SOCRATES: Might not that be justly called the true or ideal shuttle?


HERMOGENES: I think so.


SOCRATES:  And  whatever  shuttles  are  wanted,  for  the  manufacture  of

garments, thin or thick, of flaxen, woollen, or other material, ought all of

them to have the true form of the shuttle; and whatever is the shuttle best

adapted to each kind of work, that ought to be the form which the maker

produces in each case.


HERMOGENES: Yes.SOCRATES:  And  the  same  holds  of  other  instruments:  when  a  man  has

discovered the instrument which is naturally adapted to each work, he must

express this natural form, and not others which he fancies, in the material,

whatever it may be, which he employs; for example, he ought to know how

to put into iron the forms of awls adapted by nature to their several uses?


HERMOGENES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And how to put into wood forms of shuttles adapted by nature

to their uses?


HERMOGENES: True.


SOCRATES: For the several forms of shuttles naturally answer to the several

kinds of webs; and this is true of instruments in general.


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then, as to names: ought not our legislator also to know how to

put the true natural name of each thing into sounds and syllables, and to make

and give all names with a view to the ideal name, if he is to be a namer in any

true sense? And we must remember that different legislators will not use the

same syllables. For neither does every smith, although he may be making the

same instrument for the same purpose, make them all of the same iron. The

form must be the same, but the material may vary, and still the instrument

may be equally good of whatever iron made, whether in Hellas or in a foreign

country;--there is no difference.


HERMOGENES: Very true.


SOCRATES: And the legislator, whether he be Hellene or barbarian, is not

therefore to be deemed by you a worse legislator, provided he gives the true

and proper form of the name in whatever syllables; this or that country makes

no matter.


HERMOGENES: Quite true.


SOCRATES: But who then is to determine whether the proper form is givento the shuttle, whatever sort of wood may be used? the carpenter who makes,

or the weaver who is to use them?


HERMOGENES: I should say, he who is to use them, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And who uses the work of the lyre-maker? Will not he be the

man who knows how to direct what is being done, and who will know also

whether the work is being well done or not?


HERMOGENES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And who is he?


HERMOGENES: The player of the lyre.


SOCRATES: And who will direct the shipwright?


HERMOGENES: The pilot.


SOCRATES: And who will be best able to direct the legislator in his work,

and will know whether the work is well done, in this or any other country?

Will not the user be the man?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And this is he who knows how to ask questions?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And how to answer them?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And him who knows how to ask and answer you would call a

dialectician?


HERMOGENES: Yes; that would be his name.SOCRATES: Then the work of the carpenter is to make a rudder, and the

pilot has to direct him, if the rudder is to be well made.


HERMOGENES: True.


SOCRATES:  And  the  work  of  the  legislator  is  to  give  names,  and  the

dialectician must be his director if the names are to be rightly given?


HERMOGENES: That is true.


SOCRATES: Then, Hermogenes, I should say that this giving of names can

be no such light matter as you fancy, or the work of light or chance persons;

and Cratylus is right in saying that things have names by nature, and that not

every man is an artificer of names, but he only who looks to the name which

each thing by nature has, and is able to express the true forms of things in

letters and syllables.


HERMOGENES: I cannot answer you, Socrates; but I find a difficulty in

changing my opinion all in a moment, and I think that I should be more

readily persuaded, if you would show me what this is which you term the

natural fitness of names.


SOCRATES: My good Hermogenes, I have none to show. Was I not telling

you just now (but you have forgotten), that I knew nothing, and proposing to

share the enquiry with you? But now that you and I have talked over the

matter, a step has been gained; for we have discovered that names have by

nature a truth, and that not every man knows how to give a thing a name.


HERMOGENES: Very good.


SOCRATES: And what is the nature of this truth or correctness of names?

That, if you care to know, is the next question.


HERMOGENES: Certainly, I care to know.


SOCRATES: Then reflect.


HERMOGENES: How shall I reflect?SOCRATES: The true way is to have the assistance of those who know, and

you must pay them well both in money and in thanks; these are the Sophists,

of whom your brother, Callias, has--rather dearly--bought the reputation of

wisdom. But you have not yet come into your inheritance, and therefore you

had better go to him, and beg and entreat him to tell you what he has learnt

from Protagoras about the fitness of names.


HERMOGENES:  But  how  inconsistent  should  I  be,  if,  whilst  repudiating

Protagoras  and  his  truth  ('Truth'  was  the  title  of  the  book  of  Protagoras;

compare Theaet.), I were to attach any value to what he and his book affirm!


SOCRATES: Then if you despise him, you must learn of Homer and the

poets.


HERMOGENES: And where does Homer say anything about names, and

what does he say?


SOCRATES: He often speaks of them; notably and nobly in the places where

he distinguishes the different names which Gods and men give to the same

things. Does he not in these passages make a remarkable statement about the

correctness of names? For the Gods must clearly be supposed to call things

by their right and natural names; do you not think so?


HERMOGENES: Why, of course they call them rightly, if they call them at

all. But to what are you referring?


SOCRATES: Do you not know what he says about the river in Troy who had

a single combat with Hephaestus?


'Whom,' as he says, 'the Gods call Xanthus, and men call Scamander.'


HERMOGENES: I remember.


SOCRATES: Well, and about this river--to know that he ought to be called

Xanthus and not Scamander--is not that a solemn lesson? Or about the bird

which, as he says,


'The Gods call Chalcis, and men Cymindis:'to  be  taught  how  much  more  correct  the  name  Chalcis  is  than  the  name

Cymindis--do you deem that a light matter? Or about Batieia and Myrina?

(Compare Il. 'The hill which men call Batieia and the immortals the tomb of

the sportive Myrina.') And there are many other observations of the same

kind  in  Homer  and  other  poets.  Now,  I  think  that  this  is  beyond  the

understanding of you and me; but the names of Scamandrius and Astyanax,

which he affirms to have been the names of Hector's son, are more within the

range of human faculties, as I am disposed to think; and what the poet means

by correctness may be more readily apprehended in that instance: you will

remember I dare say the lines to which I refer? (Il.)


HERMOGENES: I do.


SOCRATES: Let me ask you, then, which did Homer think the more correct

of the names given to Hector's son--Astyanax or Scamandrius?


HERMOGENES: I do not know.


SOCRATES: How would you answer, if you were asked whether the wise or

the unwise are more likely to give correct names?


HERMOGENES: I should say the wise, of course.


SOCRATES: And are the men or the women of a city, taken as a class, the

wiser?


HERMOGENES: I should say, the men.


SOCRATES: And Homer, as you know, says that the Trojan men called him

Astyanax (king of the city); but if the men called him Astyanax, the other

name of Scamandrius could only have been given to him by the women.


HERMOGENES: That may be inferred.


SOCRATES: And must not Homer have imagined the Trojans to be wiser

than their wives?HERMOGENES: To be sure.


SOCRATES:  Then  he  must  have  thought  Astyanax  to  be  a  more  correct

name for the boy than Scamandrius?


HERMOGENES: Clearly.


SOCRATES: And what is the reason of this? Let us consider:--does he not

himself suggest a very good reason, when he says,


'For he alone defended their city and long walls'?


This appears to be a good reason for calling the son of the saviour king of the

city which his father was saving, as Homer observes.


HERMOGENES: I see.


SOCRATES: Why, Hermogenes, I do not as yet see myself; and do you?


HERMOGENES: No, indeed; not I.


SOCRATES: But tell me, friend, did not Homer himself also give Hector his

name?


HERMOGENES: What of that?


SOCRATES: The name appears to me to be very nearly the same as the name

of Astyanax--both are Hellenic; and a king (anax) and a holder (ektor) have

nearly the same meaning, and are both descriptive of a king; for a man is

clearly the holder of that of which he is king; he rules, and owns, and holds it.

But, perhaps, you may think that I am talking nonsense; and indeed I believe

that I myself did not know what I meant when I imagined that I had found

some indication of the opinion of Homer about the correctness of names.


HERMOGENES: I assure you that I think otherwise, and I believe you to be

on the right track.


SOCRATES: There is reason, I think, in calling the lion's whelp a lion, andthe foal of a horse a horse; I am speaking only of the ordinary course of

nature,  when  an  animal  produces  after  his  kind,  and  not  of  extraordinary

births;--if contrary to nature a horse have a calf, then I should not call that a

foal but a calf; nor do I call any inhuman birth a man, but only a natural birth.

And the same may be said of trees and other things. Do you agree with me?


HERMOGENES: Yes, I agree.


SOCRATES: Very good. But you had better watch me and see that I do not

play tricks with you. For on the same principle the son of a king is to be

called a king. And whether the syllables of the name are the same or not the

same, makes no difference, provided the meaning is retained; nor does the

addition or subtraction of a letter make any difference so long as the essence

of the thing remains in possession of the name and appears in it.


HERMOGENES: What do you mean?


SOCRATES:  A  very  simple  matter.  I  may  illustrate  my  meaning  by  the

names of letters, which you know are not the same as the letters themselves

with the exception of the four epsilon, upsilon, omicron, omega; the names of

the rest, whether vowels or consonants, are made up of other letters which we

add to them; but so long as we introduce the meaning, and there can be no

mistake, the name of the letter is quite correct. Take, for example, the letter

beta--the addition of eta, tau, alpha, gives no offence, and does not prevent

the whole name from having the value which the legislator intended--so well

did he know how to give the letters names.


HERMOGENES: I believe you are right.


SOCRATES: And may not the same be said of a king? a king will often be

the son of a king, the good son or the noble son of a good or noble sire; and

similarly the offspring of every kind, in the regular course of nature, is like

the  parent,  and  therefore  has  the  same  name.  Yet  the  syllables  may  be

disguised until they appear different to the ignorant person, and he may not

recognize them, although they are the same, just as any one of us would not

recognize  the  same  drugs  under  different  disguises  of  colour  and  smell,

although to the physician, who regards the power of them, they are the same,and he is not put out by the addition; and in like manner the etymologist is

not put out by the addition or transposition or subtraction of a letter or two, or

indeed by the change of all the letters, for this need not interfere with the

meaning. As was just now said, the names of Hector and Astyanax have only

one letter alike, which is tau, and yet they have the same meaning. And how

little in common with the letters of their names has Archepolis (ruler of the

city)--and yet the meaning is the same. And there are many other names

which just mean 'king.' Again, there are several names for a general, as, for

example, Agis (leader) and Polemarchus (chief in war) and Eupolemus (good

warrior); and others which denote a physician, as Iatrocles (famous healer)

and Acesimbrotus (curer of mortals); and there are many others which might

be cited, differing in their syllables and letters, but having the same meaning.

Would you not say so?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES:  The  same  names,  then,  ought  to  be  assigned  to  those  who

follow in the course of nature?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And what of those who follow out of the course of nature, and

are prodigies? for example, when a good and religious man has an irreligious

son, he ought to bear the name not of his father, but of the class to which he

belongs, just as in the case which was before supposed of a horse foaling a

calf.


HERMOGENES: Quite true.


SOCRATES: Then the irreligious son of a religious father should be called

irreligious?


HERMOGENES: Certainly.


SOCRATES:  He  should  not  be  called  Theophilus  (beloved  of  God)  or

Mnesitheus (mindful of God), or any of these names: if names are correctly

given, his should have an opposite meaning.HERMOGENES: Certainly, Socrates.


SOCRATES:  Again,  Hermogenes,  there  is  Orestes  (the  man  of  the

mountains) who appears to be rightly called; whether chance gave the name,

or perhaps some poet who meant to express the brutality and fierceness and

mountain wildness of his hero's nature.


HERMOGENES: That is very likely, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And his father's name is also according to nature.


HERMOGENES: Clearly.


SOCRATES:  Yes,  for  as  his  name,  so  also  is  his  nature;  Agamemnon

(admirable  for  remaining)  is  one  who  is  patient  and  persevering  in  the

accomplishment  of  his  resolves,  and  by  his  virtue  crowns  them;  and  his

continuance  at  Troy  with  all  the  vast  army  is  a  proof  of  that  admirable

endurance in him which is signified by the name Agamemnon. I also think

that Atreus is rightly called; for his murder of Chrysippus and his exceeding

cruelty to Thyestes are damaging and destructive to his reputation--the name

is a little altered and disguised so as not to be intelligible to every one, but to

the etymologist there is no difficulty in seeing the meaning, for whether you

think of him as ateires the stubborn, or as atrestos the fearless, or as ateros the

destructive one, the name is perfectly correct in every point of view. And I

think that Pelops is also named appropriately; for, as the name implies, he is

rightly called Pelops who sees what is near only (o ta pelas oron).


HERMOGENES: How so?


SOCRATES: Because, according to the tradition, he had no forethought or

foresight of all the evil which the murder of Myrtilus would entail upon his

whole race in remote ages; he saw only what was at hand and immediate, --or

in other words, pelas (near), in his eagerness to win Hippodamia by all means

for his bride. Every one would agree that the name of Tantalus is rightly

given and in accordance with nature, if the traditions about him are true.


HERMOGENES: And what are the traditions?SOCRATES: Many terrible misfortunes are said to have happened to him in

his life--last of all, came the utter ruin of his country; and after his death he

had the stone suspended (talanteia) over his head in the world below--all this

agrees wonderfully well with his name. You might imagine that some person

who wanted to call him Talantatos (the most weighted down by misfortune),

disguised the name by altering it into Tantalus; and into this form, by some

accident of tradition, it has actually been transmuted. The name of Zeus, who

is  his  alleged  father,  has  also  an  excellent  meaning,  although  hard  to  be

understood, because really like a sentence, which is divided into two parts,

for some call him Zena, and use the one half, and others who use the other

half call him Dia; the two together signify the nature of the God, and the

business of a name, as we were saying, is to express the nature. For there is

none who is more the author of life to us and to all, than the lord and king of

all. Wherefore we are right in calling him Zena and Dia, which are one name,

although divided, meaning the God through whom all creatures always have

life (di on zen aei pasi tois zosin uparchei). There is an irreverence, at first

sight, in calling him son of Cronos (who is a proverb for stupidity), and we

might rather expect Zeus to be the child of a mighty intellect. Which is the

fact;  for  this  is  the  meaning  of  his  father's  name:  Kronos  quasi  Koros

(Choreo, to sweep), not in the sense of a youth, but signifying to chatharon

chai acheraton tou nou, the pure and garnished mind (sc. apo tou chorein).

He, as we are informed by tradition, was begotten of Uranus, rightly so called

(apo tou oran ta ano) from looking upwards; which, as philosophers tell us, is

the way to have a pure mind, and the name Uranus is therefore correct. If I

could remember the genealogy of Hesiod, I would have gone on and tried

more conclusions of the same sort on the remoter ancestors of the Gods,--

then I might have seen whether this wisdom, which has come to me all in an

instant, I know not whence, will or will not hold good to the end.


HERMOGENES: You seem to me, Socrates, to be quite like a prophet newly

inspired, and to be uttering oracles.


SOCRATES: Yes, Hermogenes, and I believe that I caught the inspiration

from  the  great  Euthyphro  of  the  Prospaltian  deme,  who  gave  me  a  long

lecture which commenced at dawn: he talked and I listened, and his wisdom

and enchanting ravishment has not only filled my ears but taken possession

of my soul,and to-day I shall let his superhuman power work and finish theinvestigation of names--that will be the way; but to-morrow, if you are so

disposed, we will conjure him away, and make a purgation of him, if we can

only find some priest or sophist who is skilled in purifications of this sort.


HERMOGENES: With all my heart; for am very curious to hear the rest of

the enquiry about names.


SOCRATES: Then let us proceed; and where would you have us begin, now

that we have got a sort of outline of the enquiry? Are there any names which

witness of themselves that they are not given arbitrarily, but have a natural

fitness? The names of heroes and of men in general are apt to be deceptive

because they are often called after ancestors with whose names, as we were

saying, they may have no business; or they are the expression of a wish like

Eutychides (the son of good fortune), or Sosias (the Saviour), or Theophilus

(the beloved of God), and others. But I think that we had better leave these,

for  there  will  be  more  chance  of  finding  correctness  in  the  names  of

immutable essences;--there ought to have been more care taken about them

when they were named, and perhaps there may have been some more than

human power at work occasionally in giving them names.


HERMOGENES: I think so, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Ought we not to begin with the consideration of the Gods, and

show that they are rightly named Gods?


HERMOGENES: Yes, that will be well.


SOCRATES: My notion would be something of this sort:--I suspect that the

sun,  moon,  earth,  stars,  and  heaven,  which  are  still  the  Gods  of  many

barbarians, were the only Gods known to the aboriginal Hellenes. Seeing that

they were always moving and running, from their running nature they were

called  Gods  or  runners  (Theous,  Theontas);  and  when  men  became

acquainted with the other Gods, they proceeded to apply the same name to

them all. Do you think that likely?


HERMOGENES: I think it very likely indeed.SOCRATES: What shall follow the Gods?


HERMOGENES: Must not demons and heroes and men come next?


SOCRATES: Demons! And what do you consider to be the meaning of this

word? Tell me if my view is right.


HERMOGENES: Let me hear.


SOCRATES: You know how Hesiod uses the word?


HERMOGENES: I do not.


SOCRATES: Do you not remember that he speaks of a golden race of men

who came first?


HERMOGENES: Yes, I do.


SOCRATES: He says of them--


'But now that fate has closed over this race They are holy demons upon the

earth, Beneficent, averters of ills, guardians of mortal men.' (Hesiod, Works

and Days.)


HERMOGENES: What is the inference?


SOCRATES: What is the inference! Why, I suppose that he means by the

golden men, not men literally made of gold, but good and noble; and I am

convinced of this, because he further says that we are the iron race.


HERMOGENES: That is true.


SOCRATES: And do you not suppose that good men of our own day would

by him be said to be of golden race?


HERMOGENES: Very likely.


SOCRATES: And are not the good wise?HERMOGENES: Yes, they are wise.


SOCRATES: And therefore I have the most entire conviction that he called

them demons, because they were daemones (knowing or wise), and in our

older Attic dialect the word itself occurs. Now he and other poets say truly,

that when a good man dies he has honour and a mighty portion among the

dead,  and  becomes  a  demon;  which  is  a  name  given  to  him  signifying

wisdom. And I say too, that every wise man who happens to be a good man is

more than human (daimonion) both in life and death, and is rightly called a

demon.


HERMOGENES: Then I rather think that I am of one mind with you; but

what is the meaning of the word 'hero'? (Eros with an eta, in the old writing

eros with an epsilon.)


SOCRATES: I think that there is no difficulty in explaining, for the name is

not much altered, and signifies that they were born of love.


HERMOGENES: What do you mean?


SOCRATES: Do you not know that the heroes are demigods?


HERMOGENES: What then?


SOCRATES: All of them sprang either from the love of a God for a mortal

woman, or of a mortal man for a Goddess; think of the word in the old Attic,

and you will see better that the name heros is only a slight alteration of Eros,

from whom the heroes sprang: either this is the meaning, or, if not this, then

they must have been skilful as rhetoricians and dialecticians, and able to put

the question (erotan), for eirein is equivalent to legein. And therefore, as I

was saying, in the Attic dialect the heroes turn out to be rhetoricians and

questioners. All this is easy enough; the noble breed of heroes are a tribe of

sophists and rhetors. But can you tell me why men are called anthropoi?--that

is more difficult.


HERMOGENES: No, I cannot; and I would not try even if I could, because I

think that you are the more likely to succeed.SOCRATES: That is to say, you trust to the inspiration of Euthyphro.


HERMOGENES: Of course.


SOCRATES:  Your  faith  is  not  vain;  for  at  this  very  moment  a  new  and

ingenious thought strikes me, and, if I am not careful, before to-morrow's

dawn  I  shall  be  wiser  than  I  ought  to  be.  Now,  attend  to  me;  and  first,

remember that we often put in and pull out letters in words, and give names

as we please and change the accents. Take, for example, the word Dii Philos;

in order to convert this from a sentence into a noun, we omit one of the iotas

and sound the middle syllable grave instead of acute; as, on the other hand,

letters  are  sometimes  inserted  in  words  instead  of  being  omitted,  and  the

acute takes the place of the grave.


HERMOGENES: That is true.


SOCRATES: The name anthropos, which was once a sentence, and is now a

noun, appears to be a case just of this sort, for one letter, which is the alpha,

has been omitted, and the acute on the last syllable has been changed to a

grave.


HERMOGENES: What do you mean?


SOCRATES: I mean to say that the word 'man' implies that other animals

never examine, or consider, or look up at what they see, but that man not only

sees (opope) but considers and looks up at that which he sees, and hence he

alone of all animals is rightly anthropos, meaning anathron a opopen.


HERMOGENES: May I ask you to examine another word about which I am

curious?


SOCRATES: Certainly.


HERMOGENES: I will take that which appears to me to follow next in order.

You know the distinction of soul and body?


SOCRATES: Of course.HERMOGENES: Let us endeavour to analyze them like the previous words.


SOCRATES: You want me first of all to examine the natural fitness of the

word psuche (soul), and then of the word soma (body)?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES:  If  I  am  to  say  what  occurs  to  me  at  the  moment,  I  should

imagine that those who first used the name psuche meant to express that the

soul when in the body is the source of life, and gives the power of breath and

revival  (anapsuchon),  and  when  this  reviving  power  fails  then  the  body

perishes and dies, and this, if I am not mistaken, they called psyche. But

please stay a moment; I fancy that I can discover something which will be

more acceptable to the disciples of Euthyphro, for I am afraid that they will

scorn this explanation. What do you say to another?


HERMOGENES: Let me hear.


SOCRATES: What is that which holds and carries and gives life and motion

to the entire nature of the body? What else but the soul?


HERMOGENES: Just that.


SOCRATES: And do you not believe with Anaxagoras, that mind or soul is

the ordering and containing principle of all things?


HERMOGENES: Yes; I do.


SOCRATES: Then you may well call that power phuseche which carries and

holds nature (e phusin okei, kai ekei), and this may be refined away into

psuche.


HERMOGENES: Certainly; and this derivation is, I think, more scientific

than the other.


SOCRATES: It is so; but I cannot help laughing, if I am to suppose that this

was the true meaning of the name.HERMOGENES: But what shall we say of the next word?


SOCRATES: You mean soma (the body).


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: That may be variously interpreted; and yet more variously if a

little permutation is allowed. For some say that the body is the grave (sema)

of the soul which may be thought to be buried in our present life; or again the

index of the soul, because the soul gives indications to (semainei) the body;

probably the Orphic poets were the inventors of the name, and they were

under the impression that the soul is suffering the punishment of sin, and that

the body is an enclosure or prison in which the soul is incarcerated, kept safe

(soma, sozetai), as the name soma implies, until the penalty is paid; according

to this view, not even a letter of the word need be changed.


HERMOGENES: I think, Socrates, that we have said enough of this class of

words. But have we any more explanations of the names of the Gods, like

that which you were giving of Zeus? I should like to know whether any

similar principle of correctness is to be applied to them.


SOCRATES: Yes, indeed, Hermogenes; and there is one excellent principle

which, as men of sense, we must acknowledge,--that of the Gods we know

nothing, either of their natures or of the names which they give themselves;

but we are sure that the names by which they call themselves, whatever they

may be, are true. And this is the best of all principles; and the next best is to

say, as in prayers, that we will call them by any sort or kind of names or

patronymics which they like, because we do not know of any other. That

also, I think, is a very good custom, and one which I should much wish to

observe. Let us, then, if you please, in the first place announce to them that

we are not enquiring about them; we do not presume that we are able to do

so; but we are enquiring about the meaning of men in giving them these

names,--in this there can be small blame.


HERMOGENES: I think, Socrates, that you are quite right, and I would like

to do as you say.SOCRATES: Shall we begin, then, with Hestia, according to custom?


HERMOGENES: Yes, that will be very proper.


SOCRATES: What may we suppose him to have meant who gave the name

Hestia?


HERMOGENES: That is another and certainly a most difficult question.


SOCRATES: My dear Hermogenes, the first imposers of names must surely

have been considerable persons; they were philosophers, and had a good deal

to say.


HERMOGENES: Well, and what of them?


SOCRATES: They are the men to whom I should attribute the imposition of

names.  Even  in  foreign  names,  if  you  analyze  them,  a  meaning  is  still

discernible. For example, that which we term ousia is by some called esia,

and by others again osia. Now that the essence of things should be called

estia, which is akin to the first of these (esia = estia), is rational enough. And

there is reason in the Athenians calling that estia which participates in ousia.

For in ancient times we too seem to have said esia for ousia, and this you may

note to have been the idea of those who appointed that sacrifices should be

first offered to estia, which was natural enough if they meant that estia was

the essence of things. Those again who read osia seem to have inclined to the

opinion of Heracleitus, that all things flow and nothing stands; with them the

pushing principle (othoun) is the cause and ruling power of all things, and is

therefore rightly called osia. Enough of this, which is all that we who know

nothing can affirm. Next in order after Hestia we ought to consider Rhea and

Cronos, although the name of Cronos has been already discussed. But I dare

say that I am talking great nonsense.


HERMOGENES: Why, Socrates?


SOCRATES: My good friend, I have discovered a hive of wisdom.


HERMOGENES: Of what nature?SOCRATES: Well, rather ridiculous, and yet plausible.


HERMOGENES: How plausible?


SOCRATES:  I  fancy  to  myself  Heracleitus  repeating  wise  traditions  of

antiquity as old as the days of Cronos and Rhea, and of which Homer also

spoke.


HERMOGENES: How do you mean?


SOCRATES: Heracleitus is supposed to say that all things are in motion and

nothing at rest; he compares them to the stream of a river, and says that you

cannot go into the same water twice.


HERMOGENES: That is true.


SOCRATES: Well, then, how can we avoid inferring that he who gave the

names of Cronos and Rhea to the ancestors of the Gods, agreed pretty much

in the doctrine of Heracleitus? Is the giving of the names of streams to both

of  them  purely  accidental?  Compare  the  line  in  which  Homer,  and,  as  I

believe, Hesiod also, tells of


'Ocean, the origin of Gods, and mother Tethys (Il.--the line is not found in the

extant works of Hesiod.).'


And again, Orpheus says, that


'The fair river of Ocean was the first to marry, and he espoused his sister

Tethys, who was his mother's daughter.'


You see that this is a remarkable coincidence, and all in the direction of

Heracleitus.


HERMOGENES: I think that there is something in what you say, Socrates;

but I do not understand the meaning of the name Tethys.


SOCRATES: Well, that is almost self-explained, being only the name of a

spring, a little disguised; for that which is strained and filtered (diattomenon,ethoumenon) may be likened to a spring, and the name Tethys is made up of

these two words.


HERMOGENES: The idea is ingenious, Socrates.


SOCRATES: To be sure. But what comes next?--of Zeus we have spoken.


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then let us next take his two brothers, Poseidon and Pluto,

whether the latter is called by that or by his other name.


HERMOGENES: By all means.


SOCRATES:  Poseidon  is  Posidesmos,  the  chain  of  the  feet;  the  original

inventor of the name had been stopped by the watery element in his walks,

and not allowed to go on, and therefore he called the ruler of this element

Poseidon; the epsilon was probably inserted as an ornament. Yet, perhaps,

not so; but the name may have been originally written with a double lamda

and not with a sigma, meaning that the God knew many things (Polla eidos).

And perhaps also he being the shaker of the earth, has been named from

shaking (seiein), and then pi and delta have been added. Pluto gives wealth

(Ploutos), and his name means the giver of wealth, which comes out of the

earth beneath. People in general appear to imagine that the term Hades is

connected with the invisible (aeides) and so they are led by their fears to call

the God Pluto instead.


HERMOGENES: And what is the true derivation?


SOCRATES: In spite of the mistakes which are made about the power of this

deity, and the foolish fears which people have of him, such as the fear of

always being with him after death, and of the soul denuded of the body going

to him (compare Rep.), my belief is that all is quite consistent, and that the

office and name of the God really correspond.


HERMOGENES: Why, how is that?


SOCRATES: I will tell you my own opinion; but first, I should like to askyou which chain does any animal feel to be the stronger? and which confines

him more to the same spot,--desire or necessity?


HERMOGENES: Desire, Socrates, is stronger far.


SOCRATES:  And  do  you  not  think  that  many  a  one  would  escape  from

Hades, if he did not bind those who depart to him by the strongest of chains?


HERMOGENES: Assuredly they would.


SOCRATES: And if by the greatest of chains, then by some desire, as I

should certainly infer, and not by necessity?


HERMOGENES: That is clear.


SOCRATES: And there are many desires?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And therefore by the greatest desire, if the chain is to be the

greatest?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And is any desire stronger than the thought that you will be

made better by associating with another?


HERMOGENES: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: And is not that the reason, Hermogenes, why no one, who has

been to him, is willing to come back to us? Even the Sirens, like all the rest of

the world, have been laid under his spells. Such a charm, as I imagine, is the

God able to infuse into his words. And, according to this view, he is the

perfect and accomplished Sophist, and the great benefactor of the inhabitants

of the other world; and even to us who are upon earth he sends from below

exceeding  blessings.  For  he  has  much  more  than  he  wants  down  there;

wherefore he is called Pluto (or the rich). Note also, that he will have nothing

to do with men while they are in the body, but only when the soul is liberatedfrom  the  desires  and  evils  of  the  body.  Now  there  is  a  great  deal  of

philosophy and reflection in that; for in their liberated state he can bind them

with the desire of virtue, but while they are flustered and maddened by the

body, not even father Cronos himself would suffice to keep them with him in

his own far-famed chains.


HERMOGENES: There is a deal of truth in what you say.


SOCRATES:  Yes,  Hermogenes,  and  the  legislator  called  him  Hades,  not

from the unseen (aeides)--far otherwise, but from his knowledge (eidenai) of

all noble things.


HERMOGENES: Very good; and what do we say of Demeter, and Here, and

Apollo, and Athene, and Hephaestus, and Ares, and the other deities?


SOCRATES: Demeter is e didousa meter, who gives food like a mother;

Here is the lovely one (erate)--for Zeus, according to tradition, loved and

married her; possibly also the name may have been given when the legislator

was thinking of the heavens, and may be only a disguise of the air (aer),

putting the end in the place of the beginning. You will recognize the truth of

this if you repeat the letters of Here several times over. People dread the

name of Pherephatta as they dread the name of Apollo,--and with as little

reason; the fear, if I am not mistaken, only arises from their ignorance of the

nature of names. But they go changing the name into Phersephone, and they

are terrified at this; whereas the new name means only that the Goddess is

wise  (sophe);  for  seeing  that  all  things  in  the  world  are  in  motion

(pheromenon),  that  principle  which  embraces  and  touches  and  is  able  to

follow  them,  is  wisdom.  And  therefore  the  Goddess  may  be  truly  called

Pherepaphe (Pherepapha), or some name like it, because she touches that

which  is  in  motion  (tou  pheromenon  ephaptomene),  herein  showing  her

wisdom. And Hades, who is wise, consorts with her, because she is wise.

They  alter  her  name  into  Pherephatta  now-a-days,  because  the  present

generation care for euphony more than truth. There is the other name, Apollo,

which,  as  I  was  saying,  is  generally  supposed  to  have  some  terrible

signification. Have you remarked this fact?


HERMOGENES: To be sure I have, and what you say is true.SOCRATES: But the name, in my opinion, is really most expressive of the

power of the God.


HERMOGENES: How so?


SOCRATES: I will endeavour to explain, for I do not believe that any single

name could have been better adapted to express the attributes of the God,

embracing and in a manner signifying all four of them,--music, and prophecy,

and medicine, and archery.


HERMOGENES: That must be a strange name, and I should like to hear the

explanation.


SOCRATES:  Say  rather  an  harmonious  name,  as  beseems  the  God  of

Harmony. In the first place, the purgations and purifications which doctors

and diviners use, and their fumigations with drugs magical or medicinal, as

well as their washings and lustral sprinklings, have all one and the same

object, which is to make a man pure both in body and soul.


HERMOGENES: Very true.


SOCRATES: And is not Apollo the purifier, and the washer, and the absolver

from all impurities?


HERMOGENES: Very true.


SOCRATES: Then in reference to his ablutions and absolutions, as being the

physician who orders them, he may be rightly called Apolouon (purifier); or

in respect of his powers of divination, and his truth and sincerity, which is the

same as truth, he may be most fitly called Aplos, from aplous (sincere), as in

the Thessalian dialect, for all the Thessalians call him Aplos; also he is aei

Ballon (always shooting), because he is a master archer who never misses; or

again,  the  name  may  refer  to  his  musical  attributes,  and  then,  as  in

akolouthos, and akoitis, and in many other words the alpha is supposed to

mean 'together,' so the meaning of the name Apollo will be 'moving together,'

whether in the poles of heaven as they are called, or in the harmony of song,

which is termed concord, because he moves all together by an harmoniouspower, as astronomers and musicians ingeniously declare. And he is the God

who presides over harmony, and makes all things move together, both among

Gods and among men. And as in the words akolouthos and akoitis the alpha

is substituted for an omicron, so the name Apollon is equivalent to omopolon;

only the second lambda is added in order to avoid the ill-omened sound of

destruction (apolon). Now the suspicion of this destructive power still haunts

the minds of some who do not consider the true value of the name, which, as

I was saying just now, has reference to all the powers of the God, who is the

single  one,  the  everdarting,  the  purifier,  the  mover  together  (aplous,  aei

Ballon, apolouon, omopolon). The name of the Muses and of music would

seem to be derived from their making philosophical enquiries (mosthai); and

Leto is called by this name, because she is such a gentle Goddess, and so

willing (ethelemon) to grant our requests; or her name may be Letho, as she

is often called by strangers--they seem to imply by it her amiability, and her

smooth and easy-going way of behaving. Artemis is named from her healthy

(artemes), well-ordered nature, and because of her love of virginity, perhaps

because  she  is  a  proficient  in  virtue  (arete),  and  perhaps  also  as  hating

intercourse of the sexes (ton aroton misesasa). He who gave the Goddess her

name may have had any or all of these reasons.


HERMOGENES: What is the meaning of Dionysus and Aphrodite?


SOCRATES:  Son  of  Hipponicus,  you  ask  a  solemn  question;  there  is  a

serious  and  also  a  facetious  explanation  of  both  these  names;  the  serious

explanation  is  not  to  be  had  from  me,  but  there  is  no  objection  to  your

hearing the facetious one; for the Gods too love a joke. Dionusos is simply

didous oinon (giver of wine), Didoinusos, as he might be called in fun,--and

oinos  is  properly  oionous,  because  wine  makes  those  who  drink,  think

(oiesthai) that they have a mind (noun) when they have none. The derivation

of  Aphrodite,  born  of  the  foam  (aphros),  may  be  fairly  accepted  on  the

authority of Hesiod.


HERMOGENES:  Still  there  remains  Athene,  whom  you,  Socrates,  as  an

Athenian, will surely not forget; there are also Hephaestus and Ares.


SOCRATES: I am not likely to forget them.HERMOGENES: No, indeed.


SOCRATES:  There  is  no  difficulty  in  explaining  the  other  appellation  of

Athene.


HERMOGENES: What other appellation?


SOCRATES: We call her Pallas.


HERMOGENES: To be sure.


SOCRATES: And we cannot be wrong in supposing that this is derived from

armed dances. For the elevation of oneself or anything else above the earth,

or by the use of the hands, we call shaking (pallein), or dancing.


HERMOGENES: That is quite true.


SOCRATES: Then that is the explanation of the name Pallas?


HERMOGENES: Yes; but what do you say of the other name?


SOCRATES: Athene?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES:  That  is  a  graver  matter,  and  there,  my  friend,  the  modern

interpreters  of  Homer  may,  I  think,  assist  in  explaining  the  view  of  the

ancients. For most of these in their explanations of the poet, assert that he

meant by Athene 'mind' (nous) and 'intelligence' (dianoia), and the maker of

names appears to have had a singular notion about her; and indeed calls her

by a still higher title, 'divine intelligence' (Thou noesis), as though he would

say:  This  is  she  who  has  the  mind  of  God  (Theonoa);--using  alpha  as  a

dialectical variety for eta, and taking away iota and sigma (There seems to be

some error in the MSS. The meaning is that the word theonoa = theounoa is a

curtailed form of theou noesis, but the omitted letters do not agree.). Perhaps,

however, the name Theonoe may mean 'she who knows divine things' (Theia

noousa) better than others. Nor shall we be far wrong in supposing that the

author of it wished to identify this Goddess with moral intelligence (en etheinoesin), and therefore gave her the name ethonoe; which, however, either he

or his successors have altered into what they thought a nicer form, and called

her Athene.


HERMOGENES: But what do you say of Hephaestus?


SOCRATES: Speak you of the princely lord of light (Phaeos istora)?


HERMOGENES: Surely.


SOCRATES: Ephaistos is Phaistos, and has added the eta by attraction; that

is obvious to anybody.


HERMOGENES: That is very probable, until some more probable notion

gets into your head.


SOCRATES: To prevent that, you had better ask what is the derivation of

Ares.


HERMOGENES: What is Ares?


SOCRATES: Ares may be called, if you will, from his manhood (arren) and

manliness, or if you please, from his hard and unchangeable nature, which is

the meaning of arratos: the latter is a derivation in every way appropriate to

the God of war.


HERMOGENES: Very true.


SOCRATES: And now, by the Gods, let us have no more of the Gods, for I

am afraid of them; ask about anything but them, and thou shalt see how the

steeds of Euthyphro can prance.


HERMOGENES: Only one more God! I should like to know about Hermes,

of whom I am said not to be a true son. Let us make him out, and then I shall

know whether there is any meaning in what Cratylus says.


SOCRATES: I should imagine that the name Hermes has to do with speech,

and signifies that he is the interpreter (ermeneus), or messenger, or thief, orliar, or bargainer; all that sort of thing has a great deal to do with language; as

I was telling you, the word eirein is expressive of the use of speech, and there

is an often-recurring Homeric word emesato, which means 'he contrived'--out

of these two words, eirein and mesasthai, the legislator formed the name of

the  God  who  invented  language  and  speech;  and  we  may  imagine  him

dictating to us the use of this name: 'O my friends,' says he to us, 'seeing that

he is the contriver of tales or speeches, you may rightly call him Eirhemes.'

And this has been improved by us, as we think, into Hermes. Iris also appears

to  have  been  called  from  the  verb  'to  tell'  (eirein),  because  she  was  a

messenger.


HERMOGENES: Then I am very sure that Cratylus was quite right in saying

that I was no true son of Hermes (Ermogenes), for I am not a good hand at

speeches.


SOCRATES: There is also reason, my friend, in Pan being the double-formed

son of Hermes.


HERMOGENES: How do you make that out?


SOCRATES: You are aware that speech signifies all things (pan), and is

always turning them round and round, and has two forms, true and false?


HERMOGENES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Is not the truth that is in him the smooth or sacred form which

dwells above among the Gods, whereas falsehood dwells among men below,

and is rough like the goat of tragedy; for tales and falsehoods have generally

to do with the tragic or goatish life, and tragedy is the place of them?


HERMOGENES: Very true.


SOCRATES: Then surely Pan, who is the declarer of all things (pan) and the

perpetual  mover  (aei  polon)  of  all  things,  is  rightly  called  aipolos  (goat-

herd), he being the two-formed son of Hermes, smooth in his upper part, and

rough and goatlike in his lower regions. And, as the son of Hermes, he is

speech or the brother of speech, and that brother should be like brother is nomarvel. But, as I was saying, my dear Hermogenes, let us get away from the

Gods.


HERMOGENES: From these sort of Gods, by all means, Socrates. But why

should  we  not  discuss  another  kind  of  Gods--the  sun,  moon,  stars,  earth,

aether, air, fire, water, the seasons, and the year?


SOCRATES: You impose a great many tasks upon me. Still, if you wish, I

will not refuse.


HERMOGENES: You will oblige me.


SOCRATES: How would you have me begin? Shall I take first of all him

whom you mentioned first--the sun?


HERMOGENES: Very good.


SOCRATES: The origin of the sun will probably be clearer in the Doric

form, for the Dorians call him alios, and this name is given to him because

when he rises he gathers (alizoi) men together or because he is always rolling

in his course (aei eilein ion) about the earth; or from aiolein, of which the

meaning is the same as poikillein (to variegate), because he variegates the

productions of the earth.


HERMOGENES: But what is selene (the moon)?


SOCRATES: That name is rather unfortunate for Anaxagoras.


HERMOGENES: How so?


SOCRATES: The word seems to forestall his recent discovery, that the moon

receives her light from the sun.


HERMOGENES: Why do you say so?


SOCRATES: The two words selas (brightness) and phos (light) have much

the same meaning?HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: This light about the moon is always new (neon) and always old

(enon), if the disciples of Anaxagoras say truly. For the sun in his revolution

always adds new light, and there is the old light of the previous month.


HERMOGENES: Very true.


SOCRATES: The moon is not unfrequently called selanaia.


HERMOGENES: True.


SOCRATES: And as she has a light which is always old and always new

(enon neon aei) she may very properly have the name selaenoneoaeia; and

this when hammered into shape becomes selanaia.


HERMOGENES: A real dithyrambic sort of name that, Socrates. But what do

you say of the month and the stars?


SOCRATES: Meis (month) is called from meiousthai (to lessen), because

suffering  diminution;  the  name  of  astra  (stars)  seems  to  be  derived  from

astrape, which is an improvement on anastrope, signifying the upsetting of

the eyes (anastrephein opa).


HERMOGENES: What do you say of pur (fire) and udor (water)?


SOCRATES: I am at a loss how to explain pur; either the muse of Euthyphro

has deserted me, or there is some very great difficulty in the word. Please,

however, to note the contrivance which I adopt whenever I am in a difficulty

of this sort.


HERMOGENES: What is it?


SOCRATES: I will tell you; but I should like to know first whether you can

tell me what is the meaning of the pur?


HERMOGENES: Indeed I cannot.SOCRATES: Shall I tell you what I suspect to be the true explanation of this

and several other words?--My belief is that they are of foreign origin. For the

Hellenes, especially those who were under the dominion of the barbarians,

often borrowed from them.


HERMOGENES: What is the inference?


SOCRATES: Why, you know that any one who seeks to demonstrate the

fitness of these names according to the Hellenic language, and not according

to the language from which the words are derived, is rather likely to be at

fault.


HERMOGENES: Yes, certainly.


SOCRATES:  Well  then,  consider  whether  this  pur  is  not  foreign;  for  the

word is not easily brought into relation with the Hellenic tongue, and the

Phrygians may be observed to have the same word slightly changed, just as

they have udor (water) and kunes (dogs), and many other words.


HERMOGENES: That is true.


SOCRATES: Any violent interpretations of the words should be avoided; for

something to say about them may easily be found. And thus I get rid of pur

and udor. Aer (air), Hermogenes, may be explained as the element which

raises (airei) things from the earth, or as ever flowing (aei rei), or because the

flux of the air is wind, and the poets call the winds 'air- blasts,' (aetai); he

who uses the term may mean, so to speak, air-flux (aetorroun), in the sense of

wind-flux (pneumatorroun); and because this moving wind may be expressed

by either term he employs the word air (aer = aetes rheo). Aither (aether) I

should interpret as aeitheer; this may be correctly said, because this element

is always running in a flux about the air (aei thei peri tou aera reon). The

meaning of the word ge (earth) comes out better when in the form of gaia, for

the earth may be truly called 'mother' (gaia, genneteira), as in the language of

Homer (Od.) gegaasi means gegennesthai.


HERMOGENES: Good.SOCRATES: What shall we take next?


HERMOGENES: There are orai (the seasons), and the two names of the year,

eniautos and etos.


SOCRATES: The orai should be spelt in the old Attic way, if you desire to

know the probable truth about them; they are rightly called the orai because

they divide (orizousin) the summers and winters and winds and the fruits of

the earth. The words eniautos and etos appear to be the same,-- 'that which

brings to light the plants and growths of the earth in their turn, and passes

them in review within itself (en eauto exetazei)': this is broken up into two

words, eniautos from en eauto, and etos from etazei, just as the original name

of Zeus was divided into Zena and Dia; and the whole proposition means that

his power of reviewing from within is one, but has two names, two words

etos and eniautos being thus formed out of a single proposition.


HERMOGENES: Indeed, Socrates, you make surprising progress.


SOCRATES: I am run away with.


HERMOGENES: Very true.


SOCRATES: But am not yet at my utmost speed.


HERMOGENES: I should like very much to know, in the next place, how

you would explain the virtues. What principle of correctness is there in those

charming words--wisdom, understanding, justice, and the rest of them?


SOCRATES: That is a tremendous class of names which you are disinterring;

still, as I have put on the lion's skin, I must not be faint of heart; and I

suppose  that  I  must  consider  the  meaning  of  wisdom  (phronesis)  and

understanding (sunesis), and judgment (gnome), and knowledge (episteme),

and all those other charming words, as you call them?


HERMOGENES:  Surely,  we  must  not  leave  off  until  we  find  out  their

meaning.


SOCRATES: By the dog of Egypt I have a not bad notion which came intomy head only this moment: I believe that the primeval givers of names were

undoubtedly like too many of our modern philosophers, who, in their search

after the nature of things, are always getting dizzy from constantly going

round and round, and then they imagine that the world is going round and

round and moving in all directions; and this appearance, which arises out of

their own internal condition, they suppose to be a reality of nature; they think

that there is nothing stable or permanent, but only flux and motion, and that

the  world  is  always  full  of  every  sort  of  motion  and  change.  The

consideration of the names which I mentioned has led me into making this

reflection.


HERMOGENES: How is that, Socrates?


SOCRATES: Perhaps you did not observe that in the names which have been

just cited, the motion or flux or generation of things is most surely indicated.


HERMOGENES: No, indeed, I never thought of it.


SOCRATES: Take the first of those which you mentioned; clearly that is a

name indicative of motion.


HERMOGENES: What was the name?


SOCRATES: Phronesis (wisdom), which may signify phoras kai rhou noesis

(perception of motion and flux), or perhaps phoras onesis (the blessing of

motion),  but  is  at  any  rate  connected  with  pheresthai  (motion);  gnome

(judgment),  again,  certainly  implies  the  ponderation  or  consideration

(nomesis) of generation, for to ponder is the same as to consider; or, if you

would rather, here is noesis, the very word just now mentioned, which is

neou esis (the desire of the new); the word neos implies that the world is

always in process of creation. The giver of the name wanted to express this

longing of the soul, for the original name was neoesis, and not noesis; but eta

took the place of a double epsilon. The word sophrosune is the salvation

(soteria) of that wisdom (phronesis) which we were just now considering.

Epioteme (knowledge) is akin to this, and indicates that the soul which is

good for anything follows (epetai) the motion of things, neither anticipating

them nor falling behind them; wherefore the word should rather be read asepistemene, inserting epsilon nu. Sunesis (understanding) may be regarded in

like manner as a kind of conclusion; the word is derived from sunienai (to go

along with), and, like epistasthai (to know), implies the progression of the

soul in company with the nature of things. Sophia (wisdom) is very dark, and

appears not to be of native growth; the meaning is, touching the motion or

stream of things. You must remember that the poets, when they speak of the

commencement of any rapid motion, often use the word esuthe (he rushed);

and there was a famous Lacedaemonian who was named Sous (Rush), for by

this  word  the  Lacedaemonians  signify  rapid  motion,  and  the  touching

(epaphe) of motion is expressed by sophia, for all things are supposed to be in

motion. Good (agathon) is the name which is given to the admirable (agasto)

in nature; for, although all things move, still there are degrees of motion;

some are swifter, some slower; but there are some things which are admirable

for  their  swiftness,  and  this  admirable  part  of  nature  is  called  agathon.

Dikaiosune (justice) is clearly dikaiou sunesis (understanding of the just); but

the actual word dikaion is more difficult: men are only agreed to a certain

extent about justice, and then they begin to disagree. For those who suppose

all things to be in motion conceive the greater part of nature to be a mere

receptacle;  and  they  say  that  there  is  a  penetrating  power  which  passes

through all this, and is the instrument of creation in all, and is the subtlest and

swiftest element; for if it were not the subtlest, and a power which none can

keep  out,  and  also  the  swiftest,  passing  by  other  things  as  if  they  were

standing still, it could not penetrate through the moving universe. And this

element,  which  superintends  all  things  and  pierces  (diaion)  all,  is  rightly

called dikaion; the letter k is only added for the sake of euphony. Thus far, as

I was saying, there is a general agreement about the nature of justice; but I,

Hermogenes, being an enthusiastic disciple, have been told in a mystery that

the justice of which I am speaking is also the cause of the world: now a cause

is  that  because  of  which  anything  is  created;  and  some  one  comes  and

whispers in my ear that justice is rightly so called because partaking of the

nature of the cause, and I begin, after hearing what he has said, to interrogate

him gently: 'Well, my excellent friend,' say I, 'but if all this be true, I still

want  to  know  what  is  justice.'  Thereupon  they  think  that  I  ask  tiresome

questions,  and  am  leaping  over  the  barriers,  and  have  been  already

sufficiently answered, and they try to satisfy me with one derivation after

another, and at length they quarrel. For one of them says that justice is the

sun, and that he only is the piercing (diaionta) and burning (kaonta) elementwhich is the guardian of nature. And when I joyfully repeat this beautiful

notion, I am answered by the satirical remark, 'What, is there no justice in the

world when the sun is down?' And when I earnestly beg my questioner to tell

me his own honest opinion, he says, 'Fire in the abstract'; but this is not very

intelligible. Another says, 'No, not fire in the abstract, but the abstraction of

heat in the fire.' Another man professes to laugh at all this, and says, as

Anaxagoras says, that justice is mind, for mind, as they say, has absolute

power, and mixes with nothing, and orders all things, and passes through all

things. At last, my friend, I find myself in far greater perplexity about the

nature of justice than I was before I began to learn. But still I am of opinion

that the name, which has led me into this digression, was given to justice for

the reasons which I have mentioned.


HERMOGENES: I think, Socrates, that you are not improvising now; you

must have heard this from some one else.


SOCRATES: And not the rest?


HERMOGENES: Hardly.


SOCRATES: Well, then, let me go on in the hope of making you believe in

the originality of the rest. What remains after justice? I do not think that we

have  as  yet  discussed  courage  (andreia),--injustice  (adikia),  which  is

obviously  nothing  more  than  a  hindrance  to  the  penetrating  principle

(diaiontos), need not be considered. Well, then, the name of andreia seems to

imply a battle;--this battle is in the world of existence, and according to the

doctrine of flux is only the counterflux (enantia rhon): if you extract the delta

from  andreia,  the  name  at  once  signifies  the  thing,  and  you  may  clearly

understand that andreia is not the stream opposed to every stream, but only to

that which is contrary to justice, for otherwise courage would not have been

praised.  The  words  arren  (male)  and  aner  (man)  also  contain  a  similar

allusion  to  the  same  principle  of  the  upward  flux  (te  ano  rhon).  Gune

(woman)  I  suspect  to  be  the  same  word  as  goun  (birth):  thelu  (female)

appears to be partly derived from thele (the teat), because the teat is like rain,

and makes things flourish (tethelenai).


HERMOGENES: That is surely probable.SOCRATES: Yes; and the very word thallein (to flourish) seems to figure the

growth of youth, which is swift and sudden ever. And this is expressed by the

legislator in the name, which is a compound of thein (running), and allesthai

(leaping). Pray observe how I gallop away when I get on smooth ground.

There are a good many names generally thought to be of importance, which

have still to be explained.


HERMOGENES: True.


SOCRATES: There is the meaning of the word techne (art), for example.


HERMOGENES: Very true.


SOCRATES:  That  may  be  identified  with  echonoe,  and  expresses  the

possession  of  mind:  you  have  only  to  take  away  the  tau  and  insert  two

omichrons, one between the chi and nu, and another between the nu and eta.


HERMOGENES: That is a very shabby etymology.


SOCRATES: Yes, my dear friend; but then you know that the original names

have been long ago buried and disguised by people sticking on and stripping

off letters for the sake of euphony, and twisting and bedizening them in all

sorts of ways: and time too may have had a share in the change. Take, for

example, the word katoptron; why is the letter rho inserted? This must surely

be the addition of some one who cares nothing about the truth, but thinks

only of putting the mouth into shape. And the additions are often such that at

last no human being can possibly make out the original meaning of the word.

Another example is the word sphigx, sphiggos, which ought properly to be

phigx, phiggos, and there are other examples.


HERMOGENES: That is quite true, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And yet, if you are permitted to put in and pull out any letters

which you please, names will be too easily made, and any name may be

adapted to any object.


HERMOGENES: True.SOCRATES: Yes, that is true. And therefore a wise dictator, like yourself,

should observe the laws of moderation and probability.


HERMOGENES: Such is my desire.


SOCRATES:  And  mine,  too,  Hermogenes.  But  do  not  be  too  much  of  a

precisian, or 'you will unnerve me of my strength (Iliad.).' When you have

allowed me to add mechane (contrivance) to techne (art) I shall be at the top

of my bent, for I conceive mechane to be a sign of great accomplishment --

anein; for mekos has the meaning of greatness, and these two, mekos and

anein, make up the word mechane. But, as I was saying, being now at the top

of my bent, I should like to consider the meaning of the two words arete

(virtue)  and  kakia  (vice);  arete  I  do  not  as  yet  understand,  but  kakia  is

transparent,  and  agrees  with  the  principles  which  preceded,  for  all  things

being in a flux (ionton), kakia is kakos ion (going badly); and this evil motion

when existing in the soul has the general name of kakia, or vice, specially

appropriated to it. The meaning of kakos ienai may be further illustrated by

the use of deilia (cowardice), which ought to have come after andreia, but

was forgotten, and, as I fear, is not the only word which has been passed

over. Deilia signifies that the soul is bound with a strong chain (desmos), for

lian means strength, and therefore deilia expresses the greatest and strongest

bond of the soul; and aporia (difficulty) is an evil of the same nature (from a

(alpha) not, and poreuesthai to go), like anything else which is an impediment

to motion and movement. Then the word kakia appears to mean kakos ienai,

or going badly, or limping and halting; of which the consequence is, that the

soul becomes filled with vice. And if kakia is the name of this sort of thing,

arete will be the opposite of it, signifying in the first place ease of motion,

then that the stream of the good soul is unimpeded, and has therefore the

attribute  of  ever  flowing  without  let  or  hindrance,  and  is  therefore  called

arete, or, more correctly, aeireite (ever-flowing), and may perhaps have had

another form, airete (eligible), indicating that nothing is more eligible than

virtue, and this has been hammered into arete. I daresay that you will deem

this to be another invention of mine, but I think that if the previous word

kakia was right, then arete is also right.


HERMOGENES: But what is the meaning of kakon, which has played so

great a part in your previous discourse?SOCRATES: That is a very singular word about which I can hardly form an

opinion, and therefore I must have recourse to my ingenious device.


HERMOGENES: What device?


SOCRATES: The device of a foreign origin, which I shall give to this word

also.


HERMOGENES: Very likely you are right; but suppose that we leave these

words and endeavour to see the rationale of kalon and aischron.


SOCRATES: The meaning of aischron is evident, being only aei ischon roes

(always preventing from flowing), and this is in accordance with our former

derivations. For the name-giver was a great enemy to stagnation of all sorts,

and hence he gave the name aeischoroun to that which hindered the flux (aei

ischon roun), and that is now beaten together into aischron.


HERMOGENES: But what do you say of kalon?


SOCRATES: That is more obscure; yet the form is only due to the quantity,

and has been changed by altering omicron upsilon into omicron.


HERMOGENES: What do you mean?


SOCRATES: This name appears to denote mind.


HERMOGENES: How so?


SOCRATES: Let me ask you what is the cause why anything has a name; is

not the principle which imposes the name the cause?


HERMOGENES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And must not this be the mind of Gods, or of men, or of both?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Is not mind that which called (kalesan) things by their names,and is not mind the beautiful (kalon)?


HERMOGENES: That is evident.


SOCRATES:  And  are  not  the  works  of  intelligence  and  mind  worthy  of

praise, and are not other works worthy of blame?


HERMOGENES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Physic does the work of a physician, and carpentering does the

works of a carpenter?


HERMOGENES: Exactly.


SOCRATES: And the principle of beauty does the works of beauty?


HERMOGENES: Of course.


SOCRATES: And that principle we affirm to be mind?


HERMOGENES: Very true.


SOCRATES: Then mind is rightly called beauty because she does the works

which we recognize and speak of as the beautiful?


HERMOGENES: That is evident.


SOCRATES: What more names remain to us?


HERMOGENES: There are the words which are connected with agathon and

kalon, such as sumpheron and lusiteloun, ophelimon, kerdaleon, and their

opposites.


SOCRATES: The meaning of sumpheron (expedient) I think that you may

discover for yourself by the light of the previous examples,--for it is a sister

word to episteme, meaning just the motion (pora) of the soul accompanying

the world, and things which are done upon this principle are called sumphora

or sumpheronta, because they are carried round with the world.HERMOGENES: That is probable.


SOCRATES: Again, cherdaleon (gainful) is called from cherdos (gain), but

you must alter the delta into nu if you want to get at the meaning; for this

word also signifies good, but in another way; he who gave the name intended

to express the power of admixture (kerannumenon) and universal penetration

in the good; in forming the word, however, he inserted a delta instead of a nu,

and so made kerdos.


HERMOGENES: Well, but what is lusiteloun (profitable)?


SOCRATES:  I  suppose,  Hermogenes,  that  people  do  not  mean  by  the

profitable the gainful or that which pays (luei) the retailer, but they use the

word in the sense of swift. You regard the profitable (lusiteloun), as that

which being the swiftest thing in existence, allows of no stay in things and no

pause or end of motion, but always, if there begins to be any end, lets things

go again (luei), and makes motion immortal and unceasing: and in this point

of view, as appears to me, the good is happily denominated lusiteloun--being

that  which  looses  (luon)  the  end  (telos)  of  motion.  Ophelimon  (the

advantageous)  is  derived  from  ophellein,  meaning  that  which  creates  and

increases; this latter is a common Homeric word, and has a foreign character.


HERMOGENES: And what do you say of their opposites?


SOCRATES: Of such as are mere negatives I hardly think that I need speak.


HERMOGENES: Which are they?


SOCRATES:  The  words  axumphoron  (inexpedient),  anopheles

(unprofitable), alusiteles (unadvantageous), akerdes (ungainful).


HERMOGENES: True.


SOCRATES: I would rather take the words blaberon (harmful), zemiodes

(hurtful).


HERMOGENES: Good.SOCRATES:  The  word  blaberon  is  that  which  is  said  to  hinder  or  harm

(blaptein) the stream (roun); blapton is boulomenon aptein (seeking to hold or

bind); for aptein is the same as dein, and dein is always a term of censure;

boulomenon  aptein  roun  (wanting  to  bind  the  stream)  would  properly  be

boulapteroun, and this, as I imagine, is improved into blaberon.


HERMOGENES:  You  bring  out  curious  results,  Socrates,  in  the  use  of

names; and when I hear the word boulapteroun I cannot help imagining that

you are making your mouth into a flute, and puffing away at some prelude to

Athene.


SOCRATES: That is the fault of the makers of the name, Hermogenes; not

mine.


HERMOGENES: Very true; but what is the derivation of zemiodes?


SOCRATES:  What  is  the  meaning  of  zemiodes?--let  me  remark,

Hermogenes, how right I was in saying that great changes are made in the

meaning of words by putting in and pulling out letters; even a very slight

permutation will sometimes give an entirely opposite sense; I may instance

the word deon, which occurs to me at the moment, and reminds me of what I

was going to say to you, that the fine fashionable language of modern times

has twisted and disguised and entirely altered the original meaning both of

deon, and also of zemiodes, which in the old language is clearly indicated.


HERMOGENES: What do you mean?


SOCRATES: I will try to explain. You are aware that our forefathers loved

the sounds iota and delta, especially the women, who are most conservative

of the ancient language, but now they change iota into eta or epsilon, and

delta into zeta; this is supposed to increase the grandeur of the sound.


HERMOGENES: How do you mean?


SOCRATES: For example, in very ancient times they called the day either

imera or emera (short e), which is called by us emera (long e).HERMOGENES: That is true.


SOCRATES: Do you observe that only the ancient form shows the intention

of the giver of the name? of which the reason is, that men long for (imeirousi)

and love the light which comes after the darkness, and is therefore called

imera, from imeros, desire.


HERMOGENES: Clearly.


SOCRATES:  But  now  the  name  is  so  travestied  that  you  cannot  tell  the

meaning, although there are some who imagine the day to be called emera

because it makes things gentle (emera different accents).


HERMOGENES: Such is my view.


SOCRATES: And do you know that the ancients said duogon and not zugon?


HERMOGENES: They did so.


SOCRATES: And zugon (yoke) has no meaning,--it ought to be duogon,

which  word  expresses  the  binding  of  two  together  (duein  agoge)  for  the

purpose of drawing;--this has been changed into zugon, and there are many

other examples of similar changes.


HERMOGENES: There are.


SOCRATES: Proceeding in the same train of thought I may remark that the

word deon (obligation) has a meaning which is the opposite of all the other

appellations of good; for deon is here a species of good, and is, nevertheless,

the  chain  (desmos)  or  hinderer  of  motion,  and  therefore  own  brother  of

blaberon.


HERMOGENES: Yes, Socrates; that is quite plain.


SOCRATES: Not if you restore the ancient form, which is more likely to be

the correct one, and read dion instead of deon; if you convert the epsilon into

an  iota  after  the  old  fashion,  this  word  will  then  agree  with  other  words

meaning good; for dion, not deon, signifies the good, and is a term of praise;and the author of names has not contradicted himself, but in all these various

appellations,  deon  (obligatory),  ophelimon  (advantageous),  lusiteloun

(profitable),  kerdaleon  (gainful),  agathon  (good),  sumpheron  (expedient),

euporon (plenteous), the same conception is implied of the ordering or all-

pervading  principle  which  is  praised,  and  the  restraining  and  binding

principle  which  is  censured.  And  this  is  further  illustrated  by  the  word

zemiodes (hurtful), which if the zeta is only changed into delta as in the

ancient language, becomes demiodes; and this name, as you will perceive, is

given to that which binds motion (dounti ion).


HERMOGENES:  What  do  you  say  of  edone  (pleasure),  lupe  (pain),

epithumia (desire), and the like, Socrates?


SOCRATES: I do not think, Hermogenes, that there is any great difficulty

about them--edone is e (eta) onesis, the action which tends to advantage; and

the  original  form  may  be  supposed  to  have  been  eone,  but  this  has  been

altered by the insertion of the delta. Lupe appears to be derived from the

relaxation (luein) which the body feels when in sorrow; ania (trouble) is the

hindrance  of  motion  (alpha  and  ienai);  algedon  (distress),  if  I  am  not

mistaken, is a foreign word, which is derived from aleinos (grievous); odune

(grief) is called from the putting on (endusis) sorrow; in achthedon (vexation)

'the word too labours,' as any one may see; chara (joy) is the very expression

of the fluency and diffusion of the soul (cheo); terpsis (delight) is so called

from the pleasure creeping (erpon) through the soul, which may be likened to

a breath (pnoe) and is properly erpnoun, but has been altered by time into

terpnon; eupherosune (cheerfulness) and epithumia explain themselves; the

former, which ought to be eupherosune and has been changed euphrosune, is

named, as every one may see, from the soul moving (pheresthai) in harmony

with nature; epithumia is really e epi ton thumon iousa dunamis, the power

which  enters  into  the  soul;  thumos  (passion)  is  called  from  the  rushing

(thuseos) and boiling of the soul; imeros (desire) denotes the stream (rous)

which most draws the soul dia ten esin tes roes-- because flowing with desire

(iemenos), and expresses a longing after things and violent attraction of the

soul  to  them,  and  is  termed  imeros  from  possessing  this  power;  pothos

(longing) is expressive of the desire of that which is not present but absent,

and in another place (pou); this is the reason why the name pothos is applied

to  things  absent,  as  imeros  is  to  things  present;  eros  (love)  is  so  calledbecause flowing in (esron) from without; the stream is not inherent, but is an

influence introduced through the eyes, and from flowing in was called esros

(influx) in the old time when they used omicron for omega, and is called eros,

now that omega is substituted for omicron. But why do you not give me

another word?


HERMOGENES: What do you think of doxa (opinion), and that class of

words?


SOCRATES: Doxa is either derived from dioxis (pursuit), and expresses the

march of the soul in the pursuit of knowledge, or from the shooting of a bow

(toxon); the latter is more likely, and is confirmed by oiesis (thinking), which

is only oisis (moving), and implies the movement of the soul to the essential

nature of each thing--just as boule (counsel) has to do with shooting (bole);

and boulesthai (to wish) combines the notion of aiming and deliberating--all

these words seem to follow doxa, and all involve the idea of shooting, just as

aboulia, absence of counsel, on the other hand, is a mishap, or missing, or

mistaking of the mark, or aim, or proposal, or object.


HERMOGENES: You are quickening your pace now, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Why yes, the end I now dedicate to God, not, however, until I

have explained anagke (necessity), which ought to come next, and ekousion

(the voluntary). Ekousion is certainly the yielding (eikon) and unresisting--

the notion implied is yielding and not opposing, yielding, as I was just now

saying, to that motion which is in accordance with our will; but the necessary

and resistant being contrary to our will, implies error and ignorance; the idea

is taken from walking through a ravine which is impassable, and rugged, and

overgrown,  and  impedes  motion--and  this  is  the  derivation  of  the  word

anagkaion (necessary) an agke ion, going through a ravine. But while my

strength lasts let us persevere, and I hope that you will persevere with your

questions.


HERMOGENES: Well, then, let me ask about the greatest and noblest, such

as aletheia (truth) and pseudos (falsehood) and on (being), not forgetting to

enquire why the word onoma (name), which is the theme of our discussion,

has this name of onoma.SOCRATES: You know the word maiesthai (to seek)?


HERMOGENES: Yes;--meaning the same as zetein (to enquire).


SOCRATES:  The  word  onoma  seems  to  be  a  compressed  sentence,

signifying on ou zetema (being for which there is a search); as is still more

obvious  in  onomaston  (notable),  which  states  in  so  many  words  that  real

existence is that for which there is a seeking (on ou masma); aletheia is also

an agglomeration of theia ale (divine wandering), implying the divine motion

of existence; pseudos (falsehood) is the opposite of motion; here is another ill

name  given  by  the  legislator  to  stagnation  and  forced  inaction,  which  he

compares to sleep (eudein); but the original meaning of the word is disguised

by the addition of psi; on and ousia are ion with an iota broken off; this

agrees with the true principle, for being (on) is also moving (ion), and the

same may be said of not being, which is likewise called not going (oukion or

ouki on = ouk ion).


HERMOGENES: You have hammered away at them manfully; but suppose

that some one were to say to you, what is the word ion, and what are reon and

doun?-- show me their fitness.


SOCRATES: You mean to say, how should I answer him?


HERMOGENES: Yes.


SOCRATES:  One  way  of  giving  the  appearance  of  an  answer  has  been

already suggested.


HERMOGENES: What way?


SOCRATES: To say that names which we do not understand are of foreign

origin; and this is very likely the right answer, and something of this kind

may be true of them; but also the original forms of words may have been lost

in the lapse of ages; names have been so twisted in all manner of ways, that I

should not be surprised if the old language when compared with that now in

use would appear to us to be a barbarous tongue.HERMOGENES: Very likely.


SOCRATES:  Yes,  very  likely.  But  still  the  enquiry  demands  our  earnest

attention and we must not flinch. For we should remember, that if a person go

on analysing names into words, and enquiring also into the elements out of

which the words are formed, and keeps on always repeating this process, he

who has to answer him must at last give up the enquiry in despair.


HERMOGENES: Very true.


SOCRATES:  And  at  what  point  ought  he  to  lose  heart  and  give  up  the

enquiry?  Must  he  not  stop  when  he  comes  to  the  names  which  are  the

elements of all other names and sentences; for these cannot be supposed to be

made up of other names? The word agathon (good), for example, is, as we

were  saying,  a  compound  of  agastos  (admirable)  and  thoos  (swift).  And

probably thoos is made up of other elements, and these again of others. But if

we take a word which is incapable of further resolution, then we shall be right

in saying that we have at last reached a primary element, which need not be

resolved any further.


HERMOGENES: I believe you to be in the right.


SOCRATES:  And  suppose  the  names  about  which  you  are  now  asking

should  turn  out  to  be  primary  elements,  must  not  their  truth  or  law  be

examined according to some new method?


HERMOGENES: Very likely.


SOCRATES: Quite so, Hermogenes; all that has preceded would lead to this

conclusion. And if, as I think, the conclusion is true, then I shall again say to

you, come and help me, that I may not fall into some absurdity in stating the

principle of primary names.


HERMOGENES: Let me hear, and I will do my best to assist you.


SOCRATES: I think that you will acknowledge with me, that one principle is

applicable  to  all  names,  primary  as  well  as  secondary--when  they  areregarded simply as names, there is no difference in them.


HERMOGENES: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: All the names that we have been explaining were intended to

indicate the nature of things.


HERMOGENES: Of course.


SOCRATES: And that this is true of the primary quite as much as of the

secondary names, is implied in their being names.


HERMOGENES: Surely.


SOCRATES: But the secondary, as I conceive, derive their significance from

the primary.


HERMOGENES: That is evident.


SOCRATES: Very good; but then how do the primary names which precede

analysis show the natures of things, as far as they can be shown; which they

must do, if they are to be real names? And here I will ask you a question:

Suppose that we had no voice or tongue, and wanted to communicate with

one another, should we not, like the deaf and dumb, make signs with the

hands and head and the rest of the body?


HERMOGENES: There would be no choice, Socrates.


SOCRATES: We should imitate the nature of the thing; the elevation of our

hands  to  heaven  would  mean  lightness  and  upwardness;  heaviness  and

downwardness would be expressed by letting them drop to the ground; if we

were describing the running of a horse, or any other animal, we should make

our bodies and their gestures as like as we could to them.


HERMOGENES: I do not see that we could do anything else.


SOCRATES: We could not; for by bodily imitation only can the body ever

express anything.HERMOGENES: Very true.


SOCRATES: And when we want to express ourselves, either with the voice,

or tongue, or mouth, the expression is simply their imitation of that which we

want to express.


HERMOGENES: It must be so, I think.


SOCRATES:  Then  a  name  is  a  vocal  imitation  of  that  which  the  vocal

imitator names or imitates?


HERMOGENES: I think so.


SOCRATES:  Nay,  my  friend,  I  am  disposed  to  think  that  we  have  not

reached the truth as yet.


HERMOGENES: Why not?


SOCRATES: Because if we have we shall be obliged to admit that the people

who imitate sheep, or cocks, or other animals, name that which they imitate.


HERMOGENES: Quite true.


SOCRATES: Then could I have been right in what I was saying?


HERMOGENES:  In  my  opinion,  no.  But  I  wish  that  you  would  tell  me,

Socrates, what sort of an imitation is a name?


SOCRATES:  In  the  first  place,  I  should  reply,  not  a  musical  imitation,

although that is also vocal; nor, again, an imitation of what music imitates;

these,  in  my  judgment,  would  not  be  naming.  Let  me  put  the  matter  as

follows: All objects have sound and figure, and many have colour?


HERMOGENES: Certainly.


SOCRATES:  But  the  art  of  naming  appears  not  to  be  concerned  with

imitations of this kind; the arts which have to do with them are music and

drawing?HERMOGENES: True.


SOCRATES: Again, is there not an essence of each thing, just as there is a

colour, or sound? And is there not an essence of colour and sound as well as

of anything else which may be said to have an essence?


HERMOGENES: I should think so.


SOCRATES: Well, and if any one could express the essence of each thing in

letters and syllables, would he not express the nature of each thing?


HERMOGENES: Quite so.


SOCRATES: The musician and the painter were the two names which you

gave to the two other imitators. What will this imitator be called?


HERMOGENES: I imagine, Socrates, that he must be the namer, or name-

giver, of whom we are in search.


SOCRATES: If this is true, then I think that we are in a condition to consider

the names ron (stream), ienai (to go), schesis (retention), about which you

were asking; and we may see whether the namer has grasped the nature of

them in letters and syllables in such a manner as to imitate the essence or not.


HERMOGENES: Very good.


SOCRATES: But are these the only primary names, or are there others?


HERMOGENES: There must be others.


SOCRATES: So I should expect. But how shall we further analyse them, and

where does the imitator begin? Imitation of the essence is made by syllables

and letters; ought we not, therefore, first to separate the letters, just as those

who are beginning rhythm first distinguish the powers of elementary, and

then of compound sounds, and when they have done so, but not before, they

proceed to the consideration of rhythms?


HERMOGENES: Yes.SOCRATES: Must we not begin in the same way with letters; first separating

the  vowels,  and  then  the  consonants  and  mutes  (letters  which  are  neither

vowels nor semivowels), into classes, according to the received distinctions

of the learned; also the semivowels, which are neither vowels, nor yet mutes;

and distinguishing into classes the vowels themselves? And when we have

perfected  the  classification  of  things,  we  shall  give  them  names,  and  see

whether, as in the case of letters, there are any classes to which they may be

all referred (cf. Phaedrus); and hence we shall see their natures, and see, too,

whether they have in them classes as there are in the letters; and when we

have well considered all this, we shall know how to apply them to what they

resemble--whether one letter is used to denote one thing, or whether there is

to be an admixture of several of them; just, as in painting, the painter who

wants to depict anything sometimes uses purple only, or any other colour,

and sometimes mixes up several colours, as his method is when he has to

paint flesh colour or anything of that kind--he uses his colours as his figures

appear to require them; and so, too, we shall apply letters to the expression of

objects, either single letters when required, or several letters; and so we shall

form syllables, as they are called, and from syllables make nouns and verbs;

and  thus,  at  last,  from  the  combinations  of  nouns  and  verbs  arrive  at

language, large and fair and whole; and as the painter made a figure, even so

shall we make speech by the art of the namer or the rhetorician, or by some

other art. Not that I am literally speaking of ourselves, but I was carried

away--  meaning  to  say  that  this  was  the  way  in  which  (not  we  but)  the

ancients formed language, and what they put together we must take to pieces

in like manner, if we are to attain a scientific view of the whole subject, and

we must see whether the primary, and also whether the secondary elements

are rightly given or not, for if they are not, the composition of them, my dear

Hermogenes, will be a sorry piece of work, and in the wrong direction.


HERMOGENES: That, Socrates, I can quite believe.


SOCRATES: Well, but do you suppose that you will be able to analyse them

in this way? for I am certain that I should not.


HERMOGENES: Much less am I likely to be able.


SOCRATES: Shall we leave them, then? or shall we seek to discover, if wecan, something about them, according to the measure of our ability, saying by

way of preface, as I said before of the Gods, that of the truth about them we

know  nothing,  and  do  but  entertain  human  notions  of  them.  And  in  this

present enquiry, let us say to ourselves, before we proceed, that the higher

method is the one which we or others who would analyse language to any

good purpose must follow; but under the circumstances, as men say, we must

do as well as we can. What do you think?


HERMOGENES: I very much approve.


SOCRATES: That objects should be imitated in letters and syllables, and so

find  expression,  may  appear  ridiculous,  Hermogenes,  but  it  cannot  be

avoided--there is no better principle to which we can look for the truth of first

names. Deprived of this, we must have recourse to divine help, like the tragic

poets, who in any perplexity have their gods waiting in the air; and must get

out of our difficulty in like fashion, by saying that 'the Gods gave the first

names, and therefore they are right.' This will be the best contrivance, or

perhaps that other notion may be even better still, of deriving them from

some barbarous people, for the barbarians are older than we are; or we may

say that antiquity has cast a veil over them, which is the same sort of excuse

as the last; for all these are not reasons but only ingenious excuses for having

no reasons concerning the truth of words. And yet any sort of ignorance of

first or primitive names involves an ignorance of secondary words; for they

can only be explained by the primary. Clearly then the professor of languages

should be able to give a very lucid explanation of first names, or let him be

assured he will only talk nonsense about the rest. Do you not suppose this to

be true?


HERMOGENES: Certainly, Socrates.


SOCRATES: My first notions of original names are truly wild and ridiculous,

though I have no objection to impart them to you if you desire, and I hope

that you will communicate to me in return anything better which you may

have.


HERMOGENES: Fear not; I will do my best.SOCRATES: In the first place, the letter rho appears to me to be the general

instrument expressing all motion (kinesis). But I have not yet explained the

meaning of this latter word, which is just iesis (going); for the letter eta was

not in use among the ancients, who only employed epsilon; and the root is

kiein, which is a foreign form, the same as ienai. And the old word kinesis

will be correctly given as iesis in corresponding modern letters. Assuming

this  foreign  root  kiein,  and  allowing  for  the  change  of  the  eta  and  the

insertion of the nu, we have kinesis, which should have been kieinsis or eisis;

and stasis is the negative of ienai (or eisis), and has been improved into stasis.

Now the letter rho, as I was saying, appeared to the imposer of names an

excellent instrument for the expression of motion; and he frequently uses the

letter  for  this  purpose:  for  example,  in  the  actual  words  rein  and  roe  he

represents  motion  by  rho;  also  in  the  words  tromos  (trembling),  trachus

(rugged);  and  again,  in  words  such  as  krouein  (strike),  thrauein  (crush),

ereikein (bruise), thruptein (break), kermatixein (crumble), rumbein (whirl):

of all these sorts of movements he generally finds an expression in the letter

R, because, as I imagine, he had observed that the tongue was most agitated

and least at rest in the pronunciation of this letter, which he therefore used in

order to express motion, just as by the letter iota he expresses the subtle

elements which pass through all things. This is why he uses the letter iota as

imitative of motion, ienai, iesthai. And there is another class of letters, phi,

psi,  sigma,  and  xi,  of  which  the  pronunciation  is  accompanied  by  great

expenditure  of  breath;  these  are  used  in  the  imitation  of  such  notions  as

psuchron  (shivering),  xeon  (seething),  seiesthai,  (to  be  shaken),  seismos

(shock), and are always introduced by the giver of names when he wants to

imitate what is phusodes (windy). He seems to have thought that the closing

and pressure of the tongue in the utterance of delta and tau was expressive of

binding  and  rest  in  a  place:  he  further  observed  the  liquid  movement  of

lambda, in the pronunciation of which the tongue slips, and in this he found

the expression of smoothness, as in leios (level), and in the word oliothanein

(to slip) itself, liparon (sleek), in the word kollodes (gluey), and the like: the

heavier sound of gamma detained the slipping tongue, and the union of the

two gave the notion of a glutinous clammy nature, as in glischros, glukus,

gloiodes. The nu he observed to be sounded from within, and therefore to

have a notion of inwardness; hence he introduced the sound in endos and

entos: alpha he assigned to the expression of size, and nu of length, because

they are great letters: omicron was the sign of roundness, and therefore thereis plenty of omicron mixed up in the word goggulon (round). Thus did the

legislator, reducing all things into letters and syllables, and impressing on

them  names  and  signs,  and  out  of  them  by  imitation  compounding  other

signs. That is my view, Hermogenes, of the truth of names; but I should like

to hear what Cratylus has more to say.


HERMOGENES:  But,  Socrates,  as  I  was  telling  you  before,  Cratylus

mystifies me; he says that there is a fitness of names, but he never explains

what is this fitness, so that I cannot tell whether his obscurity is intended or

not. Tell me now, Cratylus, here in the presence of Socrates, do you agree in

what Socrates has been saying about names, or have you something better of

your own? and if you have, tell me what your view is, and then you will

either learn of Socrates, or Socrates and I will learn of you.


CRATYLUS: Well, but surely, Hermogenes, you do not suppose that you can

learn, or I explain, any subject of importance all in a moment; at any rate, not

such a subject as language, which is, perhaps, the very greatest of all.


HERMOGENES: No, indeed; but, as Hesiod says, and I agree with him, 'to

add little to little' is worth while. And, therefore, if you think that you can add

anything at all, however small, to our knowledge, take a little trouble and

oblige Socrates, and me too, who certainly have a claim upon you.


SOCRATES:  I  am  by  no  means  positive,  Cratylus,  in  the  view  which

Hermogenes and myself have worked out; and therefore do not hesitate to say

what you think, which if it be better than my own view I shall gladly accept.

And I should not be at all surprized to find that you have found some better

notion.  For  you  have  evidently  reflected  on  these  matters  and  have  had

teachers, and if you have really a better theory of the truth of names, you may

count me in the number of your disciples.


CRATYLUS: You are right, Socrates, in saying that I have made a study of

these matters, and I might possibly convert you into a disciple. But I fear that

the opposite is more probable, and I already find myself moved to say to you

what Achilles in the 'Prayers' says to Ajax,--


'Illustrious Ajax, son of Telamon, lord of the people, You appear to havespoken in all things much to my mind.'


And you, Socrates, appear to me to be an oracle, and to give answers much to

my mind, whether you are inspired by Euthyphro, or whether some Muse

may have long been an inhabitant of your breast, unconsciously to yourself.


SOCRATES: Excellent Cratylus, I have long been wondering at my own

wisdom; I cannot trust myself. And I think that I ought to stop and ask myself

What am I saying? for there is nothing worse than self-deception--when the

deceiver  is  always  at  home  and  always  with  you--it  is  quite  terrible,  and

therefore I ought often to retrace my steps and endeavour to 'look fore and

aft,' in the words of the aforesaid Homer. And now let me see; where are we?

Have we not been saying that the correct name indicates the nature of the

thing:--has this proposition been sufficiently proven?


CRATYLUS: Yes, Socrates, what you say, as I am disposed to think, is quite

true.


SOCRATES: Names, then, are given in order to instruct?


CRATYLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And naming is an art, and has artificers?


CRATYLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And who are they?


CRATYLUS: The legislators, of whom you spoke at first.


SOCRATES: And does this art grow up among men like other arts? Let me

explain what I mean: of painters, some are better and some worse?


CRATYLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: The better painters execute their works, I mean their figures,

better, and the worse execute them worse; and of builders also, the better sort

build fairer houses, and the worse build them worse.CRATYLUS: True.


SOCRATES: And among legislators, there are some who do their work better

and some worse?


CRATYLUS: No; there I do not agree with you.


SOCRATES: Then you do not think that some laws are better and others

worse?


CRATYLUS: No, indeed.


SOCRATES: Or that one name is better than another?


CRATYLUS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: Then all names are rightly imposed?


CRATYLUS: Yes, if they are names at all.


SOCRATES: Well, what do you say to the name of our friend Hermogenes,

which was mentioned before:--assuming that he has nothing of the nature of

Hermes in him, shall we say that this is a wrong name, or not his name at all?


CRATYLUS: I should reply that Hermogenes is not his name at all, but only

appears to be his, and is really the name of somebody else, who has the

nature which corresponds to it.


SOCRATES: And if a man were to call him Hermogenes, would he not be

even speaking falsely? For there may be a doubt whether you can call him

Hermogenes, if he is not.


CRATYLUS: What do you mean?


SOCRATES: Are you maintaining that falsehood is impossible? For if this is

your meaning I should answer, that there have been plenty of liars in all ages.


CRATYLUS: Why, Socrates, how can a man say that which is not?--saysomething and yet say nothing? For is not falsehood saying the thing which is

not?


SOCRATES: Your argument, friend, is too subtle for a man of my age. But I

should like to know whether you are one of those philosophers who think that

falsehood may be spoken but not said?


CRATYLUS: Neither spoken nor said.


SOCRATES: Nor uttered nor addressed? For example: If a person, saluting

you in a foreign country, were to take your hand and say: 'Hail, Athenian

stranger, Hermogenes, son of Smicrion'--these words, whether spoken, said,

uttered, or addressed, would have no application to you but only to our friend

Hermogenes, or perhaps to nobody at all?


CRATYLUS: In my opinion, Socrates, the speaker would only be talking

nonsense.


SOCRATES: Well, but that will be quite enough for me, if you will tell me

whether the nonsense would be true or false, or partly true and partly false:--

which is all that I want to know.


CRATYLUS: I should say that he would be putting himself in motion to no

purpose; and that his words would be an unmeaning sound like the noise of

hammering at a brazen pot.


SOCRATES: But let us see, Cratylus, whether we cannot find a meeting-

point, for you would admit that the name is not the same with the thing

named?


CRATYLUS: I should.


SOCRATES:  And  would  you  further  acknowledge  that  the  name  is  an

imitation of the thing?


CRATYLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And you would say that pictures are also imitations of things,but in another way?


CRATYLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: I believe you may be right, but I do not rightly understand you.

Please to say, then, whether both sorts of imitation (I mean both pictures or

words) are not equally attributable and applicable to the things of which they

are the imitation.


CRATYLUS: They are.


SOCRATES: First look at the matter thus: you may attribute the likeness of

the man to the man, and of the woman to the woman; and so on?


CRATYLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And conversely you may attribute the likeness of the man to

the woman, and of the woman to the man?


CRATYLUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: And are both modes of assigning them right, or only the first?


CRATYLUS: Only the first.


SOCRATES: That is to say, the mode of assignment which attributes to each

that which belongs to them and is like them?


CRATYLUS: That is my view.


SOCRATES: Now then, as I am desirous that we being friends should have a

good understanding about the argument, let me state my view to you: the first

mode of assignment, whether applied to figures or to names, I call right, and

when applied to names only, true as well as right; and the other mode of

giving and assigning the name which is unlike, I call wrong, and in the case

of names, false as well as wrong.


CRATYLUS: That may be true, Socrates, in the case of pictures; they may bewrongly assigned; but not in the case of names--they must be always right.


SOCRATES: Why, what is the difference? May I not go to a man and say to

him, 'This is your picture,' showing him his own likeness, or perhaps the

likeness of a woman; and when I say 'show,' I mean bring before the sense of

sight.


CRATYLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And may I not go to him again, and say, 'This is your name'?--

for the name, like the picture, is an imitation. May I not say to him-- 'This is

your name'? and may I not then bring to his sense of hearing the imitation of

himself, when I say, 'This is a man'; or of a female of the human species,

when  I  say,  'This  is  a  woman,'  as  the  case  may  be?  Is  not  all  that  quite

possible?


CRATYLUS: I would fain agree with you, Socrates; and therefore I say,

Granted.


SOCRATES: That is very good of you, if I am right, which need hardly be

disputed at present. But if I can assign names as well as pictures to objects,

the right assignment of them we may call truth, and the wrong assignment of

them falsehood. Now if there be such a wrong assignment of names, there

may also be a wrong or inappropriate assignment of verbs; and if of names

and verbs then of the sentences, which are made up of them. What do you

say, Cratylus?


CRATYLUS: I agree; and think that what you say is very true.


SOCRATES: And further, primitive nouns may be compared to pictures, and

in pictures you may either give all the appropriate colours and figures, or you

may not give them all--some may be wanting; or there may be too many or

too much of them--may there not?


CRATYLUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: And he who gives all gives a perfect picture or figure; and hewho takes away or adds also gives a picture or figure, but not a good one.


CRATYLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: In like manner, he who by syllables and letters imitates the

nature of things, if he gives all that is appropriate will produce a good image,

or in other words a name; but if he subtracts or perhaps adds a little, he will

make an image but not a good one; whence I infer that some names are well

and others ill made.


CRATYLUS: That is true.


SOCRATES: Then the artist of names may be sometimes good, or he may be

bad?


CRATYLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And this artist of names is called the legislator?


CRATYLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then like other artists the legislator may be good or he may be

bad; it must surely be so if our former admissions hold good?


CRATYLUS:  Very  true,  Socrates;  but  the  case  of  language,  you  see,  is

different; for when by the help of grammar we assign the letters alpha or beta,

or any other letters to a certain name, then, if we add, or subtract, or misplace

a letter, the name which is written is not only written wrongly, but not written

at all; and in any of these cases becomes other than a name.


SOCRATES: But I doubt whether your view is altogether correct, Cratylus.


CRATYLUS: How so?


SOCRATES: I believe that what you say may be true about numbers, which

must be just what they are, or not be at all; for example, the number ten at

once becomes other than ten if a unit be added or subtracted, and so of any

other  number:  but  this  does  not  apply  to  that  which  is  qualitative  or  toanything which is represented under an image. I should say rather that the

image, if expressing in every point the entire reality, would no longer be an

image. Let us suppose the existence of two objects: one of them shall be

Cratylus, and the other the image of Cratylus; and we will suppose, further,

that some God makes not only a representation such as a painter would make

of your outward form and colour, but also creates an inward organization like

yours, having the same warmth and softness; and into this infuses motion,

and soul, and mind, such as you have, and in a word copies all your qualities,

and places them by you in another form; would you say that this was Cratylus

and the image of Cratylus, or that there were two Cratyluses?


CRATYLUS: I should say that there were two Cratyluses.


SOCRATES:  Then  you  see,  my  friend,  that  we  must  find  some  other

principle of truth in images, and also in names; and not insist that an image is

no  longer  an  image  when  something  is  added  or  subtracted.  Do  you  not

perceive that images are very far from having qualities which are the exact

counterpart of the realities which they represent?


CRATYLUS: Yes, I see.


SOCRATES:  But  then  how  ridiculous  would  be  the  effect  of  names  on

things,  if  they  were  exactly  the  same  with  them!  For  they  would  be  the

doubles of them, and no one would be able to determine which were the

names and which were the realities.


CRATYLUS: Quite true.


SOCRATES: Then fear not, but have the courage to admit that one name

may be correctly and another incorrectly given; and do not insist that the

name  shall  be  exactly  the  same  with  the  thing;  but  allow  the  occasional

substitution of a wrong letter, and if of a letter also of a noun in a sentence,

and if of a noun in a sentence also of a sentence which is not appropriate to

the matter, and acknowledge that the thing may be named, and described, so

long  as  the  general  character  of  the  thing  which  you  are  describing  is

retained; and this, as you will remember, was remarked by Hermogenes and

myself in the particular instance of the names of the letters.CRATYLUS: Yes, I remember.


SOCRATES:  Good;  and  when  the  general  character  is  preserved,  even  if

some of the proper letters are wanting, still the thing is signified;--well, if all

the letters are given; not well, when only a few of them are given. I think that

we had better admit this, lest we be punished like travellers in Aegina who

wander about the street late at night: and be likewise told by truth herself that

we have arrived too late; or if not, you must find out some new notion of

correctness of names, and no longer maintain that a name is the expression of

a thing in letters or syllables; for if you say both, you will be inconsistent

with yourself.


CRATYLUS:  I  quite  acknowledge,  Socrates,  what  you  say  to  be  very

reasonable.


SOCRATES: Then as we are agreed thus far, let us ask ourselves whether a

name rightly imposed ought not to have the proper letters.


CRATYLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And the proper letters are those which are like the things?


CRATYLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Enough then of names which are rightly given. And in names

which are incorrectly given, the greater part may be supposed to be made up

of proper and similar letters, or there would be no likeness; but there will be

likewise a part which is improper and spoils the beauty and formation of the

word: you would admit that?


CRATYLUS: There would be no use, Socrates, in my quarrelling with you,

since I cannot be satisfied that a name which is incorrectly given is a name at

all.


SOCRATES: Do you admit a name to be the representation of a thing?


CRATYLUS: Yes, I do.SOCRATES: But do you not allow that some nouns are primitive, and some

derived?


CRATYLUS: Yes, I do.


SOCRATES:  Then  if  you  admit  that  primitive  or  first  nouns  are

representations of things, is there any better way of framing representations

than by assimilating them to the objects as much as you can; or do you prefer

the  notion  of  Hermogenes  and  of  many  others,  who  say  that  names  are

conventional, and have a meaning to those who have agreed about them, and

who  have  previous  knowledge  of  the  things  intended  by  them,  and  that

convention  is  the  only  principle;  and  whether  you  abide  by  our  present

convention, or make a new and opposite one, according to which you call

small great and great small--that, they would say, makes no difference, if you

are only agreed. Which of these two notions do you prefer?


CRATYLUS: Representation by likeness, Socrates, is infinitely better than

representation by any chance sign.


SOCRATES: Very good: but if the name is to be like the thing, the letters out

of which the first names are composed must also be like things. Returning to

the image of the picture, I would ask, How could any one ever compose a

picture which would be like anything at all, if there were not pigments in

nature which resembled the things imitated, and out of which the picture is

composed?


CRATYLUS: Impossible.


SOCRATES:  No  more  could  names  ever  resemble  any  actually  existing

thing, unless the original elements of which they are compounded bore some

degree of resemblance to the objects of which the names are the imitation:

And the original elements are letters?


CRATYLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Let me now invite you to consider what Hermogenes and I

were  saying  about  sounds.  Do  you  agree  with  me  that  the  letter  rho  isexpressive of rapidity, motion, and hardness? Were we right or wrong in

saying so?


CRATYLUS: I should say that you were right.


SOCRATES: And that lamda was expressive of smoothness, and softness,

and the like?


CRATYLUS: There again you were right.


SOCRATES: And yet, as you are aware, that which is called by us sklerotes,

is by the Eretrians called skleroter.


CRATYLUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: But are the letters rho and sigma equivalents; and is there the

same significance to them in the termination rho, which there is to us in

sigma, or is there no significance to one of us?


CRATYLUS: Nay, surely there is a significance to both of us.


SOCRATES: In as far as they are like, or in as far as they are unlike?


CRATYLUS: In as far as they are like.


SOCRATES: Are they altogether alike?


CRATYLUS: Yes; for the purpose of expressing motion.


SOCRATES: And what do you say of the insertion of the lamda? for that is

expressive not of hardness but of softness.


CRATYLUS: Why, perhaps the letter lamda is wrongly inserted, Socrates,

and should be altered into rho, as you were saying to Hermogenes and in my

opinion  rightly,  when  you  spoke  of  adding  and  subtracting  letters  upon

occasion.


SOCRATES: Good. But still the word is intelligible to both of us; when I sayskleros (hard), you know what I mean.


CRATYLUS: Yes, my dear friend, and the explanation of that is custom.


SOCRATES: And what is custom but convention? I utter a sound which I

understand, and you know that I understand the meaning of the sound: this is

what you are saying?


CRATYLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  And  if  when  I  speak  you  know  my  meaning,  there  is  an

indication given by me to you?


CRATYLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: This indication of my meaning may proceed from unlike as

well as from like, for example in the lamda of sklerotes. But if this is true,

then you have made a convention with yourself, and the correctness of a

name turns out to be convention, since letters which are unlike are indicative

equally  with  those  which  are  like,  if  they  are  sanctioned  by  custom  and

convention.  And  even  supposing  that  you  distinguish  custom  from

convention ever so much, still you must say that the signification of words is

given by custom and not by likeness, for custom may indicate by the unlike

as well as by the like. But as we are agreed thus far, Cratylus (for I shall

assume that your silence gives consent), then custom and convention must be

supposed to contribute to the indication of our thoughts; for suppose we take

the instance of number, how can you ever imagine, my good friend, that you

will find names resembling every individual number, unless you allow that

which you term convention and agreement to have authority in determining

the correctness of names? I quite agree with you that words should as far as

possible resemble things; but I fear that this dragging in of resemblance, as

Hermogenes says, is a shabby thing, which has to be supplemented by the

mechanical aid of convention with a view to correctness; for I believe that if

we  could  always,  or  almost  always,  use  likenesses,  which  are  perfectly

appropriate, this would be the most perfect state of language; as the opposite

is the most imperfect. But let me ask you, what is the force of names, and

what is the use of them?CRATYLUS: The use of names, Socrates, as I should imagine, is to inform:

the simple truth is, that he who knows names knows also the things which are

expressed by them.


SOCRATES: I suppose you mean to say, Cratylus, that as the name is, so

also is the thing; and that he who knows the one will also know the other,

because they are similars, and all similars fall under the same art or science;

and therefore you would say that he who knows names will also know things.


CRATYLUS: That is precisely what I mean.


SOCRATES: But let us consider what is the nature of this information about

things which, according to you, is given us by names. Is it the best sort of

information? or is there any other? What do you say?


CRATYLUS:  I  believe  that  to  be  both  the  only  and  the  best  sort  of

information about them; there can be no other.


SOCRATES:  But  do  you  believe  that  in  the  discovery  of  them,  he  who

discovers the names discovers also the things; or is this only the method of

instruction, and is there some other method of enquiry and discovery.


CRATYLUS: I certainly believe that the methods of enquiry and discovery

are of the same nature as instruction.


SOCRATES: Well, but do you not see, Cratylus, that he who follows names

in the search after things, and analyses their meaning, is in great danger of

being deceived?


CRATYLUS: How so?


SOCRATES: Why clearly he who first gave names gave them according to

his conception of the things which they signified--did he not?


CRATYLUS: True.


SOCRATES:  And  if  his  conception  was  erroneous,  and  he  gave  names

according to his conception, in what position shall we who are his followersfind ourselves? Shall we not be deceived by him?


CRATYLUS: But, Socrates, am I not right in thinking that he must surely

have known; or else, as I was saying, his names would not be names at all?

And you have a clear proof that he has not missed the truth, and the proof is--

that he is perfectly consistent. Did you ever observe in speaking that all the

words which you utter have a common character and purpose?


SOCRATES: But that, friend Cratylus, is no answer. For if he did begin in

error, he may have forced the remainder into agreement with the original

error and with himself; there would be nothing strange in this, any more than

in geometrical diagrams, which have often a slight and invisible flaw in the

first part of the process, and are consistently mistaken in the long deductions

which follow. And this is the reason why every man should expend his chief

thought and attention on the consideration of his first principles:--are they or

are they not rightly laid down? and when he has duly sifted them, all the rest

will  follow.  Now  I  should  be  astonished  to  find  that  names  are  really

consistent. And here let us revert to our former discussion: Were we not

saying that all things are in motion and progress and flux, and that this idea of

motion is expressed by names? Do you not conceive that to be the meaning

of them?


CRATYLUS: Yes; that is assuredly their meaning, and the true meaning.


SOCRATES:  Let  us  revert  to  episteme  (knowledge)  and  observe  how

ambiguous this word is, seeming rather to signify stopping the soul at things

than going round with them; and therefore we should leave the beginning as

at present, and not reject the epsilon, but make an insertion of an iota instead

of an epsilon (not pioteme, but epiisteme). Take another example: bebaion

(sure) is clearly the expression of station and position, and not of motion.

Again,  the  word  istoria  (enquiry)  bears  upon  the  face  of  it  the  stopping

(istanai)  of  the  stream;  and  the  word  piston  (faithful)  certainly  indicates

cessation  of  motion;  then,  again,  mneme  (memory),  as  any  one  may  see,

expresses rest in the soul, and not motion. Moreover, words such as amartia

and  sumphora,  which  have  a  bad  sense,  viewed  in  the  light  of  their

etymologies will be the same as sunesis and episteme and other words which

have a good sense (compare omartein, sunienai, epesthai, sumpheresthai);and much the same may be said of amathia and akolasia, for amathia may be

explained  as  e  ama  theo  iontos  poreia,  and  akolasia  as  e  akolouthia  tois

pragmasin. Thus the names which in these instances we find to have the

worst sense, will turn out to be framed on the same principle as those which

have the best. And any one I believe who would take the trouble might find

many other examples in which the giver of names indicates, not that things

are in motion or progress, but that they are at rest; which is the opposite of

motion.


CRATYLUS: Yes, Socrates, but observe; the greater number express motion.


SOCRATES: What of that, Cratylus? Are we to count them like votes? and is

correctness of names the voice of the majority? Are we to say of whichever

sort there are most, those are the true ones?


CRATYLUS: No; that is not reasonable.


SOCRATES:  Certainly  not.  But  let  us  have  done  with  this  question  and

proceed to another, about which I should like to know whether you think with

me. Were we not lately acknowledging that the first givers of names in states,

both Hellenic and barbarous, were the legislators, and that the art which gave

names was the art of the legislator?


CRATYLUS: Quite true.


SOCRATES: Tell me, then, did the first legislators, who were the givers of

the first names, know or not know the things which they named?


CRATYLUS: They must have known, Socrates.


SOCRATES:  Why,  yes,  friend  Cratylus,  they  could  hardly  have  been

ignorant.


CRATYLUS: I should say not.


SOCRATES: Let us return to the point from which we digressed. You were

saying,  if  you  remember,  that  he  who  gave  names  must  have  known  the

things which he named; are you still of that opinion?CRATYLUS: I am.


SOCRATES: And would you say that the giver of the first names had also a

knowledge of the things which he named?


CRATYLUS: I should.


SOCRATES:  But  how  could  he  have  learned  or  discovered  things  from

names if the primitive names were not yet given? For, if we are correct in our

view, the only way of learning and discovering things, is either to discover

names for ourselves or to learn them from others.


CRATYLUS: I think that there is a good deal in what you say, Socrates.


SOCRATES: But if things are only to be known through names, how can we

suppose that the givers of names had knowledge, or were legislators before

there were names at all, and therefore before they could have known them?


CRATYLUS: I believe, Socrates, the true account of the matter to be, that a

power more than human gave things their first names, and that the names

which are thus given are necessarily their true names.


SOCRATES: Then how came the giver of the names, if he was an inspired

being or God, to contradict himself? For were we not saying just now that he

made  some  names  expressive  of  rest  and  others  of  motion?  Were  we

mistaken?


CRATYLUS: But I suppose one of the two not to be names at all.


SOCRATES: And which, then, did he make, my good friend; those which are

expressive of rest, or those which are expressive of motion? This is a point

which, as I said before, cannot be determined by counting them.


CRATYLUS: No; not in that way, Socrates.


SOCRATES: But if this is a battle of names, some of them asserting that they

are like the truth, others contending that THEY are, how or by what criterionare we to decide between them? For there are no other names to which appeal

can be made, but obviously recourse must be had to another standard which,

without employing names, will make clear which of the two are right; and

this must be a standard which shows the truth of things.


CRATYLUS: I agree.


SOCRATES: But if that is true, Cratylus, then I suppose that things may be

known without names?


CRATYLUS: Clearly.


SOCRATES: But how would you expect to know them? What other way can

there be of knowing them, except the true and natural way, through their

affinities, when they are akin to each other, and through themselves? For that

which is other and different from them must signify something other and

different from them.


CRATYLUS: What you are saying is, I think, true.


SOCRATES: Well, but reflect; have we not several times acknowledged that

names rightly given are the likenesses and images of the things which they

name?


CRATYLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Let us suppose that to any extent you please you can learn

things through the medium of names, and suppose also that you can learn

them from the things themselves--which is likely to be the nobler and clearer

way; to learn of the image, whether the image and the truth of which the

image is the expression have been rightly conceived, or to learn of the truth

whether the truth and the image of it have been duly executed?


CRATYLUS: I should say that we must learn of the truth.


SOCRATES: How real existence is to be studied or discovered is, I suspect,

beyond  you  and  me.  But  we  may  admit  so  much,  that  the  knowledge  of

things  is  not  to  be  derived  from  names.  No;  they  must  be  studied  andinvestigated in themselves.


CRATYLUS: Clearly, Socrates.


SOCRATES: There is another point. I should not like us to be imposed upon

by the appearance of such a multitude of names, all tending in the same

direction. I myself do not deny that the givers of names did really give them

under the idea that all things were in motion and flux; which was their sincere

but, I think, mistaken opinion. And having fallen into a kind of whirlpool

themselves, they are carried round, and want to drag us in after them. There is

a matter, master Cratylus, about which I often dream, and should like to ask

your opinion: Tell me, whether there is or is not any absolute beauty or good,

or any other absolute existence?


CRATYLUS: Certainly, Socrates, I think so.


SOCRATES: Then let us seek the true beauty: not asking whether a face is

fair, or anything of that sort, for all such things appear to be in a flux; but let

us ask whether the true beauty is not always beautiful.


CRATYLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And can we rightly speak of a beauty which is always passing

away, and is first this and then that; must not the same thing be born and

retire and vanish while the word is in our mouths?


CRATYLUS: Undoubtedly.


SOCRATES: Then how can that be a real thing which is never in the same

state? for obviously things which are the same cannot change while they

remain the same; and if they are always the same and in the same state, and

never depart from their original form, they can never change or be moved.


CRATYLUS: Certainly they cannot.


SOCRATES: Nor yet can they be known by any one; for at the moment that

the observer approaches, then they become other and of another nature, so

that  you  cannot  get  any  further  in  knowing  their  nature  or  state,  for  youcannot know that which has no state.


CRATYLUS: True.


SOCRATES: Nor can we reasonably say, Cratylus, that there is knowledge at

all, if everything is in a state of transition and there is nothing abiding; for

knowledge too cannot continue to be knowledge unless continuing always to

abide and exist. But if the very nature of knowledge changes, at the time

when the change occurs there will be no knowledge; and if the transition is

always going on, there will always be no knowledge, and, according to this

view, there will be no one to know and nothing to be known: but if that which

knows and that which is known exists ever, and the beautiful and the good

and every other thing also exist, then I do not think that they can resemble a

process or flux, as we were just now supposing. Whether there is this eternal

nature in things, or whether the truth is what Heracleitus and his followers

and many others say, is a question hard to determine; and no man of sense

will like to put himself or the education of his mind in the power of names:

neither will he so far trust names or the givers of names as to be confident in

any knowledge which condemns himself and other existences to an unhealthy

state of unreality; he will not believe that all things leak like a pot, or imagine

that the world is a man who has a running at the nose. This may be true,

Cratylus, but is also very likely to be untrue; and therefore I would not have

you be too easily persuaded of it. Reflect well and like a man, and do not

easily accept such a doctrine; for you are young and of an age to learn. And

when you have found the truth, come and tell me.


CRATYLUS: I will do as you say, though I can assure you, Socrates, that I

have been considering the matter already, and the result of a great deal of

trouble and consideration is that I incline to Heracleitus.


SOCRATES: Then, another day, my friend, when you come back, you shall

give me a lesson; but at present, go into the country, as you are intending, and

Hermogenes shall set you on your way.


CRATYLUS: Very good, Socrates; I hope, however, that you will continue

to think about these things yourself.                          Critias Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    Beginning of CritiasIntroduction to Plato's Critias


  The Critias is a fragment which breaks off in the middle of a sentence. It

was designed to be the second part of a trilogy, which, like the other great

Platonic trilogy of the Sophist, Statesman, Philosopher, was never completed.

Timaeus had brought down the origin of the world to the creation of man, and

the dawn of history was now to succeed the philosophy of nature. The Critias

is also connected with the Republic. Plato, as he has already told us (Tim.),

intended  to  represent  the  ideal  state  engaged  in  a  patriotic  conflict.  This

mythical conflict is prophetic or symbolical of the struggle of Athens and

Persia,  perhaps  in  some  degree  also  of  the  wars  of  the  Greeks  and

Carthaginians, in the same way that the Persian is prefigured by the Trojan

war to the mind of Herodotus, or as the narrative of the first part of the

Aeneid is intended by Virgil to foreshadow the wars of Carthage and Rome.

The small number of the primitive Athenian citizens (20,000), 'which is about

their  present  number'  (Crit.),  is  evidently  designed  to  contrast  with  the

myriads and barbaric array of the Atlantic hosts. The passing remark in the

Timaeus that Athens was left alone in the struggle, in which she conquered

and became the liberator of Greece, is also an allusion to the later history.

Hence  we  may  safely  conclude  that  the  entire  narrative  is  due  to  the

imagination of Plato, who has used the name of Solon and introduced the

Egyptian priests to give verisimilitude to his story. To the Greek such a tale,

like that of the earth-born men, would have seemed perfectly accordant with

the character of his mythology, and not more marvellous than the wonders of

the East narrated by Herodotus and others: he might have been deceived into

believing it. But it appears strange that later ages should have been imposed

upon by the fiction. As many attempts have been made to find the great

island of Atlantis, as to discover the country of the lost tribes. Without regard

to the description of Plato, and without a suspicion that the whole narrative is

a fabrication, interpreters have looked for the spot in every part of the globe,

America, Arabia Felix, Ceylon, Palestine, Sardinia, Sweden.


  Timaeus concludes with a prayer that his words may be acceptable to the

God  whom  he  has  revealed,  and  Critias,  whose  turn  follows,  begs  that  a

larger measure of indulgence may be conceded to him, because he has tospeak  of  men  whom  we  know  and  not  of  gods  whom  we  do  not  know.

Socrates readily grants his request, and anticipating that Hermocrates will

make a similar petition, extends by anticipation a like indulgence to him.


  Critias returns to his story, professing only to repeat what Solon was told

by the priests. The war of which he was about to speak had occurred 9000

years ago. One of the combatants was the city of Athens, the other was the

great island of Atlantis. Critias proposes to speak of these rival powers first

of  all,  giving  to  Athens  the  precedence;  the  various  tribes  of  Greeks  and

barbarians who took part in the war will be dealt with as they successively

appear on the scene.


  In the beginning the gods agreed to divide the earth by lot in a friendly

manner,  and  when  they  had  made  the  allotment  they  settled  their  several

countries, and were the shepherds or rather the pilots of mankind, whom they

guided by persuasion, and not by force. Hephaestus and Athena, brother and

sister deities, in mind and art united, obtained as their lot the land of Attica, a

land suited to the growth of virtue and wisdom; and there they settled a brave

race of children of the soil, and taught them how to order the state. Some of

their  names,  such  as  Cecrops,  Erechtheus,  Erichthonius,  and  Erysichthon,

were preserved and adopted in later times, but the memory of their deeds has

passed away; for there have since been many deluges, and the remnant who

survived in the mountains were ignorant of the art of writing, and during

many generations were wholly devoted to acquiring the means of life...And

the  armed  image  of  the  goddess  which  was  dedicated  by  the  ancient

Athenians is an evidence to other ages that men and women had in those

days, as they ought always to have, common virtues and pursuits. There were

various classes of citizens, including handicraftsmen and husbandmen and a

superior class of warriors who dwelt apart, and were educated, and had all

things  in  common,  like  our  guardians.  Attica  in  those  days  extended

southwards to the Isthmus, and inland to the heights of Parnes and Cithaeron,

and between them and the sea included the district of Oropus. The country

was then, as what remains of it still is, the most fertile in the world, and

abounded in rich plains and pastures. But in the course of ages much of the

soil was washed away and disappeared in the deep sea. And the inhabitants of

this fair land were endowed with intelligence and the love of beauty.  The Acropolis of the ancient Athens extended to the Ilissus and Eridanus,

and included the Pnyx, and the Lycabettus on the opposite side to the Pnyx,

having a level surface and deep soil. The side of the hill was inhabited by

craftsmen  and  husbandmen;  and  the  warriors  dwelt  by  themselves  on  the

summit, around the temples of Hephaestus and Athene, in an enclosure which

was like the garden of a single house. In winter they retired into houses on

the north of the hill, in which they held their syssitia. These were modest

dwellings, which they bequeathed unaltered to their children's children. In

summer time the south side was inhabited by them, and then they left their

gardens and dining-halls. In the midst of the Acropolis was a fountain, which

gave an abundant supply of cool water in summer and warm in winter; of this

there  are  still  some  traces.  They  were  careful  to  preserve  the  number  of

fighting men and women at 20,000, which is equal to that of the present

military force. And so they passed their lives as guardians of the citizens and

leaders of the Hellenes. They were a just and famous race, celebrated for their

beauty and virtue all over Europe and Asia.


  And now I will speak to you of their adversaries, but first I ought to

explain that the Greek names were given to Solon in an Egyptian form, and

he enquired their meaning and translated them. His manuscript was left with

my grandfather Dropides, and is now in my possession...In the division of the

earth Poseidon obtained as his portion the island of Atlantis, and there he

begat children whose mother was a mortal. Towards the sea and in the centre

of the island there was a very fair and fertile plain, and near the centre, about

fifty stadia from the plain, there was a low mountain in which dwelt a man

named Evenor and his wife Leucippe, and their daughter Cleito, of whom

Poseidon became enamoured. He to secure his love enclosed the mountain

with rings or zones varying in size, two of land and three of sea, which his

divine power readily enabled him to excavate and fashion, and, as there was

no shipping in those days, no man could get into the place. To the interior

island  he  conveyed  under  the  earth  springs  of  water  hot  and  cold,  and

supplied the land with all things needed for the life of man. Here he begat a

family consisting of five pairs of twin male children. The eldest was Atlas,

and  him  he  made  king  of  the  centre  island,  while  to  his  twin  brother,

Eumelus, or Gadeirus, he assigned that part of the country which was nearest

the Straits. The other brothers he made chiefs over the rest of the island. And

their kingdom extended as far as Egypt and Tyrrhenia. Now Atlas had a fairposterity, and great treasures derived from mines--among them that precious

metal orichalcum; and there was abundance of wood, and herds of elephants,

and pastures for animals of all kinds, and fragrant herbs, and grasses, and

trees bearing fruit. These they used, and employed themselves in constructing

their  temples,  and  palaces,  and  harbours,  and  docks,  in  the  following

manner:--First, they bridged over the zones of sea, and made a way to and

from  the  royal  palace  which  they  built  in  the  centre  island.  This  ancient

palace  was  ornamented  by  successive  generations;  and  they  dug  a  canal

which passed through the zones of land from the island to the sea. The zones

of earth were surrounded by walls made of stone of divers colours, black and

white and red, which they sometimes intermingled for the sake of ornament;

and as they quarried they hollowed out beneath the edges of the zones double

docks having roofs of rock. The outermost of the walls was coated with brass,

the second with tin, and the third, which was the wall of the citadel, flashed

with the red light of orichalcum. In the interior of the citadel was a holy

temple, dedicated to Cleito and Poseidon, and surrounded by an enclosure of

gold, and there was Poseidon's own temple, which was covered with silver,

and the pinnacles with gold. The roof was of ivory, adorned with gold and

silver and orichalcum, and the rest of the interior was lined with orichalcum.

Within was an image of the god standing in a chariot drawn by six winged

horses,  and  touching  the  roof  with  his  head;  around  him  were  a  hundred

Nereids, riding on dolphins. Outside the temple were placed golden statues of

all the descendants of the ten kings and of their wives; there was an altar too,

and there were palaces, corresponding to the greatness and glory both of the

kingdom and of the temple.


  Also there were fountains of hot and cold water, and suitable buildings

surrounding them, and trees, and there were baths both of the kings and of

private individuals, and separate baths for women, and also for cattle. The

water from the baths was carried to the grove of Poseidon, and by aqueducts

over the bridges to the outer circles. And there were temples in the zones, and

in the larger of the two there was a racecourse for horses, which ran all round

the island. The guards were distributed in the zones according to the trust

reposed in them; the most trusted of them were stationed in the citadel. The

docks were full of triremes and stores. The land between the harbour and the

sea was surrounded by a wall, and was crowded with dwellings, and the

harbour and canal resounded with the din of human voices.  The plain around the city was highly cultivated and sheltered from the

north by mountains; it was oblong, and where falling out of the straight line

followed the circular ditch, which was of an incredible depth. This depth

received the streams which came down from the mountains, as well as the

canals of the interior, and found a way to the sea. The entire country was

divided into sixty thousand lots, each of which was a square of ten stadia; and

the owner of a lot was bound to furnish the sixth part of a war-chariot, so as

to make up ten thousand chariots, two horses and riders upon them, a pair of

chariot-horses without a seat, and an attendant and charioteer, two hoplites,

two archers, two slingers, three stone-shooters, three javelin-men, and four

sailors to make up the complement of twelve hundred ships.


  Each of the ten kings was absolute in his own city and kingdom. The

relations of the different governments to one another were determined by the

injunctions of Poseidon, which had been inscribed by the first kings on a

column of orichalcum in the temple of Poseidon, at which the kings and

princes gathered together and held a festival every fifth and every sixth year

alternately. Around the temple ranged the bulls of Poseidon, one of which the

ten kings caught and sacrificed, shedding the blood of the victim over the

inscription, and vowing not to transgress the laws of their father Poseidon.

When  night  came,  they  put  on  azure  robes  and  gave  judgment  against

offenders. The most important of their laws related to their dealings with one

another. They were not to take up arms against one another, and were to

come  to  the  rescue  if  any  of  their  brethren  were  attacked.  They  were  to

deliberate in common about war, and the king was not to have the power of

life and death over his kinsmen, unless he had the assent of the majority.


  For  many  generations,  as  tradition  tells,  the  people  of  Atlantis  were

obedient to the laws and to the gods, and practised gentleness and wisdom in

their intercourse with one another. They knew that they could only have the

true use of riches by not caring about them. But gradually the divine portion

of their souls became diluted with too much of the mortal admixture, and

they began to degenerate, though to the outward eye they appeared glorious

as ever at the very time when they were filled with all iniquity. The all-seeing

Zeus, wanting to punish them, held a council of the gods, and when he had

called them together, he spoke as follows:--  No one knew better than Plato how to invent 'a noble lie.' Observe (1) the

innocent  declaration  of  Socrates,  that  the  truth  of  the  story  is  a  great

advantage:  (2)  the  manner  in  which  traditional  names  and  indications  of

geography  are  intermingled  ('Why,  here  be  truths!'):  (3)  the  extreme

minuteness with which the numbers are given, as in the Old Epic poetry: (4)

the ingenious reason assigned for the Greek names occurring in the Egyptian

tale: (5) the remark that the armed statue of Athena indicated the common

warrior life of men and women: (6) the particularity with which the third

deluge  before  that  of  Deucalion  is  affirmed  to  have  been  the  great

destruction:  (7)  the  happy  guess  that  great  geological  changes  have  been

effected by water: (8) the indulgence of the prejudice against sailing beyond

the Columns, and the popular belief of the shallowness of the ocean in that

part: (9) the confession that the depth of the ditch in the Island of Atlantis

was not to be believed, and 'yet he could only repeat what he had heard',

compared with the statement made in an earlier passage that Poseidon, being

a God, found no difficulty in contriving the water-supply of the centre island:

(10) the mention of the old rivalry of Poseidon and Athene, and the creation

of the first inhabitants out of the soil. Plato here, as elsewhere, ingeniously

gives  the  impression  that  he  is  telling  the  truth  which  mythology  had

corrupted.


  The world, like a child, has readily, and for the most part unhesitatingly,

accepted the tale of the Island of Atlantis. In modern times we hardly seek for

traces of the submerged continent; but even Mr. Grote is inclined to believe

in the Egyptian poem of Solon of which there is no evidence in antiquity;

while others, like Martin, discuss the Egyptian origin of the legend, or like M.

de  Humboldt,  whom  he  quotes,  are  disposed  to  find  in  it  a  vestige  of  a

widely-spread tradition. Others, adopting a different vein of reflection, regard

the Island of Atlantis as the anticipation of a still greater island--the Continent

of  America.  'The  tale,'  says  M.  Martin,  'rests  upon  the  authority  of  the

Egyptian priests; and the Egyptian priests took a pleasure in deceiving the

Greeks.'  He  never  appears  to  suspect  that  there  is  a  greater  deceiver  or

magician than the Egyptian priests, that is to say, Plato himself, from the

dominion of whose genius the critic and natural philosopher of modern times

are  not  wholly  emancipated.  Although  worthless  in  respect  of  any  result

which can be attained by them, discussions like those of M. Martin (Timee)

have an interest of their own, and may be compared to the similar discussionsregarding the Lost Tribes (2 Esdras), as showing how the chance word of

some poet or philosopher has given birth to endless religious or historical

enquiries. (See Introduction to the Timaeus.)


  In  contrasting  the  small  Greek  city  numbering  about  twenty  thousand

inhabitants  with  the  barbaric  greatness  of  the  island  of  Atlantis,  Plato

probably  intended  to  show  that  a  state,  such  as  the  ideal  Athens,  was

invincible,  though  matched  against  any  number  of  opponents  (cp.  Rep.).

Even in a great empire there might be a degree of virtue and justice, such as

the Greeks believed to have existed under the sway of the first Persian kings.

But all such empires were liable to degenerate, and soon incurred the anger of

the gods. Their Oriental wealth, and splendour of gold and silver, and variety

of colours, seemed also to be at variance with the simplicity of Greek notions.

In the island of Atlantis, Plato is describing a sort of Babylonian or Egyptian

city, to which he opposes the frugal life of the true Hellenic citizen. It is

remarkable that in his brief sketch of them, he idealizes the husbandmen 'who

are lovers of honour and true husbandmen,' as well as the warriors who are

his sole concern in the Republic; and that though he speaks of the common

pursuits of men and women, he says nothing of the community of wives and

children.


  It  is  singular  that  Plato  should  have  prefixed  the  most  detested  of

Athenian names to this dialogue, and even more singular that he should have

put into the mouth of Socrates a panegyric on him (Tim.). Yet we know that

his  character  was  accounted  infamous  by  Xenophon,  and  that  the  mere

acquaintance with him was made a subject of accusation against Socrates. We

can only infer that in this, and perhaps in some other cases, Plato's characters

have no reference to the actual facts. The desire to do honour to his own

family, and the connection with Solon, may have suggested the introduction

of his name. Why the Critias was never completed, whether from accident, or

from advancing age, or from a sense of the artistic difficulty of the design,

cannot be determined.Critias


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettPersons of the Dialogue

CRITIAS

HERMOCRATES

TIMAEUS

SOCRATES


Timaeus. How thankful I am, Socrates, that I have arrived at last, and, like a

weary traveller after a long journey, may be at rest! And I pray the being who

always was of old, and has now been by me revealed, to grant that my words

may endure in so far as they have been spoken truly and acceptably to him;

but if unintentionally I have said anything wrong, I pray that he will impose

upon me a just retribution, and the just retribution of him who errs is that he

should be set right. Wishing, then, to speak truly in future concerning the

generation  of  the  gods,  I  pray  him  to  give  me  knowledge,  which  of  all

medicines is the most perfect and best. And now having offered my prayer I

deliver up the argument to Critias, who is to speak next according to our

agreement.


Critias. And I, Timaeus, accept the trust, and as you at first said that you

were going to speak of high matters, and begged that some forbearance might

be shown to you, I too ask the same or greater forbearance for what I am

about to say. And although I very well know that my request may appear to

be somewhat and discourteous, I must make it nevertheless. For will any man

of sense deny that you have spoken well? I can only attempt to show that I

ought to have more indulgence than you, because my theme is more difficult;

and I shall argue that to seem to speak well of the gods to men is far easier

than to speak well of men to men: for the inexperience and utter ignorance of

his hearers about any subject is a great assistance to him who has to speak of

it, and we know how ignorant we are concerning the gods. But I should like

to make my meaning clearer, if Timaeus, you will follow me. All that is said

by any of us can only be imitation and representation. For if we consider the

likenesses  which  painters  make  of  bodies  divine  and  heavenly,  and  the

different degrees of gratification with which the eye of the spectator receives

them, we shall see that we are satisfied with the artist who is able in any

degree to imitate the earth and its mountains, and the rivers, and the woods,

and the universe, and the things that are and move therein, and further, thatknowing nothing precise about such matters, we do not examine or analyze

the painting; all that is required is a sort of indistinct and deceptive mode of

shadowing them forth. But when a person endeavours to paint the human

form we are quick at finding out defects, and our familiar knowledge makes

us severe judges of any one who does not render every point of similarity.

And we may observe the same thing to happen in discourse; we are satisfied

with a picture of divine and heavenly things which has very little likeness to

them; but we are more precise in our criticism of mortal and human things.

Wherefore  if  at  the  moment  of  speaking  I  cannot  suitably  express  my

meaning, you must excuse me, considering that to form approved likenesses

of human things is the reverse of easy. This is what I want to suggest to you,

and at the same time to beg, Socrates, that I may have not less, but more

indulgence conceded to me in what I am about to say. Which favour, if I am

right in asking, I hope that you will be ready to grant.


Socrates. Certainly, Critias, we will grant your request, and we will grant the

same by anticipation to Hermocrates, as well as to you and Timaeus; for I

have no doubt that when his turn comes a little while hence, he will make the

same  request  which  you  have  made.  In  order,  then,  that  he  may  provide

himself with a fresh beginning, and not be compelled to say the same things

over again, let him understand that the indulgence is already extended by

anticipation  to  him.  And  now,  friend  Critias,  I  will  announce  to  you  the

judgment  of  the  theatre.  They  are  of  opinion  that  the  last  performer  was

wonderfully successful, and that you will need a great deal of indulgence

before you will be able to take his place.


Hermocrates. The warning, Socrates, which you have addressed to him, I

must also take to myself. But remember, Critias, that faint heart never yet

raised a trophy; and therefore you must go and attack the argument like a

man. First invoke Apollo and the Muses, and then let us hear you sound the

praises and show forth the virtues of your ancient citizens.


Crit. Friend Hermocrates, you, who are stationed last and have another in

front of you, have not lost heart as yet; the gravity of the situation will soon

be  revealed  to  you;  meanwhile  I  accept  your  exhortations  and

encouragements.  But  besides  the  gods  and  goddesses  whom  you  have

mentioned, I would specially invoke Mnemosyne; for all the important partof my discourse is dependent on her favour, and if I can recollect and recite

enough of what was said by the priests and brought hither by Solon, I doubt

not that I shall satisfy the requirements of this theatre. And now, making no

more excuses, I will proceed.


Let me begin by observing first of all, that nine thousand was the sum of

years which had elapsed since the war which was said to have taken place

between those who dwelt outside the Pillars of Heracles and all who dwelt

within them; this war I am going to describe. Of the combatants on the one

side, the city of Athens was reported to have been the leader and to have

fought out the war; the combatants on the other side were commanded by the

kings of Atlantis, which, as was saying, was an island greater in extent than

Libya  and  Asia,  and  when  afterwards  sunk  by  an  earthquake,  became  an

impassable barrier of mud to voyagers sailing from hence to any part of the

ocean.  The  progress  of  the  history  will  unfold  the  various  nations  of

barbarians and families of Hellenes which then existed, as they successively

appear on the scene; but I must describe first of all Athenians of that day, and

their enemies who fought with them, and then the respective powers and

governments of the two kingdoms. Let us give the precedence to Athens.


In the days of old the gods had the whole earth distributed among them by

allotment. There was no quarrelling; for you cannot rightly suppose that the

gods did not know what was proper for each of them to have, or, knowing

this, that they would seek to procure for themselves by contention that which

more properly belonged to others. They all of them by just apportionment

obtained what they wanted, and peopled their own districts; and when they

had  peopled  them  they  tended  us,  their  nurselings  and  possessions,  as

shepherds tend their flocks, excepting only that they did not use blows or

bodily force, as shepherds do, but governed us like pilots from the stern of

the vessel, which is an easy way of guiding animals, holding our souls by the

rudder of persuasion according to their own pleasure;-thus did they guide all

mortal creatures. Now different gods had their allotments in different places

which they set in order. Hephaestus and Athene, who were brother and sister,

and sprang from the same father, having a common nature, and being united

also in the love of philosophy and art, both obtained as their common portion

this land, which was naturally adapted for wisdom and virtue; and there they

implanted brave children of the soil, and put into their minds the order ofgovernment; their names are preserved, but their actions have disappeared by

reason of the destruction of those who received the tradition, and the lapse of

ages. For when there were any survivors, as I have already said, they were

men who dwelt in the mountains; and they were ignorant of the art of writing,

and had heard only the names of the chiefs of the land, but very little about

their actions. The names they were willing enough to give to their children;

but the virtues and the laws of their predecessors, they knew only by obscure

traditions;  and  as  they  themselves  and  their  children  lacked  for  many

generations the necessaries of life, they directed their attention to the supply

of their wants, and of them they conversed, to the neglect of events that had

happened in times long past; for mythology and the enquiry into antiquity are

first introduced into cities when they begin to have leisure, and when they see

that the necessaries of life have already been provided, but not before. And

this is reason why the names of the ancients have been preserved to us and

not  their  actions.  This  I  infer  because  Solon  said  that  the  priests  in  their

narrative of that war mentioned most of the names which are recorded prior

to the time of Theseus, such as Cecrops, and Erechtheus, and Erichthonius,

and Erysichthon, and the names of the women in like manner. Moreover,

since military pursuits were then common to men and women, the men of

those days in accordance with the custom of the time set up a figure and

image of the goddess in full armour, to be a testimony that all animals which

associate together, male as well as female, may, if they please, practise in

common the virtue which belongs to them without distinction of sex.


Now the country was inhabited in those days by various classes of citizens;-

there were artisans, and there were husbandmen, and there was also a warrior

class originally set apart by divine men. The latter dwelt by themselves, and

had all things suitable for nurture and education; neither had any of them

anything  of  their  own,  but  they  regarded  all  that  they  had  as  common

property; nor did they claim to receive of the other citizens anything more

than  their  necessary  food.  And  they  practised  all  the  pursuits  which  we

yesterday  described  as  those  of  our  imaginary  guardians.  Concerning  the

country the Egyptian priests said what is not only probable but manifestly

true, that the boundaries were in those days fixed by the Isthmus, and that in

the direction of the continent they extended as far as the heights of Cithaeron

and Parnes; the boundary line came down in the direction of the sea, having

the district of Oropus on the right, and with the river Asopus as the limit onthe left. The land was the best in the world, and was therefore able in those

days to support a vast army, raised from the surrounding people. Even the

remnant of Attica which now exists may compare with any region in the

world for the variety and excellence of its fruits and the suitableness of its

pastures to every sort of animal, which proves what I am saying; but in those

days the country was fair as now and yielded far more abundant produce.

How shall I establish my words? and what part of it can be truly called a

remnant  of  the  land  that  then  was?  The  whole  country  is  only  a  long

promontory extending far into the sea away from the rest of the continent,

while  the  surrounding  basin  of  the  sea  is  everywhere  deep  in  the

neighbourhood of the shore. Many great deluges have taken place during the

nine thousand years, for that is the number of years which have elapsed since

the time of which I am speaking; and during all this time and through so

many changes, there has never been any considerable accumulation of the

soil coming down from the mountains, as in other places, but the earth has

fallen  away  all  round  and  sunk  out  of  sight.  The  consequence  is,  that  in

comparison  of  what  then  was,  there  are  remaining  only  the  bones  of  the

wasted body, as they may be called, as in the case of small islands, all the

richer and softer parts of the soil having fallen away, and the mere skeleton of

the land being left. But in the primitive state of the country, its mountains

were high hills covered with soil, and the plains, as they are termed by us, of

Phelleus were full of rich earth, and there was abundance of wood in the

mountains.  Of  this  last  the  traces  still  remain,  for  although  some  of  the

mountains now only afford sustenance to bees, not so very long ago there

were still to be seen roofs of timber cut from trees growing there, which were

of a size sufficient to cover the largest houses; and there were many other

high  trees,  cultivated  by  man  and  bearing  abundance  of  food  for  cattle.

Moreover, the land reaped the benefit of the annual rainfall, not as now losing

the water which flows off the bare earth into the sea, but, having an abundant

supply in all places, and receiving it into herself and treasuring it up in the

close clay soil, it let off into the hollows the streams which it absorbed from

the heights, providing everywhere abundant fountains and rivers, of which

there may still be observed sacred memorials in places where fountains once

existed; and this proves the truth of what I am saying.


Such was the natural state of the country, which was cultivated, as we may

well believe, by true husbandmen, who made husbandry their business, andwere lovers of honour, and of a noble nature, and had a soil the best in the

world,  and  abundance  of  water,  and  in  the  heaven  above  an  excellently

attempered climate. Now the city in those days was arranged on this wise. In

the first place the Acropolis was not as now. For the fact is that a single night

of excessive rain washed away the earth and laid bare the rock; at the same

time there were earthquakes, and then occurred the extraordinary inundation,

which  was  the  third  before  the  great  destruction  of  Deucalion.  But  in

primitive times the hill of the Acropolis extended to the Eridanus and Ilissus,

and included the Pnyx on one side, and the Lycabettus as a boundary on the

opposite side to the Pnyx, and was all well covered with soil, and level at the

top, except in one or two places. Outside the Acropolis and under the sides of

the hill there dwelt artisans, and such of the husbandmen as were tilling the

ground near; the warrior class dwelt by themselves around the temples of

Athene and Hephaestus at the summit, which moreover they had enclosed

with a single fence like the garden of a single house. On the north side they

had dwellings in common and had erected halls for dining in winter, and had

all the buildings which they needed for their common life, besides temples,

but there was no adorning of them with gold and silver, for they made no use

of these for any purpose; they took a middle course between meanness and

ostentation,  and  built  modest  houses  in  which  they  and  their  children's

children  grew  old,  and  they  handed  them  down  to  others  who  were  like

themselves, always the same. But in summer-time they left their gardens and

gymnasia and dining halls, and then the southern side of the hill was made

use of by them for the same purpose. Where the Acropolis now is there was a

fountain, which was choked by the earthquake, and has left only the few

small streams which still exist in the vicinity, but in those days the fountain

gave  an  abundant  supply  of  water  for  all  and  of  suitable  temperature  in

summer and in winter. This is how they dwelt, being the guardians of their

own  citizens  and  the  leaders  of  the  Hellenes,  who  were  their  willing

followers.  And  they  took  care  to  preserve  the  same  number  of  men  and

women  through  all  time,  being  so  many  as  were  required  for  warlike

purposes, then as now-that is to say, about twenty thousand. Such were the

ancient Athenians, and after this manner they righteously administered their

own land and the rest of Hellas; they were renowned all over Europe and

Asia for the beauty of their persons and for the many virtues of their souls,

and of all men who lived in those days they were the most illustrious. And

next, if I have not forgotten what I heard when I was a child, I will impart toyou the character and origin of their adversaries. For friends should not keep

their stories to themselves, but have them in common.


Yet, before proceeding further in the narrative, I ought to warn you, that you

must not be surprised if you should perhaps hear Hellenic names given to

foreigners. I will tell you the reason of this: Solon, who was intending to use

the tale for his poem, enquired into the meaning of the names, and found that

the early Egyptians in writing them down had translated them into their own

language,  and  he  recovered  the  meaning  of  the  several  names  and  when

copying  them  out  again  translated  them  into  our  language.  My  great-

grandfather,  Dropides,  had  the  original  writing,  which  is  still  in  my

possession, and was carefully studied by me when I was a child. Therefore if

you hear names such as are used in this country, you must not be surprised,

for I have told how they came to be introduced. The tale, which was of great

length, began as follows:-


I have before remarked in speaking of the allotments of the gods, that they

distributed the whole earth into portions differing in extent, and made for

themselves temples and instituted sacrifices. And Poseidon, receiving for his

lot the island of Atlantis, begat children by a mortal woman, and settled them

in a part of the island, which I will describe. Looking towards the sea, but in

the centre of the whole island, there was a plain which is said to have been

the fairest of all plains and very fertile. Near the plain again, and also in the

centre of the island at a distance of about fifty stadia, there was a mountain

not very high on any side.


In  this  mountain  there  dwelt  one  of  the  earth  born  primeval  men  of  that

country, whose name was Evenor, and he had a wife named Leucippe, and

they had an only daughter who was called Cleito. The maiden had already

reached womanhood, when her father and mother died; Poseidon fell in love

with her and had intercourse with her, and breaking the ground, inclosed the

hill in which she dwelt all round, making alternate zones of sea and land

larger and smaller, encircling one another; there were two of land and three of

water,  which  he  turned  as  with  a  lathe,  each  having  its  circumference

equidistant every way from the centre, so that no man could get to the island,

for ships and voyages were not as yet. He himself, being a god, found no

difficulty in making special arrangements for the centre island, bringing uptwo springs of water from beneath the earth, one of warm water and the other

of cold, and making every variety of food to spring up abundantly from the

soil.  He  also  begat  and  brought  up  five  pairs  of  twin  male  children;  and

dividing the island of Atlantis into ten portions, he gave to the first-born of

the eldest pair his mother's dwelling and the surrounding allotment, which

was the largest and best, and made him king over the rest; the others he made

princes, and gave them rule over many men, and a large territory. And he

named them all; the eldest, who was the first king, he named Atlas, and after

him the whole island and the ocean were called Atlantic. To his twin brother,

who was born after him, and obtained as his lot the extremity of the island

towards the Pillars of Heracles, facing the country which is now called the

region of Gades in that part of the world, he gave the name which in the

Hellenic language is Eumelus, in the language of the country which is named

after him, Gadeirus. Of the second pair of twins he called one Ampheres, and

the other Evaemon. To the elder of the third pair of twins he gave the name

Mneseus, and Autochthon to the one who followed him. Of the fourth pair of

twins he called the elder Elasippus, and the younger Mestor. And of the fifth

pair  he  gave  to  the  elder  the  name  of  Azaes,  and  to  the  younger  that  of

Diaprepes. All these and their descendants for many generations were the

inhabitants and rulers of divers islands in the open sea; and also, as has been

already said, they held sway in our direction over the country within the

Pillars as far as Egypt and Tyrrhenia.


Now Atlas had a numerous and honourable family, and they retained the

kingdom, the eldest son handing it on to his eldest for many generations; and

they had such an amount of wealth as was never before possessed by kings

and potentates, and is not likely ever to be again, and they were furnished

with everything which they needed, both in the city and country. For because

of  the  greatness  of  their  empire  many  things  were  brought  to  them  from

foreign countries, and the island itself provided most of what was required by

them for the uses of life. In the first place, they dug out of the earth whatever

was to be found there, solid as well as fusile, and that which is now only a

name and was then something more than a name, orichalcum, was dug out of

the earth in many parts of the island, being more precious in those days than

anything except gold. There was an abundance of wood for carpenter's work,

and sufficient maintenance for tame and wild animals. Moreover, there were

a great number of elephants in the island; for as there was provision for allother sorts of animals, both for those which live in lakes and marshes and

rivers, and also for those which live in mountains and on plains, so there was

for the animal which is the largest and most voracious of all. Also whatever

fragrant  things  there  now  are  in  the  earth,  whether  roots,  or  herbage,  or

woods, or essences which distil from fruit and flower, grew and thrived in

that land; also the fruit which admits of cultivation, both the dry sort, which

is given us for nourishment and any other which we use for food-we call

them  all  by  the  common  name  pulse,  and  the  fruits  having  a  hard  rind,

affording drinks and meats and ointments, and good store of chestnuts and

the like, which furnish pleasure and amusement, and are fruits which spoil

with  keeping,  and  the  pleasant  kinds  of  dessert,  with  which  we  console

ourselves after dinner, when we are tired of eating-all these that sacred island

which then beheld the light of the sun, brought forth fair and wondrous and in

infinite  abundance.  With  such  blessings  the  earth  freely  furnished  them;

meanwhile they went on constructing their temples and palaces and harbours

and docks. And they arranged the whole country in the following manner:


First of all they bridged over the zones of sea which surrounded the ancient

metropolis, making a road to and from the royal palace. And at the very

beginning  they  built  the  palace  in  the  habitation  of  the  god  and  of  their

ancestors, which they continued to ornament in successive generations, every

king surpassing the one who went before him to the utmost of his power,

until they made the building a marvel to behold for size and for beauty. And

beginning from the sea they bored a canal of three hundred feet in width and

one  hundred  feet  in  depth  and  fifty  stadia  in  length,  which  they  carried

through to the outermost zone, making a passage from the sea up to this,

which became a harbour, and leaving an opening sufficient to enable the

largest  vessels  to  find  ingress.  Moreover,  they  divided  at  the  bridges  the

zones of land which parted the zones of sea, leaving room for a single trireme

to pass out of one zone into another, and they covered over the channels so as

to  leave  a  way  underneath  for  the  ships;  for  the  banks  were  raised

considerably above the water. Now the largest of the zones into which a

passage was cut from the sea was three stadia in breadth, and the zone of land

which came next of equal breadth; but the next two zones, the one of water,

the other of land, were two stadia, and the one which surrounded the central

island  was  a  stadium  only  in  width.  The  island  in  which  the  palace  was

situated had a diameter of five stadia. All this including the zones and thebridge, which was the sixth part of a stadium in width, they surrounded by a

stone wall on every side, placing towers and gates on the bridges where the

sea passed in. The stone which was used in the work they quarried from

underneath the centre island, and from underneath the zones, on the outer as

well as the inner side. One kind was white, another black, and a third red, and

as they quarried, they at the same time hollowed out double docks, having

roofs formed out of the native rock. Some of their buildings were simple, but

in others they put together different stones, varying the colour to please the

eye, and to be a natural source of delight. The entire circuit of the wall, which

went round the outermost zone, they covered with a coating of brass, and the

circuit  of  the  next  wall  they  coated  with  tin,  and  the  third,  which

encompassed the citadel, flashed with the red light of orichalcum.


The palaces in the interior of the citadel were constructed on this wise:-in the

centre was a holy temple dedicated to Cleito and Poseidon, which remained

inaccessible, and was surrounded by an enclosure of gold; this was the spot

where the family of the ten princes first saw the light, and thither the people

annually  brought  the  fruits  of  the  earth  in  their  season  from  all  the  ten

portions,  to  be  an  offering  to  each  of  the  ten.  Here  was  Poseidon's  own

temple which was a stadium in length, and half a stadium in width, and of a

proportionate height, having a strange barbaric appearance. All the outside of

the temple, with the exception of the pinnacles, they covered with silver, and

the pinnacles with gold. In the interior of the temple the roof was of ivory,

curiously wrought everywhere with gold and silver and orichalcum; and all

the other parts, the walls and pillars and floor, they coated with orichalcum.

In the temple they placed statues of gold: there was the god himself standing

in a chariot-the charioteer of six winged horses-and of such a size that he

touched  the  roof  of  the  building  with  his  head;  around  him  there  were  a

hundred Nereids riding on dolphins, for such was thought to be the number of

them by the men of those days. There were also in the interior of the temple

other images which had been dedicated by private persons. And around the

temple on the outside were placed statues of gold of all the descendants of the

ten kings and of their wives, and there were many other great offerings of

kings and of private persons, coming both from the city itself and from the

foreign cities over which they held sway. There was an altar too, which in

size and workmanship corresponded to this magnificence, and the palaces, in

like manner, answered to the greatness of the kingdom and the glory of thetemple.


In the next place, they had fountains, one of cold and another of hot water, in

gracious  plenty  flowing;  and  they  were  wonderfully  adapted  for  use  by

reason of the pleasantness and excellence of their waters. They constructed

buildings  about  them  and  planted  suitable  trees,  also  they  made  cisterns,

some open to the heavens, others roofed over, to be used in winter as warm

baths; there were the kings' baths, and the baths of private persons, which

were kept apart; and there were separate baths for women, and for horses and

cattle, and to each of them they gave as much adornment as was suitable. Of

the water which ran off they carried some to the grove of Poseidon, where

were growing all manner of trees of wonderful height and beauty, owing to

the excellence of the soil, while the remainder was conveyed by aqueducts

along the bridges to the outer circles; and there were many temples built and

dedicated to many gods; also gardens and places of exercise, some for men,

and others for horses in both of the two islands formed by the zones; and in

the centre of the larger of the two there was set apart a race-course of a

stadium in width, and in length allowed to extend all round the island, for

horses to race in. Also there were guardhouses at intervals for the guards, the

more  trusted  of  whom  were  appointed-to  keep  watch  in  the  lesser  zone,

which was nearer the Acropolis while the most trusted of all had houses

given them within the citadel, near the persons of the kings. The docks were

full of triremes and naval stores, and all things were quite ready for use.

Enough of the plan of the royal palace.


Leaving the palace and passing out across the three you came to a wall which

began at the sea and went all round: this was everywhere distant fifty stadia

from the largest zone or harbour, and enclosed the whole, the ends meeting at

the mouth of the channel which led to the sea. The entire area was densely

crowded with habitations; and the canal and the largest of the harbours were

full of vessels and merchants coming from all parts, who, from their numbers,

kept up a multitudinous sound of human voices, and din and clatter of all

sorts night and day.


I have described the city and the environs of the ancient palace nearly in the

words  of  Solon,  and  now  I  must  endeavour  to  represent  the  nature  and

arrangement of the rest of the land. The whole country was said by him to bevery lofty and precipitous on the side of the sea, but the country immediately

about  and  surrounding  the  city  was  a  level  plain,  itself  surrounded  by

mountains which descended towards the sea; it was smooth and even, and of

an oblong shape, extending in one direction three thousand stadia, but across

the centre inland it was two thousand stadia. This part of the island looked

towards  the  south,  and  was  sheltered  from  the  north.  The  surrounding

mountains were celebrated for their number and size and beauty, far beyond

any which still exist, having in them also many wealthy villages of country

folk, and rivers, and lakes, and meadows supplying food enough for every

animal, wild or tame, and much wood of various sorts, abundant for each and

every kind of work.


I will now describe the plain, as it was fashioned by nature and by the labours

of many generations of kings through long ages. It was for the most part

rectangular and oblong, and where falling out of the straight line followed the

circular ditch. The depth, and width, and length of this ditch were incredible,

and gave the impression that a work of such extent, in addition to so many

others, could never have been artificial. Nevertheless I must say what I was

told. It was excavated to the depth of a hundred, feet, and its breadth was a

stadium everywhere; it was carried round the whole of the plain, and was ten

thousand stadia in length. It received the streams which came down from the

mountains, and winding round the plain and meeting at the city, was there let

off into the sea. Further inland, likewise, straight canals of a hundred feet in

width were cut from it through the plain, and again let off into the ditch

leading to the sea: these canals were at intervals of a hundred stadia, and by

them  they  brought  down  the  wood  from  the  mountains  to  the  city,  and

conveyed the fruits of the earth in ships, cutting transverse passages from one

canal into another, and to the city. Twice in the year they gathered the fruits

of  the  earth-in  winter  having  the  benefit  of  the  rains  of  heaven,  and  in

summer the water which the land supplied by introducing streams from the

canals.


As to the population, each of the lots in the plain had to find a leader for the

men who were fit for military service, and the size of a lot was a square of ten

stadia each way, and the total number of all the lots was sixty thousand. And

of the inhabitants of the mountains and of the rest of the country there was

also a vast multitude, which was distributed among the lots and had leadersassigned to them according to their districts and villages. The leader was

required to furnish for the war the sixth portion of a war-chariot, so as to

make up a total of ten thousand chariots; also two horses and riders for them,

and a pair of chariot-horses without a seat, accompanied by a horseman who

could fight on foot carrying a small shield, and having a charioteer who stood

behind  the  man-at-arms  to  guide  the  two  horses;  also,  he  was  bound  to

furnish two heavy armed soldiers, two slingers, three stone-shooters and three

javelin-men,  who  were  light-armed,  and  four  sailors  to  make  up  the

complement of twelve hundred ships. Such was the military order of the royal

city-the  order  of  the  other  nine  governments  varied,  and  it  would  be

wearisome to recount their several differences.


As to offices and honours, the following was the arrangement from the first.

Each of the ten kings in his own division and in his own city had the absolute

control of the citizens, and, in most cases, of the laws, punishing and slaying

whomsoever he would. Now the order of precedence among them and their

mutual relations were regulated by the commands of Poseidon which the law

had  handed  down.  These  were  inscribed  by  the  first  kings  on  a  pillar  of

orichalcum, which was situated in the middle of the island, at the temple of

Poseidon,  whither  the  kings  were  gathered  together  every  fifth  and  every

sixth year alternately, thus giving equal honour to the odd and to the even

number. And when they were gathered together they consulted about their

common interests, and enquired if any one had transgressed in anything and

passed judgment and before they passed judgment they gave their pledges to

one another on this wise:-There were bulls who had the range of the temple

of Poseidon; and the ten kings, being left alone in the temple, after they had

offered  prayers  to  the  god  that  they  might  capture  the  victim  which  was

acceptable to him, hunted the bulls, without weapons but with staves and

nooses; and the bull which they caught they led up to the pillar and cut its

throat over the top of it so that the blood fell upon the sacred inscription.

Now on the pillar, besides the laws, there was inscribed an oath invoking

mighty curses on the disobedient. When therefore, after slaying the bull in the

accustomed manner, they had burnt its limbs, they filled a bowl of wine and

cast in a clot of blood for each of them; the rest of the victim they put in the

fire, after having purified the column all round. Then they drew from the

bowl in golden cups and pouring a libation on the fire, they swore that they

would judge according to the laws on the pillar, and would punish him whoin any point had already transgressed them, and that for the future they would

not, if they could help, offend against the writing on the pillar, and would

neither command others, nor obey any ruler who commanded them, to act

otherwise than according to the laws of their father Poseidon. This was the

prayer which each of them-offered up for himself and for his descendants, at

the same time drinking and dedicating the cup out of which he drank in the

temple of the god; and after they had supped and satisfied their needs, when

darkness came on, and the fire about the sacrifice was cool, all of them put on

most  beautiful  azure  robes,  and,  sitting  on  the  ground,  at  night,  over  the

embers of the sacrifices by which they had sworn, and extinguishing all the

fire about the temple, they received and gave judgment, if any of them had an

accusation  to  bring  against  any  one;  and  when  they  given  judgment,  at

daybreak they wrote down their sentences on a golden tablet, and dedicated it

together with their robes to be a memorial.


There were many special laws affecting the several kings inscribed about the

temples, but the most important was the following: They were not to take up

arms against one another, and they were all to come to the rescue if any one

in  any  of  their  cities  attempted  to  overthrow  the  royal  house;  like  their

ancestors, they were to deliberate in common about war and other matters,

giving the supremacy to the descendants of Atlas. And the king was not to

have the power of life and death over any of his kinsmen unless he had the

assent of the majority of the ten.


Such was the vast power which the god settled in the lost island of Atlantis;

and this he afterwards directed against our land for the following reasons, as

tradition tells: For many generations, as long as the divine nature lasted in

them, they were obedient to the laws, and well-affectioned towards the god,

whose seed they were; for they possessed true and in every way great spirits,

uniting gentleness with wisdom in the various chances of life, and in their

intercourse  with  one  another.  They  despised  everything  but  virtue,  caring

little for their present state of life, and thinking lightly of the possession of

gold and other property, which seemed only a burden to them; neither were

they intoxicated by luxury; nor did wealth deprive them of their self-control;

but they were sober, and saw clearly that all these goods are increased by

virtue  and  friendship  with  one  another,  whereas  by  too  great  regard  and

respect for them, they are lost and friendship with them. By such reflectionsand by the continuance in them of a divine nature, the qualities which we

have described grew and increased among them; but when the divine portion

began to fade away, and became diluted too often and too much with the

mortal admixture, and the human nature got the upper hand, they then, being

unable to bear their fortune, behaved unseemly, and to him who had an eye to

see grew visibly debased, for they were losing the fairest of their precious

gifts; but to those who had no eye to see the true happiness, they appeared

glorious and blessed at the very time when they were full of avarice and

unrighteous power. Zeus, the god of gods, who rules according to law, and is

able to see into such things, perceiving that an honourable race was in a

woeful plight, and wanting to inflict punishment on them, that they might be

chastened and improve, collected all the gods into their most holy habitation,

which, being placed in the centre of the world, beholds all created things.

And when he had called them together, he spake as follows-* The rest of the

Dialogue of Critias has been lost.                            Crito Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    Beginning of CritoIntroduction to Plato's Crito


  The Crito seems intended to exhibit the character of Socrates in one light

only, not as the philosopher, fulfilling a divine mission and trusting in the

will of heaven, but simply as the good citizen, who having been unjustly

condemned is willing to give up his life in obedience to the laws of the state...


  The days of Socrates are drawing to a close; the fatal ship has been seen

off Sunium, as he is informed by his aged friend and contemporary Crito,

who visits him before the dawn has broken; he himself has been warned in a

dream that on the third day he must depart. Time is precious, and Crito has

come early in order to gain his consent to a plan of escape. This can be easily

accomplished by his friends, who will incur no danger in making the attempt

to save him, but will be disgraced for ever if they allow him to perish. He

should think of his duty to his children, and not play into the hands of his

enemies. Money is already provided by Crito as well as by Simmias and

others, and he will have no difficulty in finding friends in Thessaly and other

places.


  Socrates is afraid that Crito is but pressing upon him the opinions of the

many: whereas, all his life long he has followed the dictates of reason only

and the opinion of the one wise or skilled man. There was a time when Crito

himself had allowed the propriety of this. And although some one will say

'the many can kill us,' that makes no difference; but a good life, in other

words, a just and honourable life, is alone to be valued. All considerations of

loss  of  reputation  or  injury  to  his  children  should  be  dismissed:  the  only

question is whether he would be right in attempting to escape. Crito, who is a

disinterested person not having the fear of death before his eyes, shall answer

this for him. Before he was condemned they had often held discussions, in

which they agreed that no man should either do evil, or return evil for evil, or

betray the right. Are these principles to be altered because the circumstances

of Socrates are altered? Crito admits that they remain the same. Then is his

escape consistent with the maintenance of them? To this Crito is unable or

unwilling to reply.


  Socrates proceeds:--Suppose the Laws of Athens to come and remonstratewith  him:  they  will  ask  'Why  does  he  seek  to  overturn  them?'  and  if  he

replies, 'they have injured him,' will not the Laws answer, 'Yes, but was that

the agreement? Has he any objection to make to them which would justify

him in overturning them? Was he not brought into the world and educated by

their help, and are they not his parents? He might have left Athens and gone

where he pleased, but he has lived there for seventy years more constantly

than any other citizen.' Thus he has clearly shown that he acknowledged the

agreement, which he cannot now break without dishonour to himself and

danger to his friends. Even in the course of the trial he might have proposed

exile as the penalty, but then he declared that he preferred death to exile. And

whither will he direct his footsteps? In any well-ordered state the Laws will

consider him as an enemy. Possibly in a land of misrule like Thessaly he may

be  welcomed  at  first,  and  the  unseemly  narrative  of  his  escape  will  be

regarded by the inhabitants as an amusing tale. But if he offends them he will

have  to  learn  another  sort  of  lesson.  Will  he  continue  to  give  lectures  in

virtue?  That  would  hardly  be  decent.  And  how  will  his  children  be  the

gainers  if  he  takes  them  into  Thessaly,  and  deprives  them  of  Athenian

citizenship? Or if he leaves them behind, does he expect that they will be

better taken care of by his friends because he is in Thessaly? Will not true

friends care for them equally whether he is alive or dead?


  Finally, they exhort him to think of justice first, and of life and children

afterwards. He may now depart in peace and innocence, a sufferer and not a

doer of evil. But if he breaks agreements, and returns evil for evil, they will

be angry with him while he lives; and their brethren the Laws of the world

below  will  receive  him  as  an  enemy.  Such  is  the  mystic  voice  which  is

always murmuring in his ears.


  That Socrates was not a good citizen was a charge made against him

during his lifetime, which has been often repeated in later ages. The crimes of

Alcibiades, Critias, and Charmides, who had been his pupils, were still recent

in the memory of the now restored democracy. The fact that he had been

neutral in the death-struggle of Athens was not likely to conciliate popular

good-will.  Plato,  writing  probably  in  the  next  generation,  undertakes  the

defence of his friend and master in this particular, not to the Athenians of his

day, but to posterity and the world at large.  Whether such an incident ever really occurred as the visit of Crito and the

proposal of escape is uncertain: Plato could easily have invented far more

than that (Phaedr.); and in the selection of Crito, the aged friend, as the fittest

person to make the proposal to Socrates, we seem to recognize the hand of

the artist. Whether any one who has been subjected by the laws of his country

to an unjust judgment is right in attempting to escape, is a thesis about which

casuists might disagree. Shelley (Prose Works) is of opinion that Socrates

'did well to die,' but not for the 'sophistical' reasons which Plato has put into

his mouth. And there would be no difficulty in arguing that Socrates should

have lived and preferred to a glorious death the good which he might still be

able to perform. 'A rhetorician would have had much to say upon that point.'

It may be observed however that Plato never intended to answer the question

of casuistry, but only to exhibit the ideal of patient virtue which refuses to do

the  least  evil  in  order  to  avoid  the  greatest,  and  to  show  his  master

maintaining in death the opinions which he had professed in his life. Not 'the

world,' but the 'one wise man,' is still the paradox of Socrates in his last

hours. He must be guided by reason, although her conclusions may be fatal to

him. The remarkable sentiment that the wicked can do neither good nor evil

is true, if taken in the sense, which he means, of moral evil; in his own words,

'they cannot make a man wise or foolish.'


  This little dialogue is a perfect piece of dialectic, in which granting the

'common principle,' there is no escaping from the conclusion. It is anticipated

at the beginning by the dream of Socrates and the parody of Homer. The

personification  of  the  Laws,  and  of  their  brethren  the  Laws  in  the  world

below, is one of the noblest and boldest figures of speech which occur in

Plato.Crito


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettPersons of the Dialogue: SOCRATES, CRITO


Scene: The Prison of Socrates.


SOCRATES: Why have you come at this hour, Crito? it must be quite early.


CRITO: Yes, certainly.


SOCRATES: What is the exact time?


CRITO: The dawn is breaking.


SOCRATES: I wonder that the keeper of the prison would let you in.


CRITO: He knows me because I often come, Socrates; moreover. I have done

him a kindness.


SOCRATES: And are you only just arrived?


CRITO: No, I came some time ago.


SOCRATES:  Then  why  did  you  sit  and  say  nothing,  instead  of  at  once

awakening me?


CRITO: I should not have liked myself, Socrates, to be in such great trouble

and  unrest  as  you  are--indeed  I  should  not:  I  have  been  watching  with

amazement your peaceful slumbers; and for that reason I did not awake you,

because I wished to minimize the pain. I have always thought you to be of a

happy disposition; but never did I see anything like the easy, tranquil manner

in which you bear this calamity.


SOCRATES: Why, Crito, when a man has reached my age he ought not to be

repining at the approach of death.


CRITO: And yet other old men find themselves in similar misfortunes, and

age does not prevent them from repining.SOCRATES: That is true. But you have not told me why you come at this

early hour.


CRITO: I come to bring you a message which is sad and painful; not, as I

believe, to yourself, but to all of us who are your friends, and saddest of all to

me.


SOCRATES: What? Has the ship come from Delos, on the arrival of which I

am to die?


CRITO: No, the ship has not actually arrived, but she will probably be here

to-day, as persons who have come from Sunium tell me that they have left

her there; and therefore to-morrow, Socrates, will be the last day of your life.


SOCRATES: Very well, Crito; if such is the will of God, I am willing; but

my belief is that there will be a delay of a day.


CRITO: Why do you think so?


SOCRATES: I will tell you. I am to die on the day after the arrival of the

ship?


CRITO: Yes; that is what the authorities say.


SOCRATES: But I do not think that the ship will be here until to-morrow;

this I infer from a vision which I had last night, or rather only just now, when

you fortunately allowed me to sleep.


CRITO: And what was the nature of the vision?


SOCRATES:  There  appeared  to  me  the  likeness  of  a  woman,  fair  and

comely, clothed in bright raiment, who called to me and said: O Socrates,


'The third day hence to fertile Phthia shalt thou go.' (Homer, Il.)


CRITO: What a singular dream, Socrates!


SOCRATES: There can be no doubt about the meaning, Crito, I think.CRITO: Yes; the meaning is only too clear. But, oh! my beloved Socrates, let

me entreat you once more to take my advice and escape. For if you die I shall

not only lose a friend who can never be replaced, but there is another evil:

people who do not know you and me will believe that I might have saved you

if I had been willing to give money, but that I did not care. Now, can there be

a worse disgrace than this--that I should be thought to value money more than

the life of a friend? For the many will not be persuaded that I wanted you to

escape, and that you refused.


SOCRATES: But why, my dear Crito, should we care about the opinion of

the  many?  Good  men,  and  they  are  the  only  persons  who  are  worth

considering, will think of these things truly as they occurred.


CRITO:  But  you  see,  Socrates,  that  the  opinion  of  the  many  must  be

regarded, for what is now happening shows that they can do the greatest evil

to any one who has lost their good opinion.


SOCRATES: I only wish it were so, Crito; and that the many could do the

greatest evil; for then they would also be able to do the greatest good-- and

what a fine thing this would be! But in reality they can do neither; for they

cannot make a man either wise or foolish; and whatever they do is the result

of chance.


CRITO: Well, I will not dispute with you; but please to tell me, Socrates,

whether you are not acting out of regard to me and your other friends: are you

not afraid that if you escape from prison we may get into trouble with the

informers for having stolen you away, and lose either the whole or a great

part of our property; or that even a worse evil may happen to us? Now, if you

fear on our account, be at ease; for in order to save you, we ought surely to

run this, or even a greater risk; be persuaded, then, and do as I say.


SOCRATES:  Yes,  Crito,  that  is  one  fear  which  you  mention,  but  by  no

means the only one.


CRITO: Fear not--there are persons who are willing to get you out of prison

at no great cost; and as for the informers they are far from being exorbitant in

their  demands--a  little  money  will  satisfy  them.  My  means,  which  arecertainly ample, are at your service, and if you have a scruple about spending

all mine, here are strangers who will give you the use of theirs; and one of

them, Simmias the Theban, has brought a large sum of money for this very

purpose; and Cebes and many others are prepared to spend their money in

helping you to escape. I say, therefore, do not hesitate on our account, and do

not  say,  as  you  did  in  the  court  (compare  Apol.),  that  you  will  have  a

difficulty in knowing what to do with yourself anywhere else. For men will

love you in other places to which you may go, and not in Athens only; there

are friends of mine in Thessaly, if you like to go to them, who will value and

protect you, and no Thessalian will give you any trouble. Nor can I think that

you are at all justified, Socrates, in betraying your own life when you might

be saved; in acting thus you are playing into the hands of your enemies, who

are  hurrying  on  your  destruction.  And  further  I  should  say  that  you  are

deserting your own children; for you might bring them up and educate them;

instead of which you go away and leave them, and they will have to take their

chance; and if they do not meet with the usual fate of orphans, there will be

small thanks to you. No man should bring children into the world who is

unwilling to persevere to the end in their nurture and education. But you

appear to be choosing the easier part, not the better and manlier, which would

have been more becoming in one who professes to care for virtue in all his

actions, like yourself. And indeed, I am ashamed not only of you, but of us

who are your friends, when I reflect that the whole business will be attributed

entirely to our want of courage. The trial need never have come on, or might

have been managed differently; and this last act, or crowning folly, will seem

to have occurred through our negligence and cowardice, who might have

saved you, if we had been good for anything; and you might have saved

yourself, for there was no difficulty at all. See now, Socrates, how sad and

discreditable are the consequences, both to us and you. Make up your mind

then, or rather have your mind already made up, for the time of deliberation

is over, and there is only one thing to be done, which must be done this very

night,  and  if  we  delay  at  all  will  be  no  longer  practicable  or  possible;  I

beseech you therefore, Socrates, be persuaded by me, and do as I say.


SOCRATES: Dear Crito, your zeal is invaluable, if a right one; but if wrong,

the greater the zeal the greater the danger; and therefore we ought to consider

whether I shall or shall not do as you say. For I am and always have been one

of those natures who must be guided by reason, whatever the reason may bewhich upon reflection appears to me to be the best; and now that this chance

has befallen me, I cannot repudiate my own words: the principles which I

have hitherto honoured and revered I still honour, and unless we can at once

find other and better principles, I am certain not to agree with you; no, not

even if the power of the multitude could inflict many more imprisonments,

confiscations,  deaths,  frightening  us  like  children  with  hobgoblin  terrors

(compare Apol.). What will be the fairest way of considering the question?

Shall I return to your old argument about the opinions of men?--we were

saying that some of them are to be regarded, and others not. Now were we

right in maintaining this before I was condemned? And has the argument

which was once good now proved to be talk for the sake of talking--mere

childish nonsense? That is what I want to consider with your help, Crito:--

whether, under my present circumstances, the argument appears to be in any

way  different  or  not;  and  is  to  be  allowed  by  me  or  disallowed.  That

argument, which, as I believe, is maintained by many persons of authority,

was to the effect, as I was saying, that the opinions of some men are to be

regarded, and of other men not to be regarded. Now you, Crito, are not going

to die to-morrow--at least, there is no human probability of this, and therefore

you are disinterested and not liable to be deceived by the circumstances in

which you are placed. Tell me then, whether I am right in saying that some

opinions, and the opinions of some men only, are to be valued, and that other

opinions, and the opinions of other men, are not to be valued. I ask you

whether I was right in maintaining this?


CRITO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: The good are to be regarded, and not the bad?


CRITO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And the opinions of the wise are good, and the opinions of the

unwise are evil?


CRITO: Certainly.


SOCRATES:  And  what  was  said  about  another  matter?  Is  the  pupil  who

devotes himself to the practice of gymnastics supposed to attend to the praiseand blame and opinion of every man, or of one man only--his physician or

trainer, whoever he may be?


CRITO: Of one man only.


SOCRATES: And he ought to fear the censure and welcome the praise of that

one only, and not of the many?


CRITO: Clearly so.


SOCRATES: And he ought to act and train, and eat and drink in the way

which seems good to his single master who has understanding, rather than

according to the opinion of all other men put together?


CRITO: True.


SOCRATES: And if he disobeys and disregards the opinion and approval of

the one, and regards the opinion of the many who have no understanding, will

he not suffer evil?


CRITO: Certainly he will.


SOCRATES: And what will the evil be, whither tending and what affecting,

in the disobedient person?


CRITO: Clearly, affecting the body; that is what is destroyed by the evil.


SOCRATES: Very good; and is not this true, Crito, of other things which we

need not separately enumerate? In questions of just and unjust, fair and foul,

good and evil, which are the subjects of our present consultation, ought we to

follow the opinion of the many and to fear them; or the opinion of the one

man who has understanding? ought we not to fear and reverence him more

than all the rest of the world: and if we desert him shall we not destroy and

injure that principle in us which may be assumed to be improved by justice

and deteriorated by injustice;--there is such a principle?


CRITO: Certainly there is, Socrates.SOCRATES: Take a parallel instance:--if, acting under the advice of those

who have no understanding, we destroy that which is improved by health and

is deteriorated by disease, would life be worth having? And that which has

been destroyed is--the body?


CRITO: Yes.


SOCRATES: Could we live, having an evil and corrupted body?


CRITO: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: And will life be worth having, if that higher part of man be

destroyed, which is improved by justice and depraved by injustice? Do we

suppose that principle, whatever it may be in man, which has to do with

justice and injustice, to be inferior to the body?


CRITO: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: More honourable than the body?


CRITO: Far more.


SOCRATES: Then, my friend, we must not regard what the many say of us:

but what he, the one man who has understanding of just and unjust, will say,

and what the truth will say. And therefore you begin in error when you advise

that we should regard the opinion of the many about just and unjust, good and

evil, honorable and dishonorable.--'Well,' some one will say, 'but the many

can kill us.'


CRITO: Yes, Socrates; that will clearly be the answer.


SOCRATES: And it is true; but still I find with surprise that the old argument

is unshaken as ever. And I should like to know whether I may say the same of

another proposition--that not life, but a good life, is to be chiefly valued?


CRITO: Yes, that also remains unshaken.


SOCRATES: And a good life is equivalent to a just and honorable one--thatholds also?


CRITO: Yes, it does.


SOCRATES: From these premisses I proceed to argue the question whether I

ought or ought not to try and escape without the consent of the Athenians:

and if I am clearly right in escaping, then I will make the attempt; but if not, I

will abstain. The other considerations which you mention, of money and loss

of character and the duty of educating one's children, are, I fear, only the

doctrines of the multitude, who would be as ready to restore people to life, if

they were able, as they are to put them to death--and with as little reason. But

now,  since  the  argument  has  thus  far  prevailed,  the  only  question  which

remains to be considered is, whether we shall do rightly either in escaping or

in suffering others to aid in our escape and paying them in money and thanks,

or whether in reality we shall not do rightly; and if the latter, then death or

any  other  calamity  which  may  ensue  on  my  remaining  here  must  not  be

allowed to enter into the calculation.


CRITO: I think that you are right, Socrates; how then shall we proceed?


SOCRATES: Let us consider the matter together, and do you either refute me

if  you  can,  and  I  will  be  convinced;  or  else  cease,  my  dear  friend,  from

repeating to me that I ought to escape against the wishes of the Athenians: for

I  highly  value  your  attempts  to  persuade  me  to  do  so,  but  I  may  not  be

persuaded against my own better judgment. And now please to consider my

first position, and try how you can best answer me.


CRITO: I will.


SOCRATES: Are we to say that we are never intentionally to do wrong, or

that in one way we ought and in another way we ought not to do wrong, or is

doing wrong always evil and dishonorable, as I was just now saying, and as

has been already acknowledged by us? Are all our former admissions which

were made within a few days to be thrown away? And have we, at our age,

been earnestly discoursing with one another all our life long only to discover

that we are no better than children? Or, in spite of the opinion of the many,

and in spite of consequences whether better or worse, shall we insist on thetruth of what was then said, that injustice is always an evil and dishonour to

him who acts unjustly? Shall we say so or not?


CRITO: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then we must do no wrong?


CRITO: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: Nor when injured injure in return, as the many imagine; for we

must injure no one at all? (E.g. compare Rep.)


CRITO: Clearly not.


SOCRATES: Again, Crito, may we do evil?


CRITO: Surely not, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And what of doing evil in return for evil, which is the morality

of the many--is that just or not?


CRITO: Not just.


SOCRATES: For doing evil to another is the same as injuring him?


CRITO: Very true.


SOCRATES: Then we ought not to retaliate or render evil for evil to any one,

whatever  evil  we  may  have  suffered  from  him.  But  I  would  have  you

consider,  Crito,  whether  you  really  mean  what  you  are  saying.  For  this

opinion has never been held, and never will be held, by any considerable

number of persons; and those who are agreed and those who are not agreed

upon this point have no common ground, and can only despise one another

when they see how widely they differ. Tell me, then, whether you agree with

and assent to my first principle, that neither injury nor retaliation nor warding

off evil by evil is ever right. And shall that be the premiss of our argument?

Or do you decline and dissent from this? For so I have ever thought, and

continue to think; but, if you are of another opinion, let me hear what youhave to say. If, however, you remain of the same mind as formerly, I will

proceed to the next step.


CRITO: You may proceed, for I have not changed my mind.


SOCRATES: Then I will go on to the next point, which may be put in the

form of a question:--Ought a man to do what he admits to be right, or ought

he to betray the right?


CRITO: He ought to do what he thinks right.


SOCRATES: But if this is true, what is the application? In leaving the prison

against the will of the Athenians, do I wrong any? or rather do I not wrong

those whom I ought least to wrong? Do I not desert the principles which were

acknowledged by us to be just--what do you say?


CRITO: I cannot tell, Socrates, for I do not know.


SOCRATES: Then consider the matter in this way:--Imagine that I am about

to play truant (you may call the proceeding by any name which you like), and

the laws and the government come and interrogate me: 'Tell us, Socrates,'

they  say;  'what  are  you  about?  are  you  not  going  by  an  act  of  yours  to

overturn us--the laws, and the whole state, as far as in you lies? Do you

imagine that a state can subsist and not be overthrown, in which the decisions

of law have no power, but are set aside and trampled upon by individuals?'

What will be our answer, Crito, to these and the like words? Any one, and

especially a rhetorician, will have a good deal to say on behalf of the law

which requires a sentence to be carried out. He will argue that this law should

not be set aside; and shall we reply, 'Yes; but the state has injured us and

given an unjust sentence.' Suppose I say that?


CRITO: Very good, Socrates.


SOCRATES: 'And was that our agreement with you?' the law would answer;

'or were you to abide by the sentence of the state?' And if I were to express

my  astonishment  at  their  words,  the  law  would  probably  add:  'Answer,

Socrates, instead of opening your eyes--you are in the habit of asking andanswering questions. Tell us,--What complaint have you to make against us

which justifies you in attempting to destroy us and the state? In the first place

did we not bring you into existence? Your father married your mother by our

aid and begat you. Say whether you have any objection to urge against those

of us who regulate marriage?' None, I should reply. 'Or against those of us

who after birth regulate the nurture and education of children, in which you

also were trained? Were not the laws, which have the charge of education,

right in commanding your father to train you in music and gymnastic?' Right,

I should reply. 'Well then, since you were brought into the world and nurtured

and educated by us, can you deny in the first place that you are our child and

slave, as your fathers were before you? And if this is true you are not on

equal terms with us; nor can you think that you have a right to do to us what

we are doing to you. Would you have any right to strike or revile or do any

other evil to your father or your master, if you had one, because you have

been struck or reviled by him, or received some other evil at his hands?--you

would not say this? And because we think right to destroy you, do you think

that you have any right to destroy us in return, and your country as far as in

you lies? Will you, O professor of true virtue, pretend that you are justified in

this? Has a philosopher like you failed to discover that our country is more to

be valued and higher and holier far than mother or father or any ancestor, and

more to be regarded in the eyes of the gods and of men of understanding?

also to be soothed, and gently and reverently entreated when angry, even

more than a father, and either to be persuaded, or if not persuaded, to be

obeyed? And when we are punished by her, whether with imprisonment or

stripes, the punishment is to be endured in silence; and if she lead us to

wounds or death in battle, thither we follow as is right; neither may any one

yield or retreat or leave his rank, but whether in battle or in a court of law, or

in any other place, he must do what his city and his country order him; or he

must change their view of what is just: and if he may do no violence to his

father or mother, much less may he do violence to his country.' What answer

shall we make to this, Crito? Do the laws speak truly, or do they not?


CRITO: I think that they do.


SOCRATES: Then the laws will say: 'Consider, Socrates, if we are speaking

truly  that  in  your  present  attempt  you  are  going  to  do  us  an  injury.  For,

having brought you into the world, and nurtured and educated you, and givenyou and every other citizen a share in every good which we had to give, we

further proclaim to any Athenian by the liberty which we allow him, that if he

does not like us when he has become of age and has seen the ways of the city,

and made our acquaintance, he may go where he pleases and take his goods

with him. None of us laws will forbid him or interfere with him. Any one

who does not like us and the city, and who wants to emigrate to a colony or

to any other city, may go where he likes, retaining his property. But he who

has experience of the manner in which we order justice and administer the

state, and still remains, has entered into an implied contract that he will do as

we command him. And he who disobeys us is, as we maintain, thrice wrong:

first, because in disobeying us he is disobeying his parents; secondly, because

we  are  the  authors  of  his  education;  thirdly,  because  he  has  made  an

agreement  with  us  that  he  will  duly  obey  our  commands;  and  he  neither

obeys them nor convinces us that our commands are unjust; and we do not

rudely impose them, but give him the alternative of obeying or convincing

us;--that is what we offer, and he does neither.


'These are the sort of accusations to which, as we were saying, you, Socrates,

will  be  exposed  if  you  accomplish  your  intentions;  you,  above  all  other

Athenians.' Suppose now I ask, why I rather than anybody else? they will

justly  retort  upon  me  that  I  above  all  other  men  have  acknowledged  the

agreement. 'There is clear proof,' they will say, 'Socrates, that we and the city

were  not  displeasing  to  you.  Of  all  Athenians  you  have  been  the  most

constant resident in the city, which, as you never leave, you may be supposed

to love (compare Phaedr.). For you never went out of the city either to see the

games, except once when you went to the Isthmus, or to any other place

unless when you were on military service; nor did you travel as other men do.

Nor had you any curiosity to know other states or their laws: your affections

did not go beyond us and our state; we were your especial favourites, and you

acquiesced in our government of you; and here in this city you begat your

children, which is a proof of your satisfaction. Moreover, you might in the

course of the trial, if you had liked, have fixed the penalty at banishment; the

state which refuses to let you go now would have let you go then. But you

pretended that you preferred death to exile (compare Apol.), and that you

were not unwilling to die. And now you have forgotten these fine sentiments,

and pay no respect to us the laws, of whom you are the destroyer; and are

doing what only a miserable slave would do, running away and turning yourback upon the compacts and agreements which you made as a citizen. And

first of all answer this very question: Are we right in saying that you agreed

to be governed according to us in deed, and not in word only? Is that true or

not?' How shall we answer, Crito? Must we not assent?


CRITO: We cannot help it, Socrates.


SOCRATES:  Then  will  they  not  say:  'You,  Socrates,  are  breaking  the

covenants and agreements which you made with us at your leisure, not in any

haste or under any compulsion or deception, but after you have had seventy

years to think of them, during which time you were at liberty to leave the

city, if we were not to your mind, or if our covenants appeared to you to be

unfair. You had your choice, and might have gone either to Lacedaemon or

Crete, both which states are often praised by you for their good government,

or  to  some  other  Hellenic  or  foreign  state.  Whereas  you,  above  all  other

Athenians, seemed to be so fond of the state, or, in other words, of us her

laws (and who would care about a state which has no laws?), that you never

stirred out of her; the halt, the blind, the maimed, were not more stationary in

her than you were. And now you run away and forsake your agreements. Not

so, Socrates, if you will take our advice; do not make yourself ridiculous by

escaping out of the city.


'For just consider, if you transgress and err in this sort of way, what good will

you do either to yourself or to your friends? That your friends will be driven

into exile and deprived of citizenship, or will lose their property, is tolerably

certain; and you yourself, if you fly to one of the neighbouring cities, as, for

example, Thebes or Megara, both of which are well governed, will come to

them as an enemy, Socrates, and their government will be against you, and all

patriotic citizens will cast an evil eye upon you as a subverter of the laws, and

you  will  confirm  in  the  minds  of  the  judges  the  justice  of  their  own

condemnation of you. For he who is a corrupter of the laws is more than

likely to be a corrupter of the young and foolish portion of mankind. Will you

then flee from well-ordered cities and virtuous men? and is existence worth

having on these terms? Or will you go to them without shame, and talk to

them, Socrates? And what will you say to them? What you say here about

virtue and justice and institutions and laws being the best things among men?

Would that be decent of you? Surely not. But if you go away from well-governed states to Crito's friends in Thessaly, where there is great disorder

and licence, they will be charmed to hear the tale of your escape from prison,

set off with ludicrous particulars of the manner in which you were wrapped in

a goatskin or some other disguise, and metamorphosed as the manner is of

runaways; but will there be no one to remind you that in your old age you

were not ashamed to violate the most sacred laws from a miserable desire of a

little more life? Perhaps not, if you keep them in a good temper; but if they

are out of temper you will hear many degrading things; you will live, but

how?--as the flatterer of all men, and the servant of all men; and doing what?-

-eating and drinking in Thessaly, having gone abroad in order that you may

get a dinner. And where will be your fine sentiments about justice and virtue?

Say that you wish to live for the sake of your children--you want to bring

them up and educate them--will you take them into Thessaly and deprive

them of Athenian citizenship? Is this the benefit which you will confer upon

them? Or are you under the impression that they will be better cared for and

educated  here  if  you  are  still  alive,  although  absent  from  them;  for  your

friends will take care of them? Do you fancy that if you are an inhabitant of

Thessaly they will take care of them, and if you are an inhabitant of the other

world  that  they  will  not  take  care  of  them?  Nay;  but  if  they  who  call

themselves friends are good for anything, they will--to be sure they will.


'Listen, then, Socrates, to us who have brought you up. Think not of life and

children first, and of justice afterwards, but of justice first, that you may be

justified before the princes of the world below. For neither will you nor any

that belong to you be happier or holier or juster in this life, or happier in

another, if you do as Crito bids. Now you depart in innocence, a sufferer and

not a doer of evil; a victim, not of the laws, but of men. But if you go forth,

returning  evil  for  evil,  and  injury  for  injury,  breaking  the  covenants  and

agreements which you have made with us, and wronging those whom you

ought least of all to wrong, that is to say, yourself, your friends, your country,

and us, we shall be angry with you while you live, and our brethren, the laws

in the world below, will receive you as an enemy; for they will know that you

have done your best to destroy us. Listen, then, to us and not to Crito.'


This, dear Crito, is the voice which I seem to hear murmuring in my ears, like

the sound of the flute in the ears of the mystic; that voice, I say, is humming

in  my  ears,  and  prevents  me  from  hearing  any  other.  And  I  know  thatanything  more  which  you  may  say  will  be  vain.  Yet  speak,  if  you  have

anything to say.


CRITO: I have nothing to say, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Leave me then, Crito, to fulfil the will of God, and to follow

whither he leads.


THE END                        Euthydemus Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    Beginning of EuthydemusIntroduction to Plato's Euthydemus


  The Euthydemus, though apt to be regarded by us only as an elaborate

jest, has also a very serious purpose. It may fairly claim to be the oldest

treatise on logic; for that science originates in the misunderstandings which

necessarily accompany the first efforts of speculation. Several of the fallacies

which are satirized in it reappear in the Sophistici Elenchi of Aristotle and are

retained at the end of our manuals of logic. But if the order of history were

followed, they should be placed not at the end but at the beginning of them;

for they belong to the age in which the human mind was first making the

attempt to distinguish thought from sense, and to separate the universal from

the  particular  or  individual.  How  to  put  together  words  or  ideas,  how  to

escape ambiguities in the meaning of terms or in the structure of propositions,

how to resist the fixed impression of an 'eternal being' or 'perpetual flux,' how

to distinguish between words and things--these were problems not easy of

solution  in  the  infancy  of  philosophy.  They  presented  the  same  kind  of

difficulty to the half- educated man which spelling or arithmetic do to the

mind of a child. It was long before the new world of ideas which had been

sought after with such passionate yearning was set in order and made ready

for use. To us the fallacies which arise in the pre-Socratic philosophy are

trivial and obsolete because we are no longer liable to fall into the errors

which  are  expressed  by  them.  The  intellectual  world  has  become  better

assured  to  us,  and  we  are  less  likely  to  be  imposed  upon  by  illusions  of

words.


  The logic of Aristotle is for the most part latent in the dialogues of Plato.

The nature of definition is explained not by rules but by examples in the

Charmides,  Lysis,  Laches,  Protagoras,  Meno,  Euthyphro,  Theaetetus,

Gorgias, Republic; the nature of division is likewise illustrated by examples

in the Sophist and Statesman; a scheme of categories is found in the Philebus;

the true doctrine of contradiction is taught, and the fallacy of arguing in a

circle  is  exposed  in  the  Republic;  the  nature  of  synthesis  and  analysis  is

graphically described in the Phaedrus; the nature of words is analysed in the

Cratylus; the form of the syllogism is indicated in the genealogical trees of

the Sophist and Statesman; a true doctrine of predication and an analysis ofthe sentence are given in the Sophist; the different meanings of one and being

are  worked  out  in  the  Parmenides.  Here  we  have  most  of  the  important

elements of logic, not yet systematized or reduced to an art or science, but

scattered up and down as they would naturally occur in ordinary discourse.

They are of little or no use or significance to us; but because we have grown

out of the need of them we should not therefore despise them. They are still

interesting and instructive for the light which they shed on the history of the

human mind.


  There are indeed many old fallacies which linger among us, and new ones

are constantly springing up. But they are not of the kind to which ancient

logic  can  be  usefully  applied.  The  weapons  of  common  sense,  not  the

analytics of Aristotle, are needed for their overthrow. Nor is the use of the

Aristotelian logic any longer natural to us. We no longer put arguments into

the form of syllogisms like the schoolmen; the simple use of language has

been,  happily,  restored  to  us.  Neither  do  we  discuss  the  nature  of  the

proposition, nor extract hidden truths from the copula, nor dispute any longer

about nominalism and realism. We do not confuse the form with the matter of

knowledge, or invent laws of thought, or imagine that any single science

furnishes  a  principle  of  reasoning  to  all  the  rest.  Neither  do  we  require

categories or heads of argument to be invented for our use. Those who have

no knowledge of logic, like some of our great physical philosophers, seem to

be quite as good reasoners as those who have. Most of the ancient puzzles

have been settled on the basis of usage and common sense; there is no need to

reopen them. No science should raise problems or invent forms of thought

which add nothing to knowledge and are of no use in assisting the acquisition

of it. This seems to be the natural limit of logic and metaphysics; if they give

us a more comprehensive or a more definite view of the different spheres of

knowledge they are to be studied; if not, not. The better part of ancient logic

appears hardly in our own day to have a separate existence; it is absorbed in

two other sciences: (1) rhetoric, if indeed this ancient art be not also fading

away  into  literary  criticism;  (2)  the  science  of  language,  under  which  all

questions relating to words and propositions and the combinations of them

may properly be included.


  To continue dead or imaginary sciences, which make no signs of progress

and have no definite sphere, tends to interfere with the prosecution of livingones.  The  study  of  them  is  apt  to  blind  the  judgment  and  to  render  men

incapable of seeing the value of evidence, and even of appreciating the nature

of truth. Nor should we allow the living science to become confused with the

dead  by  an  ambiguity  of  language.  The  term  logic  has  two  different

meanings, an ancient and a modern one, and we vainly try to bridge the gulf

between them. Many perplexities are avoided by keeping them apart. There

might certainly be a new science of logic; it would not however be built up

out of the fragments of the old, but would be distinct from them--relative to

the state of knowledge which exists at the present time, and based chiefly on

the methods of Modern Inductive philosophy. Such a science might have two

legitimate fields: first, the refutation and explanation of false philosophies

still  hovering  in  the  air  as  they  appear  from  the  point  of  view  of  later

experience or are comprehended in the history of the human mind, as in a

larger  horizon:  secondly,  it  might  furnish  new  forms  of  thought  more

adequate to the expression of all the diversities and oppositions of knowledge

which have grown up in these latter days; it might also suggest new methods

of enquiry derived from the comparison of the sciences. Few will deny that

the  introduction  of  the  words  'subject'  and  'object'  and  the  Hegelian

reconciliation of opposites have been 'most gracious aids' to psychology, or

that the methods of Bacon and Mill have shed a light far and wide on the

realms  of  knowledge.  These  two  great  studies,  the  one  destructive  and

corrective of error, the other conservative and constructive of truth, might be

a first and second part of logic. Ancient logic would be the propaedeutic or

gate  of  approach  to  logical  science,--nothing  more.  But  to  pursue  such

speculations further, though not irrelevant, might lead us too far away from

the argument of the dialogue.


  The  Euthydemus  is,  of  all  the  Dialogues  of  Plato,  that  in  which  he

approaches most nearly to the comic poet. The mirth is broader, the irony

more sustained, the contrast between Socrates and the two Sophists, although

veiled,  penetrates  deeper  than  in  any  other  of  his  writings.  Even

Thrasymachus, in the Republic, is at last pacified, and becomes a friendly and

interested auditor of the great discourse. But in the Euthydemus the mask is

never dropped; the accustomed irony of Socrates continues to the end...


  Socrates narrates to Crito a remarkable scene in which he has himself

taken part, and in which the two brothers, Dionysodorus and Euthydemus, arethe chief performers. They are natives of Chios, who had settled at Thurii, but

were driven out, and in former days had been known at Athens as professors

of rhetoric and of the art of fighting in armour. To this they have now added a

new accomplishment--the art of Eristic, or fighting with words, which they

are likewise willing to teach 'for a consideration.' But they can also teach

virtue in a very short time and in the very best manner. Socrates, who is

always  on  the  look-out  for  teachers  of  virtue,  is  interested  in  the  youth

Cleinias, the grandson of the great Alcibiades, and is desirous that he should

have the benefit of their instructions. He is ready to fall down and worship

them; although the greatness of their professions does arouse in his mind a

temporary incredulity.


  A circle gathers round them, in the midst of which are Socrates, the two

brothers, the youth Cleinias, who is watched by the eager eyes of his lover

Ctesippus, and others. The performance begins; and such a performance as

might well seem to require an invocation of Memory and the Muses. It is

agreed that the brothers shall question Cleinias. 'Cleinias,' says Euthydemus,

'who  learn,  the  wise  or  the  unwise?'  'The  wise,'  is  the  reply;  given  with

blushing and hesitation. 'And yet when you learned you did not know and

were not wise.' Then Dionysodorus takes up the ball: 'Who are they who

learn dictation of the grammar-master; the wise or the foolish boys?' 'The

wise.' 'Then, after all, the wise learn.' 'And do they learn,' said Euthydemus,

'what they know or what they do not know?' 'The latter.' 'And dictation is a

dictation of letters?' 'Yes.' 'And you know letters?' 'Yes.' 'Then you learn what

you know.' 'But,' retorts Dionysodorus, 'is not learning acquiring knowledge?'

'Yes.' 'And you acquire that which you have not got already?' 'Yes.' 'Then you

learn that which you do not know.'


  Socrates is afraid that the youth Cleinias may be discouraged at these

repeated overthrows. He therefore explains to him the nature of the process to

which he is being subjected. The two strangers are not serious; there are jests

at the mysteries which precede the enthronement, and he is being initiated

into the mysteries of the sophistical ritual. This is all a sort of horse-play,

which  is  now  ended.  The  exhortation  to  virtue  will  follow,  and  Socrates

himself (if the wise men will not laugh at him) is desirous of showing the

way in which such an exhortation should be carried on, according to his own

poor notion. He proceeds to question Cleinias. The result of the investigationmay be summed up as follows:--


  All men desire good; and good means the possession of goods, such as

wealth, health, beauty, birth, power, honour; not forgetting the virtues and

wisdom. And yet in this enumeration the greatest good of all is omitted. What

is that? Good fortune. But what need is there of good fortune when we have

wisdom  already:--in  every  art  and  business  are  not  the  wise  also  the

fortunate?  This  is  admitted.  And  again,  the  possession  of  goods  is  not

enough; there must also be a right use of them which can only be given by

knowledge: in themselves they are neither good nor evil-- knowledge and

wisdom  are  the  only  good,  and  ignorance  and  folly  the  only  evil.  The

conclusion is that we must get 'wisdom.' But can wisdom be taught? 'Yes,'

says Cleinias. The ingenuousness of the youth delights Socrates, who is at

once relieved from the necessity of discussing one of his great puzzles. 'Since

wisdom is the only good, he must become a philosopher, or lover of wisdom.'

'That I will,' says Cleinias.


  After Socrates has given this specimen of his own mode of instruction,

the two brothers recommence their exhortation to virtue, which is of quite

another sort.


  'You want Cleinias to be wise?' 'Yes.' 'And he is not wise yet?' 'No.' 'Then

you want him to be what he is not, and not to be what he is?--not to be--that

is, to perish. Pretty lovers and friends you must all be!'


  Here  Ctesippus,  the  lover  of  Cleinias,  interposes  in  great  excitement,

thinking that he will teach the two Sophists a lesson of good manners. But he

is quickly entangled in the meshes of their sophistry; and as a storm seems to

be gathering Socrates pacifies him with a joke, and Ctesippus then says that

he is not reviling the two Sophists, he is only contradicting them. 'But,' says

Dionysodorus,  'there  is  no  such  thing  as  contradiction.  When  you  and  I

describe the same thing, or you describe one thing and I describe another,

how can there be a contradiction?' Ctesippus is unable to reply.


  Socrates has already heard of the denial of contradiction, and would like

to be informed by the great master of the art, 'What is the meaning of this

paradox? Is there no such thing as error, ignorance, falsehood? Then what arethey professing to teach?' The two Sophists complain that Socrates is ready to

answer what they said a year ago, but is 'non-plussed' at what they are saying

now.  'What  does  the  word  "non-plussed"  mean?'  Socrates  is  informed,  in

reply,  that  words  are  lifeless  things,  and  lifeless  things  have  no  sense  or

meaning.  Ctesippus  again  breaks  out,  and  again  has  to  be  pacified  by

Socrates, who renews the conversation with Cleinias. The two Sophists are

like Proteus in the variety of their transformations, and he, like Menelaus in

the Odyssey, hopes to restore them to their natural form.


  He  had  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  Cleinias  must  become  a

philosopher. And philosophy is the possession of knowledge; and knowledge

must be of a kind which is profitable and may be used. What knowledge is

there which has such a nature? Not the knowledge which is required in any

particular art; nor again the art of the composer of speeches, who knows how

to write them, but cannot speak them, although he too must be admitted to be

a kind of enchanter of wild animals. Neither is the knowledge which we are

seeking the knowledge of the general. For the general makes over his prey to

the statesman, as the huntsman does to the cook, or the taker of quails to the

keeper  of  quails;  he  has  not  the  use  of  that  which  he  acquires.  The  two

enquirers,  Cleinias  and  Socrates,  are  described  as  wandering  about  in  a

wilderness, vainly searching after the art of life and happiness. At last they

fix upon the kingly art, as having the desired sort of knowledge. But the

kingly art only gives men those goods which are neither good nor evil: and if

we say further that it makes us wise, in what does it make us wise? Not in

special arts, such as cobbling or carpentering, but only in itself: or say again

that it makes us good, there is no answer to the question, 'good in what?' At

length in despair Cleinias and Socrates turn to the 'Dioscuri' and request their

aid.


    Euthydemus  argues  that  Socrates  knows  something;  and  as  he  cannot

know and not know, he cannot know some things and not know others, and

therefore he knows all things: he and Dionysodorus and all other men know

all things. 'Do they know shoemaking, etc?' 'Yes.' The sceptical Ctesippus

would like to have some evidence of this extraordinary statement: he will

believe if Euthydemus will tell him how many teeth Dionysodorus has, and if

Dionysodorus will give him a like piece of information about Euthydemus.

Even Socrates is incredulous, and indulges in a little raillery at the expense ofthe brothers. But he restrains himself, remembering that if the men who are to

be his teachers think him stupid they will take no pains with him. Another

fallacy is produced which turns on the absoluteness of the verb 'to know.'

And here Dionysodorus is caught 'napping,' and is induced by Socrates to

confess that 'he does not know the good to be unjust.' Socrates appeals to his

brother Euthydemus; at the same time he acknowledges that he cannot, like

Heracles, fight against a Hydra, and even Heracles, on the approach of a

second monster, called upon his nephew Iolaus to help. Dionysodorus rejoins

that  Iolaus  was  no  more  the  nephew  of  Heracles  than  of  Socrates.  For  a

nephew is a nephew, and a brother is a brother, and a father is a father, not of

one man only, but of all; nor of men only, but of dogs and sea-monsters.

Ctesippus makes merry with the consequences which follow: 'Much good has

your father got out of the wisdom of his puppies.'


  'But,' says Euthydemus, unabashed, 'nobody wants much good.' Medicine

is a good, arms are a good, money is a good, and yet there may be too much

of them in wrong places. 'No,' says Ctesippus, 'there cannot be too much

gold.' And would you be happy if you had three talents of gold in your belly,

a talent in your pate, and a stater in either eye?' Ctesippus, imitating the new

wisdom, replies, 'And do not the Scythians reckon those to be the happiest of

men who have their skulls gilded and see the inside of them?' 'Do you see,'

retorts Euthydemus, 'what has the quality of vision or what has not the quality

of vision?' 'What has the quality of vision.' 'And you see our garments?' 'Yes.'

'Then  our  garments  have  the  quality  of  vision.'  A  similar  play  of  words

follows, which is successfully retorted by Ctesippus, to the great delight of

Cleinias,  who  is  rebuked  by  Socrates  for  laughing  at  such  solemn  and

beautiful things.


  'But are there any beautiful things? And if there are such, are they the

same or not the same as absolute beauty?' Socrates replies that they are not

the same, but each of them has some beauty present with it. 'And are you an

ox because you have an ox present with you?' After a few more amphiboliae,

in which Socrates, like Ctesippus, in self-defence borrows the weapons of the

brothers, they both confess that the two heroes are invincible; and the scene

concludes with a grand chorus of shouting and laughing, and a panegyrical

oration from Socrates:--  First,  he  praises  the  indifference  of  Dionysodorus  and  Euthydemus  to

public opinion; for most persons would rather be refuted by such arguments

than use them in the refutation of others. Secondly, he remarks upon their

impartiality; for they stop their own mouths, as well as those of other people.

Thirdly, he notes their liberality, which makes them give away their secret to

all the world: they should be more reserved, and let no one be present at this

exhibition who does not pay them a handsome fee; or better still they might

practise on one another only. He concludes with a respectful request that they

will receive him and Cleinias among their disciples.


  Crito tells Socrates that he has heard one of the audience criticise severely

this  wisdom,--not  sparing  Socrates  himself  for  countenancing  such  an

exhibition. Socrates asks what manner of man was this censorious critic. 'Not

an orator, but a great composer of speeches.' Socrates understands that he is

an amphibious animal, half philosopher, half politician; one of a class who

have  the  highest  opinion  of  themselves  and  a  spite  against  philosophers,

whom they imagine to be their rivals. They are a class who are very likely to

get mauled by Euthydemus and his friends, and have a great notion of their

own wisdom; for they imagine themselves to have all the advantages and

none  of  the  drawbacks  both  of  politics  and  of  philosophy.  They  do  not

understand the principles of combination, and hence are ignorant that the

union of two good things which have different ends produces a compound

inferior to either of them taken separately.


  Crito  is  anxious  about  the  education  of  his  children,  one  of  whom  is

growing up. The description of Dionysodorus and Euthydemus suggests to

him  the  reflection  that  the  professors  of  education  are  strange  beings.

Socrates consoles him with the remark that the good in all professions are

few,  and  recommends  that  'he  and  his  house'  should  continue  to  serve

philosophy, and not mind about its professors.


  ...


  There is a stage in the history of philosophy in which the old is dying out,

and the new has not yet come into full life. Great philosophies like the Eleatic

or Heraclitean, which have enlarged the boundaries of the human mind, begin

to  pass  away  in  words.  They  subsist  only  as  forms  which  have  rootedthemselves in language--as troublesome elements of thought which cannot be

either  used  or  explained  away.  The  same  absoluteness  which  was  once

attributed to abstractions is now attached to the words which are the signs of

them. The philosophy which in the first and second generation was a great

and inspiring effort of reflection, in the third becomes sophistical, verbal,

eristic.


  It is this stage of philosophy which Plato satirises in the Euthydemus. The

fallacies which are noted by him appear trifling to us now, but they were not

trifling  in  the  age  before  logic,  in  the  decline  of  the  earlier  Greek

philosophies, at a time when language was first beginning to perplex human

thought. Besides he is caricaturing them; they probably received more subtle

forms at the hands of those who seriously maintained them. They are patent

to us in Plato, and we are inclined to wonder how any one could ever have

been deceived by them; but we must remember also that there was a time

when the human mind was only with great difficulty disentangled from such

fallacies.


  To appreciate fully the drift of the Euthydemus, we should imagine a

mental state in which not individuals only, but whole schools during more

than one generation, were animated by the desire to exclude the conception of

rest, and therefore the very word 'this' (Theaet.) from language; in which the

ideas of space, time, matter, motion, were proved to be contradictory and

imaginary; in which the nature of qualitative change was a puzzle, and even

differences of degree, when applied to abstract notions, were not understood;

in which there was no analysis of grammar, and mere puns or plays of words

received serious attention; in which contradiction itself was denied, and, on

the one hand, every predicate was affirmed to be true of every subject, and on

the other, it was held that no predicate was true of any subject, and that

nothing was, or was known, or could be spoken. Let us imagine disputes

carried on with religious earnestness and more than scholastic subtlety, in

which  the  catchwords  of  philosophy  are  completely  detached  from  their

context. (Compare Theaet.) To such disputes the humour, whether of Plato in

the ancient, or of Pope and Swift in the modern world, is the natural enemy.

Nor must we forget that in modern times also there is no fallacy so gross, no

trick of language so transparent, no abstraction so barren and unmeaning, no

form of thought so contradictory to experience, which has not been found tosatisfy  the  minds  of  philosophical  enquirers  at  a  certain  stage,  or  when

regarded from a certain point of view only. The peculiarity of the fallacies of

our  own  age  is  that  we  live  within  them,  and  are  therefore  generally

unconscious of them.


  Aristotle  has  analysed  several  of  the  same  fallacies  in  his  book  'De

Sophisticis Elenchis,' which Plato, with equal command of their true nature,

has preferred to bring to the test of ridicule. At first we are only struck with

the broad humour of this 'reductio ad absurdum:' gradually we perceive that

some important questions begin to emerge. Here, as everywhere else, Plato is

making war against the philosophers who put words in the place of things,

who  tear  arguments  to  tatters,  who  deny  predication,  and  thus  make

knowledge  impossible,  to  whom  ideas  and  objects  of  sense  have  no

fixedness, but are in a state of perpetual oscillation and transition. Two great

truths seem to be indirectly taught through these fallacies: (1) The uncertainty

of language, which allows the same words to be used in different meanings,

or with different degrees of meaning: (2) The necessary limitation or relative

nature of all phenomena. Plato is aware that his own doctrine of ideas, as well

as the Eleatic Being and Not- being, alike admit of being regarded as verbal

fallacies. The sophism advanced in the Meno, 'that you cannot enquire either

into  what  you  know  or  do  not  know,'  is  lightly  touched  upon  at  the

commencement of the Dialogue; the thesis of Protagoras, that everything is

true to him to whom it seems to be true, is satirized. In contrast with these

fallacies  is  maintained  the  Socratic  doctrine  that  happiness  is  gained  by

knowledge.  The  grammatical  puzzles  with  which  the  Dialogue  concludes

probably  contain  allusions  to  tricks  of  language  which  may  have  been

practised by the disciples of Prodicus or Antisthenes. They would have had

more point, if we were acquainted with the writings against which Plato's

humour is directed. Most of the jests appear to have a serious meaning; but

we have lost the clue to some of them, and cannot determine whether, as in

the Cratylus, Plato has or has not mixed up purely unmeaning fun with his

satire.


  The two discourses of Socrates may be contrasted in several respects with

the exhibition of the Sophists: (1) In their perfect relevancy to the subject of

discussion, whereas the Sophistical discourses are wholly irrelevant: (2) In

their  enquiring  sympathetic  tone,  which  encourages  the  youth,  instead  of'knocking him down,' after the manner of the two Sophists: (3) In the absence

of any definite conclusion--for while Socrates and the youth are agreed that

philosophy is to be studied, they are not able to arrive at any certain result

about the art which is to teach it. This is a question which will hereafter be

answered in the Republic; as the conception of the kingly art is more fully

developed in the Politicus, and the caricature of rhetoric in the Gorgias.


  The characters of the Dialogue are easily intelligible. There is Socrates

once more in the character of an old man; and his equal in years, Crito, the

father of Critobulus, like Lysimachus in the Laches, his fellow demesman

(Apol.), to whom the scene is narrated, and who once or twice interrupts with

a remark after the manner of the interlocutor in the Phaedo, and adds his

commentary  at  the  end;  Socrates  makes  a  playful  allusion  to  his  money-

getting habits. There is the youth Cleinias, the grandson of Alcibiades, who

may be compared with Lysis, Charmides, Menexenus, and other ingenuous

youths out of whose mouths Socrates draws his own lessons, and to whom he

always seems to stand in a kindly and sympathetic relation. Crito will not

believe that Socrates has not improved or perhaps invented the answers of

Cleinias (compare Phaedrus). The name of the grandson of Alcibiades, who

is described as long dead, (Greek), and who died at the age of forty-four, in

the  year  404  B.C.,  suggests  not  only  that  the  intended  scene  of  the

Euthydemus  could  not  have  been  earlier  than  404,  but  that  as  a  fact  this

Dialogue could not have been composed before 390 at the soonest. Ctesippus,

who is the lover of Cleinias, has been already introduced to us in the Lysis,

and seems there too to deserve the character which is here given him, of a

somewhat uproarious young man. But the chief study of all is the picture of

the two brothers, who are unapproachable in their effrontery, equally careless

of what they say to others and of what is said to them, and never at a loss.

They are 'Arcades ambo et cantare pares et respondere parati.' Some superior

degree of wit or subtlety is attributed to Euthydemus, who sees the trap in

which Socrates catches Dionysodorus.


  The  epilogue  or  conclusion  of  the  Dialogue  has  been  criticised  as

inconsistent  with  the  general  scheme.  Such  a  criticism  is  like  similar

criticisms on Shakespeare, and proceeds upon a narrow notion of the variety

which the Dialogue, like the drama, seems to admit. Plato in the abundance

of his dramatic power has chosen to write a play upon a play, just as he oftengives us an argument within an argument. At the same time he takes the

opportunity of assailing another class of persons who are as alien from the

spirit  of  philosophy  as  Euthydemus  and  Dionysodorus.  The  Eclectic,  the

Syncretist, the Doctrinaire, have been apt to have a bad name both in ancient

and modern times. The persons whom Plato ridicules in the epilogue to the

Euthydemus  are  of  this  class.  They  occupy  a  border-ground  between

philosophy and politics; they keep out of the dangers of politics, and at the

same time use philosophy as a means of serving their own interests. Plato

quaintly describes them as making two good things, philosophy and politics,

a little worse by perverting the objects of both. Men like Antiphon or Lysias

would be types of the class. Out of a regard to the respectabilities of life, they

are disposed to censure the interest which Socrates takes in the exhibition of

the two brothers. They do not understand, any more than Crito, that he is

pursuing his vocation of detecting the follies of mankind, which he finds 'not

unpleasant.' (Compare Apol.)


    Education  is  the  common  subject  of  all  Plato's  earlier  Dialogues.  The

concluding remark of Crito, that he has a difficulty in educating his two sons,

and the advice of Socrates to him that he should not give up philosophy

because he has no faith in philosophers, seems to be a preparation for the

more  peremptory  declaration  of  the  Meno  that  'Virtue  cannot  be  taught

because there are no teachers.'


  The reasons for placing the Euthydemus early in the series are: (1) the

similarity  in  plan  and  style  to  the  Protagoras,  Charmides,  and  Lysis;--the

relation of Socrates to the Sophists is still that of humorous antagonism, not,

as in the later Dialogues of Plato, of embittered hatred; and the places and

persons have a considerable family likeness; (2) the Euthydemus belongs to

the Socratic period in which Socrates is represented as willing to learn, but

unable to teach; and in the spirit of Xenophon's Memorabilia, philosophy is

defined as 'the knowledge which will make us happy;' (3) we seem to have

passed  the  stage  arrived  at  in  the  Protagoras,  for  Socrates  is  no  longer

discussing whether virtue can be taught--from this question he is relieved by

the  ingenuous  declaration  of  the  youth  Cleinias;  and  (4)  not  yet  to  have

reached  the  point  at  which  he  asserts  'that  there  are  no  teachers.'  Such

grounds  are  precarious,  as  arguments  from  style  and  plan  are  apt  to  be

(Greek). But no arguments equally strong can be urged in favour of assigningto the Euthydemus any other position in the series.Euthydemus


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettPersons  of  the  Dialogue: SOCRATES,  who  is  the  narrator,  CRITO,

CLEINIAS, EUTHYDEMUS, DIONYSODORUS, CTESIPPUS


Scene: The Lyceum.


CRITO:  Who  was  the  person,  Socrates,  with  whom  you  were  talking

yesterday at the Lyceum? There was such a crowd around you that I could

not get within hearing, but I caught a sight of him over their heads, and I

made out, as I thought, that he was a stranger with whom you were talking:

who was he?


SOCRATES: There were two, Crito; which of them do you mean?


CRITO: The one whom I mean was seated second from you on the right-hand

side.  In  the  middle  was  Cleinias  the  young  son  of  Axiochus,  who  has

wonderfully grown; he is only about the age of my own Critobulus, but he is

much forwarder and very good-looking: the other is thin and looks younger

than he is.


SOCRATES: He whom you mean, Crito, is Euthydemus; and on my left

hand  there  was  his  brother  Dionysodorus,  who  also  took  part  in  the

conversation.


CRITO:  Neither  of  them  are  known  to  me,  Socrates;  they  are  a  new

importation of Sophists, as I should imagine. Of what country are they, and

what is their line of wisdom?


SOCRATES: As to their origin, I believe that they are natives of this part of

the world, and have migrated from Chios to Thurii; they were driven out of

Thurii, and have been living for many years past in these regions. As to their

wisdom, about which you ask, Crito, they are wonderful-- consummate! I

never knew what the true pancratiast was before; they are simply made up of

fighting, not like the two Acarnanian brothers who fight with their bodies

only, but this pair of heroes, besides being perfect in the use of their bodies,

are invincible in every sort of warfare; for they are capital at fighting in

armour, and will teach the art to any one who pays them; and also they aremost skilful in legal warfare; they will plead themselves and teach others to

speak and to compose speeches which will have an effect upon the courts.

And this was only the beginning of their wisdom, but they have at last carried

out the pancratiastic art to the very end, and have mastered the only mode of

fighting which had been hitherto neglected by them; and now no one dares

even to stand up against them: such is their skill in the war of words, that they

can refute any proposition whether true or false. Now I am thinking, Crito, of

placing myself in their hands; for they say that in a short time they can impart

their skill to any one.


CRITO: But, Socrates, are you not too old? there may be reason to fear that.


SOCRATES:  Certainly  not,  Crito;  as  I  will  prove  to  you,  for  I  have  the

consolation of knowing that they began this art of disputation which I covet,

quite, as I may say, in old age; last year, or the year before, they had none of

their new wisdom. I am only apprehensive that I may bring the two strangers

into disrepute, as I have done Connus the son of Metrobius, the harp-player,

who is still my music-master; for when the boys who go to him see me going

with them, they laugh at me and call him grandpapa's master. Now I should

not like the strangers to experience similar treatment; the fear of ridicule may

make  them  unwilling  to  receive  me;  and  therefore,  Crito,  I  shall  try  and

persuade some old men to accompany me to them, as I persuaded them to go

with me to Connus, and I hope that you will make one: and perhaps we had

better take your sons as a bait; they will want to have them as pupils, and for

the sake of them willing to receive us.


CRITO: I see no objection, Socrates, if you like; but first I wish that you

would give me a description of their wisdom, that I may know beforehand

what we are going to learn.


SOCRATES: In less than no time you shall hear; for I cannot say that I did

not attend--I paid great attention to them, and I remember and will endeavour

to repeat the whole story. Providentially I was sitting alone in the dressing-

room of the Lyceum where you saw me, and was about to depart; when I was

getting up I recognized the familiar divine sign: so I sat down again, and in a

little while the two brothers Euthydemus and Dionysodorus came in, and

several  others  with  them,  whom  I  believe  to  be  their  disciples,  and  theywalked about in the covered court; they had not taken more than two or three

turns when Cleinias entered, who, as you truly say, is very much improved:

he  was  followed  by  a  host  of  lovers,  one  of  whom  was  Ctesippus  the

Paeanian, a well-bred youth, but also having the wildness of youth. Cleinias

saw me from the entrance as I was sitting alone, and at once came and sat

down  on  the  right  hand  of  me,  as  you  describe;  and  Dionysodorus  and

Euthydemus,  when  they  saw  him,  at  first  stopped  and  talked  with  one

another, now and then glancing at us, for I particularly watched them; and

then Euthydemus came and sat down by the youth, and the other by me on

the left hand; the rest anywhere. I saluted the brothers, whom I had not seen

for  a  long  time;  and  then  I  said  to  Cleinias:  Here  are  two  wise  men,

Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, Cleinias, wise not in a small but in a large

way of wisdom, for they know all about war,--all that a good general ought to

know about the array and command of an army, and the whole art of fighting

in armour: and they know about law too, and can teach a man how to use the

weapons of the courts when he is injured.


They heard me say this, but only despised me. I observed that they looked at

one another, and both of them laughed; and then Euthydemus said: Those,

Socrates, are matters which we no longer pursue seriously; to us they are

secondary occupations.


Indeed, I said, if such occupations are regarded by you as secondary, what

must the principal one be; tell me, I beseech you, what that noble study is?


The teaching of virtue, Socrates, he replied, is our principal occupation; and

we believe that we can impart it better and quicker than any man.


My God! I said, and where did you learn that? I always thought, as I was

saying just now, that your chief accomplishment was the art of fighting in

armour; and I used to say as much of you, for I remember that you professed

this  when  you  were  here  before.  But  now  if  you  really  have  the  other

knowledge, O forgive me: I address you as I would superior beings, and ask

you to pardon the impiety of my former expressions. But are you quite sure

about this, Dionysodorus and Euthydemus? the promise is so vast, that a

feeling of incredulity steals over me.You may take our word, Socrates, for the fact.


Then I think you happier in having such a treasure than the great king is in

the possession of his kingdom. And please to tell me whether you intend to

exhibit your wisdom; or what will you do?


That is why we have come hither, Socrates; and our purpose is not only to

exhibit, but also to teach any one who likes to learn.


But I can promise you, I said, that every unvirtuous person will want to learn.

I shall be the first; and there is the youth Cleinias, and Ctesippus: and here

are  several  others,  I  said,  pointing  to  the  lovers  of  Cleinias,  who  were

beginning to gather round us. Now Ctesippus was sitting at some distance

from Cleinias; and when Euthydemus leaned forward in talking with me, he

was prevented from  seeing Cleinias, who was between us; and so, partly

because he wanted to look at his love, and also because he was interested, he

jumped up and stood opposite to us: and all the other admirers of Cleinias, as

well  as  the  disciples  of  Euthydemus  and  Dionysodorus,  followed  his

example. And these were the persons whom I showed to Euthydemus, telling

him that they were all eager to learn: to which Ctesippus and all of them with

one voice vehemently assented, and bid him exhibit the power of his wisdom.

Then I said: O Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, I earnestly request you to do

myself and the company the favour to exhibit. There may be some trouble in

giving the whole exhibition; but tell me one thing,--can you make a good

man of him only who is already convinced that he ought to learn of you, or of

him also who is not convinced, either because he imagines that virtue is a

thing which cannot be taught at all, or that you are not the teachers of it? Has

your art power to persuade him, who is of the latter temper of mind, that

virtue can be taught; and that you are the men from whom he will best learn

it?


Certainly, Socrates, said Dionysodorus; our art will do both.


And you and your brother, Dionysodorus, I said, of all men who are now

living are the most likely to stimulate him to philosophy and to the study of

virtue?Yes, Socrates, I rather think that we are.


Then I wish that you would be so good as to defer the other part of the

exhibition, and only try to persuade the youth whom you see here that he

ought to be a philosopher and study virtue. Exhibit that, and you will confer a

great favour on me and on every one present; for the fact is I and all of us are

extremely anxious that he should become truly good. His name is Cleinias,

and he is the son of Axiochus, and grandson of the old Alcibiades, cousin of

the Alcibiades that now is. He is quite young, and we are naturally afraid that

some one may get the start of us, and turn his mind in a wrong direction, and

he may be ruined. Your visit, therefore, is most happily timed; and I hope that

you  will  make  a  trial  of  the  young  man,  and  converse  with  him  in  our

presence, if you have no objection.


These were pretty nearly the expressions which I used; and Euthydemus, in a

manly  and  at  the  same  time  encouraging  tone,  replied:  There  can  be  no

objection, Socrates, if the young man is only willing to answer questions.


He is quite accustomed to do so, I replied; for his friends often come and ask

him  questions  and  argue  with  him;  and  therefore  he  is  quite  at  home  in

answering.


What followed, Crito, how can I rightly narrate? For not slight is the task of

rehearsing  infinite  wisdom,  and  therefore,  like  the  poets,  I  ought  to

commence my relation with an invocation to Memory and the Muses. Now

Euthydemus, if I remember rightly, began nearly as follows: O Cleinias, are

those who learn the wise or the ignorant?


The youth, overpowered by the question blushed, and in his perplexity looked

at me for help; and I, knowing that he was disconcerted, said: Take courage,

Cleinias, and answer like a man whichever you think; for my belief is that

you will derive the greatest benefit from their questions.


Whichever he answers, said Dionysodorus, leaning forward so as to catch my

ear,  his  face  beaming  with  laughter,  I  prophesy  that  he  will  be  refuted,

Socrates.While he was speaking to me, Cleinias gave his answer: and therefore I had

no time to warn him of the predicament in which he was placed, and he

answered that those who learned were the wise.


Euthydemus proceeded: There are some whom you would call teachers, are

there not?


The boy assented.


And they are the teachers of those who learn--the grammar-master and the

lyre-master used to teach you and other boys; and you were the learners?


Yes.


And when you were learners you did not as yet know the things which you

were learning?


No, he said.


And were you wise then?


No, indeed, he said.


But if you were not wise you were unlearned?


Certainly.


You then, learning what you did not know, were unlearned when you were

learning?


The youth nodded assent.


Then the unlearned learn, and not the wise, Cleinias, as you imagine.


At these words the followers of Euthydemus, of whom I spoke, like a chorus

at the bidding of their director, laughed and cheered. Then, before the youth

had time to recover his breath, Dionysodorus cleverly took him in hand, and

said: Yes, Cleinias; and when the grammar-master dictated anything to you,were they the wise boys or the unlearned who learned the dictation?


The wise, replied Cleinias.


Then after all the wise are the learners and not the unlearned; and your last

answer to Euthydemus was wrong.


Then  once  more  the  admirers  of  the  two  heroes,  in  an  ecstasy  at  their

wisdom, gave vent to another peal of laughter, while the rest of us were silent

and amazed. Euthydemus, observing this, determined to persevere with the

youth; and in order to heighten the effect went on asking another similar

question, which might be compared to the double turn of an expert dancer.

Do those, said he, who learn, learn what they know, or what they do not

know?


Again Dionysodorus whispered to me: That, Socrates, is just another of the

same sort.


Good heavens, I said; and your last question was so good!


Like all our other questions, Socrates, he replied--inevitable.


I see the reason, I said, why you are in such reputation among your disciples.


Meanwhile Cleinias had answered Euthydemus that those who learned learn

what they do not know; and he put him through a series of questions the same

as before.


Do you not know letters?


He assented.


All letters?


Yes.


But when the teacher dictates to you, does he not dictate letters?To this also he assented.


Then if you know all letters, he dictates that which you know?


This again was admitted by him.


Then, said the other, you do not learn that which he dictates; but he only who

does not know letters learns?


Nay, said Cleinias; but I do learn.


Then, said he, you learn what you know, if you know all the letters?


He admitted that.


Then, he said, you were wrong in your answer.


The  word  was  hardly  out  of  his  mouth  when  Dionysodorus  took  up  the

argument, like a ball which he caught, and had another throw at the youth.

Cleinias,  he  said,  Euthydemus  is  deceiving  you.  For  tell  me  now,  is  not

learning acquiring knowledge of that which one learns?


Cleinias assented.


And knowing is having knowledge at the time?


He agreed.


And not knowing is not having knowledge at the time?


He admitted that.


And are those who acquire those who have or have not a thing?


Those who have not.


And have you not admitted that those who do not know are of the number of

those who have not?He nodded assent.


Then those who learn are of the class of those who acquire, and not of those

who have?


He agreed.


Then, Cleinias, he said, those who do not know learn, and not those who

know.


Euthydemus was proceeding to give the youth a third fall; but I knew that he

was in deep water, and therefore, as I wanted to give him a respite lest he

should be disheartened, I said to him consolingly: You must not be surprised,

Cleinias, at the singularity of their mode of speech: this I say because you

may not understand what the two strangers are doing with you; they are only

initiating you after the manner of the Corybantes in the mysteries; and this

answers to the enthronement, which, if you have ever been initiated, is, as

you will know, accompanied by dancing and sport; and now they are just

prancing  and  dancing  about  you,  and  will  next  proceed  to  initiate  you;

imagine  then  that  you  have  gone  through  the  first  part  of  the  sophistical

ritual, which, as Prodicus says, begins with initiation into the correct use of

terms. The two foreign gentlemen, perceiving that you did not know, wanted

to explain to you that the word 'to learn' has two meanings, and is used, first,

in the sense of acquiring knowledge of some matter of which you previously

have no knowledge, and also, when you have the knowledge, in the sense of

reviewing this matter, whether something done or spoken by the light of this

newly-acquired knowledge; the latter is generally called 'knowing' rather than

'learning,' but the word 'learning' is also used; and you did not see, as they

explained to you, that the term is employed of two opposite sorts of men, of

those who know, and of those who do not know. There was a similar trick in

the second question, when they asked you whether men learn what they know

or  what  they  do  not  know.  These  parts  of  learning  are  not  serious,  and

therefore I say that the gentlemen are not serious, but are only playing with

you. For if a man had all that sort of knowledge that ever was, he would not

be at all the wiser; he would only be able to play with men, tripping them up

and oversetting them with distinctions of words. He would be like a person

who pulls away a stool from some one when he is about to sit down, and thenlaughs and makes merry at the sight of his friend overturned and laid on his

back. And you must regard all that has hitherto passed between you and them

as merely play. But in what is to follow I am certain that they will exhibit to

you their serious purpose, and keep their promise (I will show them how); for

they promised to give me a sample of the hortatory philosophy, but I suppose

that they wanted to have a game with you first. And now, Euthydemus and

Dionysodorus, I think that we have had enough of this. Will you let me see

you explaining to the young man how he is to apply himself to the study of

virtue and wisdom? And I will first show you what I conceive to be the

nature of the task, and what sort of a discourse I desire to hear; and if I do this

in a very inartistic and ridiculous manner, do not laugh at me, for I only

venture to improvise before you because I am eager to hear your wisdom: and

I must therefore ask you and your disciples to refrain from laughing. And

now, O son of Axiochus, let me put a question to you: Do not all men desire

happiness? And yet, perhaps, this is one of those ridiculous questions which I

am afraid to ask, and which ought not to be asked by a sensible man: for what

human being is there who does not desire happiness?


There is no one, said Cleinias, who does not.


Well, then, I said, since we all of us desire happiness, how can we be happy?-

-that  is  the  next  question.  Shall  we  not  be  happy  if  we  have  many  good

things? And this, perhaps, is even a more simple question than the first, for

there can be no doubt of the answer.


He assented.


And what things do we esteem good? No solemn sage is required to tell us

this, which may be easily answered; for every one will say that wealth is a

good.


Certainly, he said.


And are not health and beauty goods, and other personal gifts?


He agreed.Can there be any doubt that good birth, and power, and honours in one's own

land, are goods?


He assented.


And what other goods are there? I said. What do you say of temperance,

justice, courage: do you not verily and indeed think, Cleinias, that we shall be

more right in ranking them as goods than in not ranking them as goods? For a

dispute might possibly arise about this. What then do you say?


They are goods, said Cleinias.


Very  well,  I  said;  and  where  in  the  company  shall  we  find  a  place  for

wisdom--among the goods or not?


Among the goods.


And now, I said, think whether we have left out any considerable goods.


I do not think that we have, said Cleinias.


Upon recollection, I said, indeed I am afraid that we have left out the greatest

of them all.


What is that? he asked.


Fortune, Cleinias, I replied; which all, even the most foolish, admit to be the

greatest of goods.


True, he said.


On second thoughts, I added, how narrowly, O son of Axiochus, have you

and I escaped making a laughing-stock of ourselves to the strangers.


Why do you say so?


Why, because we have already spoken of good-fortune, and are but repeating

ourselves.What do you mean?


I  mean  that  there  is  something  ridiculous  in  again  putting  forward  good-

fortune, which has a place in the list already, and saying the same thing twice

over.


He asked what was the meaning of this, and I replied: Surely wisdom is

good-fortune; even a child may know that.


The simple-minded youth was amazed; and, observing his surprise, I said to

him: Do you not know, Cleinias, that flute-players are most fortunate and

successful in performing on the flute?


He assented.


And are not the scribes most fortunate in writing and reading letters?


Certainly.


Amid the dangers of the sea, again, are any more fortunate on the whole than

wise pilots?


None, certainly.


And if you were engaged in war, in whose company would you rather take

the risk--in company with a wise general, or with a foolish one?


With a wise one.


And  if  you  were  ill,  whom  would  you  rather  have  as  a  companion  in  a

dangerous illness--a wise physician, or an ignorant one?


A wise one.


You think, I said, that to act with a wise man is more fortunate than to act

with an ignorant one?


He assented.