                                Table of Contents




    About This Edition

    The Apology

    Charmides

    Cratylus

    Critias

    Crito

      Euthydemus

    Euthyphro

    Gorgias

    Ion

    Laches

    Laws

    Lesser Hippias

    Lysis

    Meno

      Menexenus

    Parmenides

    Phaedo

    Phaedrus

    Philebus

    Protagoras

    The Republic

    The Seventh Letter

    Sophist

    Statesman

    Symposium

    Theaetetus

    TimaeusAbout This Edition


  This edition contains the complete works of Plato translated by Benjamin

Jowett (1817-1893) of the University of Oxford. Also included are lengthy

and  insightful  introductions  by  Jowett.  Modern  scholarship  puts  some  of

Plato's works in doubt such as First Alcibiades, Hippias (major), Clitophon,

and Epistles. These are not included; the works presented here are generally

agreed by most scholars to be attributed to Plato.                          Apology Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    I. Socrates' Defense

    II. Socrates' Proposal for his Sentence

    III. Socrates' Comments on his SentenceIntroduction to Plato's Apology


  In  what  relation  the  Apology  of  Plato  stands  to  the  real  defence  of

Socrates, there are no means of determining. It certainly agrees in tone and

character with the description of Xenophon, who says in the Memorabilia

that Socrates might have been acquitted 'if in any moderate degree he would

have conciliated the favour of the dicasts;' and who informs us in another

passage, on the testimony of Hermogenes, the friend of Socrates, that he had

no wish to live; and that the divine sign refused to allow him to prepare a

defence, and also that Socrates himself declared this to be unnecessary, on

the ground that all his life long he had been preparing against that hour. For

the speech breathes throughout a spirit of defiance, (ut non supplex aut reus

sed magister aut dominus videretur esse judicum' (Cic. de Orat.); and the

loose and desultory style is an imitation of the 'accustomed manner' in which

Socrates spoke in 'the agora and among the tables of the money-changers.'

The allusion in the Crito may, perhaps, be adduced as a further evidence of

the literal accuracy of some parts. But in the main it must be regarded as the

ideal of Socrates, according to Plato's conception of him, appearing in the

greatest and most public scene of his life, and in the height of his triumph,

when he is weakest, and yet his mastery over mankind is greatest, and his

habitual irony acquires a new meaning and a sort of tragic pathos in the face

of death. The facts of his life are summed up, and the features of his character

are  brought  out  as  if  by  accident  in  the  course  of  the  defence.  The

conversational  manner,  the  seeming  want  of  arrangement,  the  ironical

simplicity, are found to result in a perfect work of art, which is the portrait of

Socrates.


  Yet some of the topics may have been actually used by Socrates; and the

recollection of his very words may have rung in the ears of his disciple. The

Apology  of  Plato  may  be  compared  generally  with  those  speeches  of

Thucydides in which he has embodied his conception of the lofty character

and  policy  of  the  great  Pericles,  and  which  at  the  same  time  furnish  a

commentary on the situation of affairs from the point of view of the historian.

So in the Apology there is an ideal rather than a literal truth; much is said

which was not said, and is only Plato's view of the situation. Plato was not,like Xenophon, a chronicler of facts; he does not appear in any of his writings

to have aimed at literal accuracy. He is not therefore to be supplemented from

the Memorabilia and Symposium of Xenophon, who belongs to an entirely

different class of writers. The Apology of Plato is not the report of what

Socrates said, but an elaborate composition, quite as much so in fact as one of

the Dialogues. And we may perhaps even indulge in the fancy that the actual

defence of Socrates was as much greater than the Platonic defence as the

master was greater than the disciple. But in any case, some of the words used

by him must have been remembered, and some of the facts recorded must

have actually occurred. It is significant that Plato is said to have been present

at the defence (Apol.), as he is also said to have been absent at the last scene

in the Phaedo. Is it fanciful to suppose that he meant to give the stamp of

authenticity to the one and not to the other?--especially when we consider

that these two passages are the only ones in which Plato makes mention of

himself. The circumstance that Plato was to be one of his sureties for the

payment of the fine which he proposed has the appearance of truth. More

suspicious  is  the  statement  that  Socrates  received  the  first  impulse  to  his

favourite calling of cross-examining the world from the Oracle of Delphi; for

he must already have been famous before Chaerephon went to consult the

Oracle (Riddell), and the story is of a kind which is very likely to have been

invented. On the whole we arrive at the conclusion that the Apology is true to

the character of Socrates, but we cannot show that any single sentence in it

was actually spoken by him. It breathes the spirit of Socrates, but has been

cast anew in the mould of Plato.


  There is not much in the other Dialogues which can be compared with the

Apology. The same recollection of his master may have been present to the

mind of Plato when depicting the sufferings of the Just in the Republic. The

Crito may also be regarded as a sort of appendage to the Apology, in which

Socrates,  who  has  defied  the  judges,  is  nevertheless  represented  as

scrupulously obedient to the laws. The idealization of the sufferer is carried

still further in the Gorgias, in which the thesis is maintained, that 'to suffer is

better than to do evil;' and the art of rhetoric is described as only useful for

the purpose of self-accusation. The parallelisms which occur in the so-called

Apology of Xenophon are not worth noticing, because the writing in which

they are contained is manifestly spurious. The statements of the Memorabilia

respecting the trial and death of Socrates agree generally with Plato; but theyhave lost the flavour of Socratic irony in the narrative of Xenophon.


  The Apology or Platonic defence of Socrates is divided into three parts:

1st. The defence properly so called; 2nd. The shorter address in mitigation of

the penalty; 3rd. The last words of prophetic rebuke and exhortation.


  The first part commences with an apology for his colloquial style; he is,

as he has always been, the enemy of rhetoric, and knows of no rhetoric but

truth; he will not falsify his character by making a speech. Then he proceeds

to divide his accusers into two classes; first, there is the nameless accuser--

public opinion. All the world from their earliest years had heard that he was a

corrupter  of  youth,  and  had  seen  him  caricatured  in  the  Clouds  of

Aristophanes. Secondly, there are the professed accusers, who are but the

mouth-piece of the others. The accusations of both might be summed up in a

formula.  The  first  say,  'Socrates  is  an  evil-doer  and  a  curious  person,

searching into things under the earth and above the heaven; and making the

worse appear the better cause, and teaching all this to others.' The second,

'Socrates is an evil-doer and corrupter of the youth, who does not receive the

gods whom the state receives, but introduces other new divinities.' These last

words appear to have been the actual indictment (compare Xen. Mem.); and

the previous formula, which is a summary of public opinion, assumes the

same legal style.


  The answer begins by clearing up a confusion. In the representations of

the Comic poets, and in the opinion of the multitude, he had been identified

with the teachers of physical science and with the Sophists. But this was an

error.  For  both  of  them  he  professes  a  respect  in  the  open  court,  which

contrasts with his manner of speaking about them in other places. (Compare

for  Anaxagoras,  Phaedo,  Laws;  for  the  Sophists,  Meno,  Republic,  Tim.,

Theaet., Soph., etc.) But at the same time he shows that he is not one of them.

Of natural philosophy he knows nothing; not that he despises such pursuits,

but the fact is that he is ignorant of them, and never says a word about them.

Nor is he paid for giving instruction--that is another mistaken notion:--he has

nothing  to  teach.  But  he  commends  Evenus  for  teaching  virtue  at  such  a

'moderate' rate as five minae. Something of the 'accustomed irony,' which

may perhaps be expected to sleep in the ear of the multitude, is lurking here.  He then goes on to explain the reason why he is in such an evil name.

That had arisen out of a peculiar mission which he had taken upon himself.

The enthusiastic Chaerephon (probably in anticipation of the answer which

he received) had gone to Delphi and asked the oracle if there was any man

wiser than Socrates; and the answer was, that there was no man wiser. What

could be the meaning of this--that he who knew nothing, and knew that he

knew nothing, should be declared by the oracle to be the wisest of men?

Reflecting upon the answer, he determined to refute it by finding 'a wiser;'

and first he went to the politicians, and then to the poets, and then to the

craftsmen, but always with the same result--he found that they knew nothing,

or hardly anything more than himself; and that the little advantage which in

some cases they possessed was more than counter-balanced by their conceit

of knowledge. He knew nothing, and knew that he knew nothing: they knew

little or nothing, and imagined that they knew all things. Thus he had passed

his life as a sort of missionary in detecting the pretended wisdom of mankind;

and this occupation had quite absorbed him and taken him away both from

public and private affairs. Young men of the richer sort had made a pastime

of the same pursuit, 'which was not unamusing.' And hence bitter enmities

had arisen; the professors of knowledge had revenged themselves by calling

him  a  villainous  corrupter  of  youth,  and  by  repeating  the  commonplaces

about atheism and materialism and sophistry, which are the stock-accusations

against all philosophers when there is nothing else to be said of them.


  The second accusation he meets by interrogating Meletus, who is present

and can be interrogated. 'If he is the corrupter, who is the improver of the

citizens?'  (Compare  Meno.)  'All  men  everywhere.'  But  how  absurd,  how

contrary to analogy is this! How inconceivable too, that he should make the

citizens  worse  when  he  has  to  live  with  them.  This  surely  cannot  be

intentional; and if unintentional, he ought to have been instructed by Meletus,

and not accused in the court.


  But there is another part of the indictment which says that he teaches men

not to receive the gods whom the city receives, and has other new gods. 'Is

that the way in which he is supposed to corrupt the youth?' 'Yes, it is.' 'Has he

only new gods, or none at all?' 'None at all.' 'What, not even the sun and

moon?' 'No; why, he says that the sun is a stone, and the moon earth.' That,

replies Socrates, is the old confusion about Anaxagoras; the Athenian peopleare not so ignorant as to attribute to the influence of Socrates notions which

have  found  their  way  into  the  drama,  and  may  be  learned  at  the  theatre.

Socrates  undertakes  to  show  that  Meletus  (rather  unjustifiably)  has  been

compounding a riddle in this part of the indictment: 'There are no gods, but

Socrates believes in the existence of the sons of gods, which is absurd.'


  Leaving Meletus, who has had enough words spent upon him, he returns

to the original accusation. The question may be asked, Why will he persist in

following a profession which leads him to death? Why?--because he must

remain at his post where the god has placed him, as he remained at Potidaea,

and Amphipolis, and Delium, where the generals placed him. Besides, he is

not so overwise as to imagine that he knows whether death is a good or an

evil; and he is certain that desertion of his duty is an evil. Anytus is quite

right in saying that they should never have indicted him if they meant to let

him go. For he will certainly obey God rather than man; and will continue to

preach to all men of all ages the necessity of virtue and improvement; and if

they refuse to listen to him he will still persevere and reprove them. This is

his  way  of  corrupting  the  youth,  which  he  will  not  cease  to  follow  in

obedience to the god, even if a thousand deaths await him.


  He is desirous that they should let him live--not for his own sake, but for

theirs; because he is their heaven-sent friend (and they will never have such

another), or, as he may be ludicrously described, he is the gadfly who stirs the

generous  steed  into  motion.  Why  then  has  he  never  taken  part  in  public

affairs? Because the familiar divine voice has hindered him; if he had been a

public man, and had fought for the right, as he would certainly have fought

against the many, he would not have lived, and could therefore have done no

good. Twice in public matters he has risked his life for the sake of justice--

once at the trial of the generals; and again in resistance to the tyrannical

commands of the Thirty.


  But, though not a public man, he has passed his days in instructing the

citizens without fee or reward--this was his mission. Whether his disciples

have turned out well or ill, he cannot justly be charged with the result, for he

never promised to teach them anything. They might come if they liked, and

they might stay away if they liked: and they did come, because they found an

amusement in hearing the pretenders to wisdom detected. If they have beencorrupted, their elder relatives (if not themselves) might surely come into

court and witness against him, and there is an opportunity still for them to

appear.  But  their  fathers  and  brothers  all  appear  in  court  (including  'this'

Plato), to witness on his behalf; and if their relatives are corrupted, at least

they are uncorrupted; 'and they are my witnesses. For they know that I am

speaking the truth, and that Meletus is lying.'


  This is about all that he has to say. He will not entreat the judges to spare

his life; neither will he present a spectacle of weeping children, although he,

too, is not made of 'rock or oak.' Some of the judges themselves may have

complied with this practice on similar occasions, and he trusts that they will

not be angry with him for not following their example. But he feels that such

conduct brings discredit on the name of Athens: he feels too, that the judge

has sworn not to give away justice; and he cannot be guilty of the impiety of

asking the judge to break his oath, when he is himself being tried for impiety.


  As he expected, and probably intended, he is convicted. And now the tone

of the speech, instead of being more conciliatory, becomes more lofty and

commanding.  Anytus  proposes  death  as  the  penalty:  and  what  counter-

proposition shall he make? He, the benefactor of the Athenian people, whose

whole  life  has  been  spent  in  doing  them  good,  should  at  least  have  the

Olympic victor's reward of maintenance in the Prytaneum. Or why should he

propose any counter-penalty when he does not know whether death, which

Anytus proposes, is a good or an evil? And he is certain that imprisonment is

an evil, exile is an evil. Loss of money might be an evil, but then he has none

to give; perhaps he can make up a mina. Let that be the penalty, or, if his

friends wish, thirty minae; for which they will be excellent securities.


  (He is condemned to death.)


  He  is  an  old  man  already,  and  the  Athenians  will  gain  nothing  but

disgrace  by  depriving  him  of  a  few  years  of  life.  Perhaps  he  could  have

escaped, if he had chosen to throw down his arms and entreat for his life. But

he does not at all repent of the manner of his defence; he would rather die in

his own fashion than live in theirs. For the penalty of unrighteousness is

swifter than death; that penalty has already overtaken his accusers as death

will soon overtake him.  And now, as one who is about to die, he will prophesy to them. They

have put him to death in order to escape the necessity of giving an account of

their  lives.  But  his  death  'will  be  the  seed'  of  many  disciples  who  will

convince them of their evil ways, and will come forth to reprove them in

harsher terms, because they are younger and more inconsiderate.


  He would like to say a few words, while there is time, to those who would

have  acquitted  him.  He  wishes  them  to  know  that  the  divine  sign  never

interrupted  him  in  the  course  of  his  defence;  the  reason  of  which,  as  he

conjectures, is that the death to which he is going is a good and not an evil.

For either death is a long sleep, the best of sleeps, or a journey to another

world in which the souls of the dead are gathered together, and in which there

may  be  a  hope  of  seeing  the  heroes  of  old--in  which,  too,  there  are  just

judges; and as all are immortal, there can be no fear of any one suffering

death for his opinions.


  Nothing evil can happen to the good man either in life or death, and his

own death has been permitted by the gods, because it was better for him to

depart; and therefore he forgives his judges because they have done him no

harm, although they never meant to do him any good.


  He has a last request to make to them--that they will trouble his sons as he

has  troubled  them,  if  they  appear  to  prefer  riches  to  virtue,  or  to  think

themselves something when they are nothing.


  ...


  'Few persons will be found to wish that Socrates should have defended

himself otherwise,'--if, as we must add, his defence was that with which Plato

has  provided  him.  But  leaving  this  question,  which  does  not  admit  of  a

precise solution, we may go on to ask what was the impression which Plato in

the Apology intended to give of the character and conduct of his master in the

last great scene? Did he intend to represent him (1) as employing sophistries;

(2) as designedly irritating the judges? Or are these sophistries to be regarded

as belonging to the age in which he lived and to his personal character, and

this  apparent  haughtiness  as  flowing  from  the  natural  elevation  of  his

position?  For example, when he says that it is absurd to suppose that one man is the

corrupter and all the rest of the world the improvers of the youth; or, when he

argues that he never could have corrupted the men with whom he had to live;

or, when he proves his belief in the gods because he believes in the sons of

gods, is he serious or jesting? It may be observed that these sophisms all

occur in his cross-examination of Meletus, who is easily foiled and mastered

in the hands of the great dialectician. Perhaps he regarded these answers as

good enough for his accuser, of whom he makes very light. Also there is a

touch of irony in them, which takes them out of the category of sophistry.

(Compare Euthyph.)


  That  the  manner  in  which  he  defends  himself  about  the  lives  of  his

disciples is not satisfactory, can hardly be denied. Fresh in the memory of the

Athenians,  and  detestable  as  they  deserved  to  be  to  the  newly  restored

democracy, were the names of Alcibiades, Critias, Charmides. It is obviously

not  a  sufficient  answer  that  Socrates  had  never  professed  to  teach  them

anything, and is therefore not justly chargeable with their crimes. Yet the

defence, when taken out of this ironical form, is doubtless sound: that his

teaching had nothing to do with their evil lives. Here, then, the sophistry is

rather  in  form  than  in  substance,  though  we  might  desire  that  to  such  a

serious charge Socrates had given a more serious answer.


  Truly characteristic of Socrates is another point in his answer, which may

also be regarded as sophistical. He says that 'if he has corrupted the youth, he

must have corrupted them involuntarily.' But if, as Socrates argues, all evil is

involuntary, then all criminals ought to be admonished and not punished. In

these  words  the  Socratic  doctrine  of  the  involuntariness  of  evil  is  clearly

intended to be conveyed. Here again, as in the former instance, the defence of

Socrates is untrue practically, but may be true in some ideal or transcendental

sense. The commonplace reply, that if he had been guilty of corrupting the

youth their relations would surely have witnessed against him, with which he

concludes this part of his defence, is more satisfactory.


  Again, when Socrates argues that he must believe in the gods because he

believes in the sons of gods, we must remember that this is a refutation not of

the  original  indictment,  which  is  consistent  enough--'Socrates  does  not

receive the gods whom the city receives, and has other new divinities' --but ofthe interpretation put upon the words by Meletus, who has affirmed that he is

a downright atheist. To this Socrates fairly answers, in accordance with the

ideas of the time, that a downright atheist cannot believe in the sons of gods

or in divine things. The notion that demons or lesser divinities are the sons of

gods is not to be regarded as ironical or sceptical. He is arguing 'ad hominem'

according to the notions of mythology current in his age. Yet he abstains

from saying that he believed in the gods whom the State approved. He does

not  defend  himself,  as  Xenophon  has  defended  him,  by  appealing  to  his

practice of religion. Probably he neither wholly believed, nor disbelieved, in

the existence of the popular gods; he had no means of knowing about them.

According  to  Plato  (compare  Phaedo;  Symp.),  as  well  as  Xenophon

(Memor.), he was punctual in the performance of the least religious duties;

and he must have believed in his own oracular sign, of which he seemed to

have an internal witness. But the existence of Apollo or Zeus, or the other

gods whom the State approves, would have appeared to him both uncertain

and unimportant in comparison of the duty of self-examination, and of those

principles  of  truth  and  right  which  he  deemed  to  be  the  foundation  of

religion. (Compare Phaedr.; Euthyph.; Republic.)


  The  second  question,  whether  Plato  meant  to  represent  Socrates  as

braving or irritating his judges, must also be answered in the negative. His

irony,  his  superiority,  his  audacity,  'regarding  not  the  person  of  man,'

necessarily flow out of the loftiness of his situation. He is not acting a part

upon a great occasion, but he is what he has been all his life long, 'a king of

men.'  He  would  rather  not  appear  insolent,  if  he  could  avoid  it  (ouch  os

authadizomenos touto lego). Neither is he desirous of hastening his own end,

for life and death are simply indifferent to him. But such a defence as would

be acceptable to his judges and might procure an acquittal, it is not in his

nature to make. He will not say or do anything that might pervert the course

of justice; he cannot have his tongue bound even 'in the throat of death.' With

his  accusers  he  will  only  fence  and  play,  as  he  had  fenced  with  other

'improvers of youth,' answering the Sophist according to his sophistry all his

life long. He is serious when he is speaking of his own mission, which seems

to distinguish him from all other reformers of mankind, and originates in an

accident. The dedication of himself to the improvement of his fellow-citizens

is not so remarkable as the ironical spirit in which he goes about doing good

only in vindication of the credit of the oracle, and in the vain hope of findinga wiser man than himself. Yet this singular and almost accidental character of

his mission agrees with the divine sign which, according to our notions, is

equally accidental and irrational, and is nevertheless accepted by him as the

guiding  principle  of  his  life.  Socrates  is  nowhere  represented  to  us  as  a

freethinker  or  sceptic.  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  his  sincerity  when  he

speculates on the possibility of seeing and knowing the heroes of the Trojan

war  in  another  world.  On  the  other  hand,  his  hope  of  immortality  is

uncertain;--he also conceives of death as a long sleep (in this respect differing

from the Phaedo), and at last falls back on resignation to the divine will, and

the certainty that no evil can happen to the good man either in life or death.

His absolute truthfulness seems to hinder him from asserting positively more

than this; and he makes no attempt to veil his ignorance in mythology and

figures of speech. The gentleness of the first part of the speech contrasts with

the  aggravated,  almost  threatening,  tone  of  the  conclusion.  He

characteristically remarks that he will not speak as a rhetorician, that is to

say, he will not make a regular defence such as Lysias or one of the orators

might have composed for him, or, according to some accounts, did compose

for him. But he first procures himself a hearing by conciliatory words. He

does  not  attack  the  Sophists;  for  they  were  open  to  the  same  charges  as

himself; they were equally ridiculed by the Comic poets, and almost equally

hateful  to  Anytus  and  Meletus.  Yet  incidentally  the  antagonism  between

Socrates and the Sophists is allowed to appear. He is poor and they are rich;

his profession that he teaches nothing is opposed to their readiness to teach

all  things;  his  talking  in  the  marketplace  to  their  private  instructions;  his

tarry-at-home life to their wandering from city to city. The tone which he

assumes towards them is one of real friendliness, but also of concealed irony.

Towards Anaxagoras, who had disappointed him in his hopes of learning

about mind and nature, he shows a less kindly feeling, which is also the

feeling of Plato in other passages (Laws). But Anaxagoras had been dead

thirty years, and was beyond the reach of persecution.


  It has been remarked that the prophecy of a new generation of teachers

who  would  rebuke  and  exhort  the  Athenian  people  in  harsher  and  more

violent terms was, as far as we know, never fulfilled. No inference can be

drawn from this circumstance as to the probability of the words attributed to

him having been actually uttered. They express the aspiration of the first

martyr  of  philosophy,  that  he  would  leave  behind  him  many  followers,accompanied by the not unnatural feeling that they would be fiercer and more

inconsiderate in their words when emancipated from his control.


  The above remarks must be understood as applying with any degree of

certainty to the Platonic Socrates only. For, although these or similar words

may  have  been  spoken  by  Socrates  himself,  we  cannot  exclude  the

possibility, that like so much else, e.g. the wisdom of Critias, the poem of

Solon,  the  virtues  of  Charmides,  they  may  have  been  due  only  to  the

imagination of Plato. The arguments of those who maintain that the Apology

was composed during the process, resting on no evidence, do not require a

serious refutation. Nor are the reasonings of Schleiermacher, who argues that

the Platonic defence is an exact or nearly exact reproduction of the words of

Socrates, partly because Plato would not have been guilty of the impiety of

altering them, and also because many points of the defence might have been

improved and strengthened, at all more conclusive. (See English Translation.)

What effect the death of Socrates produced on the mind of Plato, we cannot

certainly determine; nor can we say how he would or must have written under

the circumstances. We observe that the enmity of Aristophanes to Socrates

does not prevent Plato from introducing them together in the Symposium

engaged in friendly intercourse. Nor is there any trace in the Dialogues of an

attempt  to  make  Anytus  or  Meletus  personally  odious  in  the  eyes  of  the

Athenian public.Socrates' Defense


How you have felt, O men of Athens, at hearing the speeches of my accusers,

I cannot tell; but I know that their persuasive words almost made me forget

who I was - such was the effect of them; and yet they have hardly spoken a

word of truth. But many as their falsehoods were, there was one of them

which quite amazed me; - I mean when they told you to be upon your guard,

and not to let yourselves be deceived by the force of my eloquence. They

ought to have been ashamed of saying this, because they were sure to be

detected  as  soon  as  I  opened  my  lips  and  displayed  my  deficiency;  they

certainly did appear to be most shameless in saying this, unless by the force

of eloquence they mean the force of truth; for then I do indeed admit that I

am eloquent. But in how different a way from theirs! Well, as I was saying,

they have hardly uttered a word, or not more than a word, of truth; but you

shall  hear  from  me  the  whole  truth:  not,  however,  delivered  after  their

manner, in a set oration duly ornamented with words and phrases. No indeed!

but I shall use the words and arguments which occur to me at the moment; for

I am certain that this is right, and that at my time of life I ought not to be

appearing before you, O men of Athens, in the character of a juvenile orator -

let no one expect this of me. And I must beg of you to grant me one favor,

which is this - If you hear me using the same words in my defence which I

have been in the habit of using, and which most of you may have heard in the

agora, and at the tables of the money-changers, or anywhere else, I would ask

you not to be surprised at this, and not to interrupt me. For I am more than

seventy years of age, and this is the first time that I have ever appeared in a

court of law, and I am quite a stranger to the ways of the place; and therefore

I would have you regard me as if I were really a stranger, whom you would

excuse if he spoke in his native tongue, and after the fashion of his country; -

that I think is not an unfair request. Never mind the manner, which may or

may not be good; but think only of the justice of my cause, and give heed to

that: let the judge decide justly and the speaker speak truly.


And first, I have to reply to the older charges and to my first accusers, and

then I will go to the later ones. For I have had many accusers, who accused

me of old, and their false charges have continued during many years; and Iam  more  afraid  of  them  than  of  Anytus  and  his  associates,  who  are

dangerous, too, in their own way. But far more dangerous are these, who

began when you were children, and took possession of your minds with their

falsehoods, telling of one Socrates, a wise man, who speculated about the

heaven  above,  and  searched  into  the  earth  beneath,  and  made  the  worse

appear the better cause. These are the accusers whom I dread; for they are the

circulators  of  this  rumor,  and  their  hearers  are  too  apt  to  fancy  that

speculators of this sort do not believe in the gods. And they are many, and

their charges against me are of ancient date, and they made them in days

when you were impressible - in childhood, or perhaps in youth - and the

cause  when  heard  went  by  default,  for  there  was  none  to  answer.  And,

hardest of all, their names I do not know and cannot tell; unless in the chance

of a comic poet. But the main body of these slanderers who from envy and

malice  have  wrought  upon  you  -  and  there  are  some  of  them  who  are

convinced themselves, and impart their convictions to others - all these, I say,

are most difficult to deal with; for I cannot have them up here, and examine

them, and therefore I must simply fight with shadows in my own defence,

and  examine  when  there  is  no  one  who  answers.  I  will  ask  you  then  to

assume with me, as I was saying, that my opponents are of two kinds - one

recent, the other ancient; and I hope that you will see the propriety of my

answering the latter first, for these accusations you heard long before the

others, and much oftener.


Well, then, I will make my defence, and I will endeavor in the short time

which is allowed to do away with this evil opinion of me which you have

held for such a long time; and I hope I may succeed, if this be well for you

and me, and that my words may find favor with you. But I know that to

accomplish this is not easy - I quite see the nature of the task. Let the event

be as God wills: in obedience to the law I make my defence.


I will begin at the beginning, and ask what the accusation is which has given

rise to this slander of me, and which has encouraged Meletus to proceed

against me. What do the slanderers say? They shall be my prosecutors, and I

will  sum  up  their  words  in  an  affidavit.  "Socrates  is  an  evil-doer,  and  a

curious person, who searches into things under the earth and in heaven, and

he makes the worse appear the better cause; and he teaches the aforesaid

doctrines to others." That is the nature of the accusation, and that is what youhave seen yourselves in the comedy of Aristophanes; who has introduced a

man whom he calls Socrates, going about and saying that he can walk in the

air, and talking a deal of nonsense concerning matters of which I do not

pretend  to  know  either  much  or  little  -  not  that  I  mean  to  say  anything

disparaging of anyone who is a student of natural philosophy. I should be

very sorry if Meletus could lay that to my charge. But the simple truth is, O

Athenians, that I have nothing to do with these studies. Very many of those

here present are witnesses to the truth of this, and to them I appeal. Speak

then, you who have heard me, and tell your neighbors whether any of you

have ever known me hold forth in few words or in many upon matters of this

sort. ... You hear their answer. And from what they say of this you will be

able to judge of the truth of the rest.


As little foundation is there for the report that I am a teacher, and take money;

that is no more true than the other. Although, if a man is able to teach, I

honor him for being paid. There is Gorgias of Leontium, and Prodicus of

Ceos, and Hippias of Elis, who go the round of the cities, and are able to

persuade the young men to leave their own citizens, by whom they might be

taught  for  nothing,  and  come  to  them,  whom  they  not  only  pay,  but  are

thankful  if  they  may  be  allowed  to  pay  them.  There  is  actually  a  Parian

philosopher residing in Athens, of whom I have heard; and I came to hear of

him in this way: - I met a man who has spent a world of money on the

Sophists, Callias the son of Hipponicus, and knowing that he had sons, I

asked him: "Callias," I said, "if your two sons were foals or calves, there

would be no difficulty in finding someone to put over them; we should hire a

trainer of horses or a farmer probably who would improve and perfect them

in their own proper virtue and excellence; but as they are human beings,

whom  are  you  thinking  of  placing  over  them?  Is  there  anyone  who

understands human and political virtue? You must have thought about this as

you have sons; is there anyone?" "There is," he said. "Who is he?" said I,

"and of what country? and what does he charge?" "Evenus the Parian," he

replied; "he is the man, and his charge is five minae." Happy is Evenus, I said

to myself, if he really has this wisdom, and teaches at such a modest charge.

Had I the same, I should have been very proud and conceited; but the truth is

that I have no knowledge of the kind.


I dare say, Athenians, that someone among you will reply, "Why is this,Socrates, and what is the origin of these accusations of you: for there must

have been something strange which you have been doing? All this great fame

and talk about you would never have arisen if you had been like other men:

tell us, then, why this is, as we should be sorry to judge hastily of you." Now

I regard this as a fair challenge, and I will endeavor to explain to you the

origin of this name of "wise," and of this evil fame. Please to attend then.

And although some of you may think I am joking, I declare that I will tell you

the entire truth. Men of Athens, this reputation of mine has come of a certain

sort of wisdom which I possess. If you ask me what kind of wisdom, I reply,

such  wisdom  as  is  attainable  by  man,  for  to  that  extent  I  am  inclined  to

believe that I am wise; whereas the persons of whom I was speaking have a

superhuman  wisdom,  which  I  may  fail  to  describe,  because  I  have  it  not

myself; and he who says that I have, speaks falsely, and is taking away my

character. And here, O men of Athens, I must beg you not to interrupt me,

even if I seem to say something extravagant. For the word which I will speak

is not mine. I will refer you to a witness who is worthy of credit, and will tell

you about my wisdom - whether I have any, and of what sort - and that

witness shall be the god of Delphi. You must have known Chaerephon; he

was early a friend of mine, and also a friend of yours, for he shared in the

exile of the people, and returned with you. Well, Chaerephon, as you know,

was very impetuous in all his doings, and he went to Delphi and boldly asked

the  oracle  to  tell  him  whether  -  as  I  was  saying,  I  must  beg  you  not  to

interrupt - he asked the oracle to tell him whether there was anyone wiser

than I was, and the Pythian prophetess answered that there was no man wiser.

Chaerephon is dead himself, but his brother, who is in court, will confirm the

truth of this story.


Why do I mention this? Because I am going to explain to you why I have

such an evil name. When I heard the answer, I said to myself, What can the

god mean? and what is the interpretation of this riddle? for I know that I have

no wisdom, small or great. What can he mean when he says that I am the

wisest of men? And yet he is a god and cannot lie; that would be against his

nature. After a long consideration, I at last thought of a method of trying the

question. I reflected that if I could only find a man wiser than myself, then I

might go to the god with a refutation in my hand. I should say to him, "Here

is  a  man  who  is  wiser  than  I  am;  but  you  said  that  I  was  the  wisest."

Accordingly I went to one who had the reputation of wisdom, and observedto him - his name I need not mention; he was a politician whom I selected for

examination - and the result was as follows: When I began to talk with him, I

could not help thinking that he was not really wise, although he was thought

wise by many, and wiser still by himself; and I went and tried to explain to

him  that  he  thought  himself  wise,  but  was  not  really  wise;  and  the

consequence was that he hated me, and his enmity was shared by several who

were present and heard me. So I left him, saying to myself, as I went away:

Well,  although  I  do  not  suppose  that  either  of  us  knows  anything  really

beautiful and good, I am better off than he is - for he knows nothing, and

thinks that he knows. I neither know nor think that I know. In this latter

particular, then, I seem to have slightly the advantage of him. Then I went to

another, who had still higher philosophical pretensions, and my conclusion

was exactly the same. I made another enemy of him, and of many others

besides him.


After this I went to one man after another, being not unconscious of the

enmity which I provoked, and I lamented and feared this: but necessity was

laid upon me - the word of God, I thought, ought to be considered first. And I

said  to  myself,  Go  I  must  to  all  who  appear  to  know,  and  find  out  the

meaning of the oracle. And I swear to you, Athenians, by the dog I swear! -

for I must tell you the truth - the result of my mission was just this: I found

that the men most in repute were all but the most foolish; and that some

inferior  men  were  really  wiser  and  better.  I  will  tell  you  the  tale  of  my

wanderings  and  of  the  "Herculean"  labors,  as  I  may  call  them,  which  I

endured only to find at last the oracle irrefutable. When I left the politicians, I

went  to  the  poets;  tragic,  dithyrambic,  and  all  sorts.  And  there,  I  said  to

myself,  you  will  be  detected;  now  you  will  find  out  that  you  are  more

ignorant than they are. Accordingly, I took them some of the most elaborate

passages in their own writings, and asked what was the meaning of them -

thinking that they would teach me something. Will you believe me? I am

almost ashamed to speak of this, but still I must say that there is hardly a

person present who would not have talked better about their poetry than they

did themselves. That showed me in an instant that not by wisdom do poets

write poetry, but by a sort of genius and inspiration; they are like diviners or

soothsayers  who  also  say  many  fine  things,  but  do  not  understand  the

meaning of them. And the poets appeared to me to be much in the same case;

and I further observed that upon the strength of their poetry they believedthemselves to be the wisest of men in other things in which they were not

wise. So I departed, conceiving myself to be superior to them for the same

reason that I was superior to the politicians.


At last I went to the artisans, for I was conscious that I knew nothing at all, as

I may say, and I was sure that they knew many fine things; and in this I was

not mistaken, for they did know many things of which I was ignorant, and in

this they certainly were wiser than I was. But I observed that even the good

artisans  fell  into  the  same  error  as  the  poets;  because  they  were  good

workmen they thought that they also knew all sorts of high matters, and this

defect in them overshadowed their wisdom - therefore I asked myself on

behalf of the oracle, whether I would like to be as I was, neither having their

knowledge nor their ignorance, or like them in both; and I made answer to

myself and the oracle that I was better off as I was.


This investigation has led to my having many enemies of the worst and most

dangerous kind, and has given occasion also to many calumnies, and I am

called wise, for my hearers always imagine that I myself possess the wisdom

which I find wanting in others: but the truth is, O men of Athens, that God

only is wise; and in this oracle he means to say that the wisdom of men is

little or nothing; he is not speaking of Socrates, he is only using my name as

an illustration, as if he said, He, O men, is the wisest, who, like Socrates,

knows  that  his  wisdom  is  in  truth  worth  nothing.  And  so  I  go  my  way,

obedient  to  the  god,  and  make  inquisition  into  the  wisdom  of  anyone,

whether citizen or stranger, who appears to be wise; and if he is not wise,

then in vindication of the oracle I show him that he is not wise; and this

occupation quite absorbs me, and I have no time to give either to any public

matter of interest or to any concern of my own, but I am in utter poverty by

reason of my devotion to the god.


There is another thing: - young men of the richer classes, who have not much

to do, come about me of their own accord; they like to hear the pretenders

examined, and they often imitate me, and examine others themselves; there

are plenty of persons, as they soon enough discover, who think that they

know something, but really know little or nothing: and then those who are

examined by them instead of being angry with themselves are angry with me:

This confounded Socrates, they say; this villainous misleader of youth! - andthen if somebody asks them, Why, what evil does he practise or teach? they

do not know, and cannot tell; but in order that they may not appear to be at a

loss,  they  repeat  the  ready-made  charges  which  are  used  against  all

philosophers about teaching things up in the clouds and under the earth, and

having no gods, and making the worse appear the better cause; for they do

not like to confess that their pretence of knowledge has been detected - which

is the truth: and as they are numerous and ambitious and energetic, and are all

in battle array and have persuasive tongues, they have filled your ears with

their loud and inveterate calumnies. And this is the reason why my three

accusers, Meletus and Anytus and Lycon, have set upon me; Meletus, who

has  a  quarrel  with  me  on  behalf  of  the  poets;  Anytus,  on  behalf  of  the

craftsmen;  Lycon,  on  behalf  of  the  rhetoricians:  and  as  I  said  at  the

beginning, I cannot expect to get rid of this mass of calumny all in a moment.

And this, O men of Athens, is the truth and the whole truth; I have concealed

nothing, I have dissembled nothing. And yet I know that this plainness of

speech makes them hate me, and what is their hatred but a proof that I am

speaking the truth? - this is the occasion and reason of their slander of me, as

you will find out either in this or in any future inquiry.


I have said enough in my defence against the first class of my accusers; I turn

to the second class, who are headed by Meletus, that good and patriotic man,

as he calls himself. And now I will try to defend myself against them: these

new  accusers  must  also  have  their  affidavit  read.  What  do  they  say?

Something of this sort: - That Socrates is a doer of evil, and corrupter of the

youth, and he does not believe in the gods of the state, and has other new

divinities of his own. That is the sort of charge; and now let us examine the

particular counts. He says that I am a doer of evil, who corrupt the youth; but

I say, O men of Athens, that Meletus is a doer of evil, and the evil is that he

makes a joke of a serious matter, and is too ready at bringing other men to

trial from a pretended zeal and interest about matters in which he really never

had the smallest interest. And the truth of this I will endeavor to prove.


Come hither, Meletus, and let me ask a question of you. You think a great

deal about the improvement of youth?


Yes, I do.Tell the judges, then, who is their improver; for you must know, as you have

taken the pains to discover their corrupter, and are citing and accusing me

before them. Speak, then, and tell the judges who their improver is. Observe,

Meletus, that you are silent, and have nothing to say. But is not this rather

disgraceful, and a very considerable proof of what I was saying, that you

have  no  interest  in  the  matter?  Speak  up,  friend,  and  tell  us  who  their

improver is.


The laws.


But that, my good sir, is not my meaning. I want to know who the person is,

who, in the first place, knows the laws.


The judges, Socrates, who are present in court.


What do you mean to say, Meletus, that they are able to instruct and improve

youth?


Certainly they are.


What, all of them, or some only and not others?


All of them.


By the goddess Here, that is good news! There are plenty of improvers, then.

And what do you say of the audience, - do they improve them?


Yes, they do.


And the senators?


Yes, the senators improve them.


But perhaps the members of the citizen assembly corrupt them? - or do they

too improve them?


They improve them.Then every Athenian improves and elevates them; all with the exception of

myself; and I alone am their corrupter? Is that what you affirm?


That is what I stoutly affirm.


I am very unfortunate if that is true. But suppose I ask you a question: Would

you say that this also holds true in the case of horses? Does one man do them

harm and all the world good? Is not the exact opposite of this true? One man

is able to do them good, or at least not many; - the trainer of horses, that is to

say, does them good, and others who have to do with them rather injure

them?  Is  not  that  true,  Meletus,  of  horses,  or  any  other  animals?  Yes,

certainly. Whether you and Anytus say yes or no, that is no matter. Happy

indeed would be the condition of youth if they had one corrupter only, and all

the  rest  of  the  world  were  their  improvers.  And  you,  Meletus,  have

sufficiently  shown  that  you  never  had  a  thought  about  the  young:  your

carelessness is seen in your not caring about matters spoken of in this very

indictment.


And now, Meletus, I must ask you another question: Which is better, to live

among bad citizens, or among good ones? Answer, friend, I say; for that is a

question which may be easily answered. Do not the good do their neighbors

good, and the bad do them evil?


Certainly.


And is there anyone who would rather be injured than benefited by those who

live with him? Answer, my good friend; the law requires you to answer -

does anyone like to be injured?


Certainly not.


And when you accuse me of corrupting and deteriorating the youth, do you

allege that I corrupt them intentionally or unintentionally?


Intentionally, I say.


But you have just admitted that the good do their neighbors good, and the evildo them evil. Now is that a truth which your superior wisdom has recognized

thus early in life, and am I, at my age, in such darkness and ignorance as not

to know that if a man with whom I have to live is corrupted by me, I am very

likely to be harmed by him, and yet I corrupt him, and intentionally, too; -

that is what you are saying, and of that you will never persuade me or any

other  human  being.  But  either  I  do  not  corrupt  them,  or  I  corrupt  them

unintentionally, so that on either view of the case you lie. If my offence is

unintentional, the law has no cognizance of unintentional offences: you ought

to have taken me privately, and warned and admonished me; for if I had been

better advised, I should have left off doing what I only did unintentionally -

no doubt I should; whereas you hated to converse with me or teach me, but

you indicted me in this court, which is a place not of instruction, but of

punishment.


I have shown, Athenians, as I was saying, that Meletus has no care at all,

great or small, about the matter. But still I should like to know, Meletus, in

what I am affirmed to corrupt the young. I suppose you mean, as I infer from

your indictment, that I teach them not to acknowledge the gods which the

state acknowledges, but some other new divinities or spiritual agencies in

their stead. These are the lessons which corrupt the youth, as you say.


Yes, that I say emphatically.


Then, by the gods, Meletus, of whom we are speaking, tell me and the court,

in somewhat plainer terms, what you mean! for I do not as yet understand

whether  you  affirm  that  I  teach  others  to  acknowledge  some  gods,  and

therefore do believe in gods and am not an entire atheist - this you do not lay

to  my  charge;  but  only  that  they  are  not  the  same  gods  which  the  city

recognizes - the charge is that they are different gods. Or, do you mean to say

that I am an atheist simply, and a teacher of atheism?


I mean the latter - that you are a complete atheist.


That is an extraordinary statement, Meletus. Why do you say that? Do you

mean that I do not believe in the godhead of the sun or moon, which is the

common creed of all men?I assure you, judges, that he does not believe in them; for he says that the sun

is stone, and the moon earth.


Friend Meletus, you think that you are accusing Anaxagoras; and you have

but a bad opinion of the judges, if you fancy them ignorant to such a degree

as not to know that those doctrines are found in the books of Anaxagoras the

Clazomenian, who is full of them. And these are the doctrines which the

youth  are  said  to  learn  of  Socrates,  when  there  are  not  unfrequently

exhibitions of them at the theatre (price of admission one drachma at the

most); and they might cheaply purchase them, and laugh at Socrates if he

pretends to father such eccentricities. And so, Meletus, you really think that I

do not believe in any god?


I swear by Zeus that you believe absolutely in none at all.


You are a liar, Meletus, not believed even by yourself. For I cannot help

thinking, O men of Athens, that Meletus is reckless and impudent, and that he

has  written  this  indictment  in  a  spirit  of  mere  wantonness  and  youthful

bravado. Has he not compounded a riddle, thinking to try me? He said to

himself: - I shall see whether this wise Socrates will discover my ingenious

contradiction, or whether I shall be able to deceive him and the rest of them.

For he certainly does appear to me to contradict himself in the indictment as

much as if he said that Socrates is guilty of not believing in the gods, and yet

of believing in them - but this surely is a piece of fun.


I should like you, O men of Athens, to join me in examining what I conceive

to be his inconsistency; and do you, Meletus, answer. And I must remind you

that you are not to interrupt me if I speak in my accustomed manner.


Did ever man, Meletus, believe in the existence of human things, and not of

human beings? ... I wish, men of Athens, that he would answer, and not be

always  trying  to  get  up  an  interruption.  Did  ever  any  man  believe  in

horsemanship, and not in horses? or in flute-playing, and not in flute-players?

No, my friend; I will answer to you and to the court, as you refuse to answer

for yourself. There is no man who ever did. But now please to answer the

next question: Can a man believe in spiritual and divine agencies, and not in

spirits or demigods?He cannot.


I am glad that I have extracted that answer, by the assistance of the court;

nevertheless you swear in the indictment that I teach and believe in divine or

spiritual agencies (new or old, no matter for that); at any rate, I believe in

spiritual agencies, as you say and swear in the affidavit; but if I believe in

divine beings, I must believe in spirits or demigods; - is not that true? Yes,

that is true, for I may assume that your silence gives assent to that. Now what

are spirits or demigods? are they not either gods or the sons of gods? Is that

true?


Yes, that is true.


But this is just the ingenious riddle of which I was speaking: the demigods or

spirits are gods, and you say first that I don't believe in gods, and then again

that I do believe in gods; that is, if I believe in demigods. For if the demigods

are the illegitimate sons of gods, whether by the Nymphs or by any other

mothers, as is thought, that, as all men will allow, necessarily implies the

existence of their parents. You might as well affirm the existence of mules,

and deny that of horses and asses. Such nonsense, Meletus, could only have

been intended by you as a trial of me. You have put this into the indictment

because you had nothing real of which to accuse me. But no one who has a

particle of understanding will ever be convinced by you that the same man

can believe in divine and superhuman things, and yet not believe that there

are gods and demigods and heroes.


I have said enough in answer to the charge of Meletus: any elaborate defence

is unnecessary; but as I was saying before, I certainly have many enemies,

and this is what will be my destruction if I am destroyed; of that I am certain;

-  not  Meletus,  nor  yet  Anytus,  but  the  envy  and  detraction  of  the  world,

which has been the death of many good men, and will probably be the death

of many more; there is no danger of my being the last of them.


Someone will say: And are you not ashamed, Socrates, of a course of life

which is likely to bring you to an untimely end? To him I may fairly answer:

There  you  are  mistaken:  a  man  who  is  good  for  anything  ought  not  to

calculate the chance of living or dying; he ought only to consider whether indoing anything he is doing right or wrong - acting the part of a good man or

of a bad. Whereas, according to your view, the heroes who fell at Troy were

not good for much, and the son of Thetis above all, who altogether despised

danger in comparison with disgrace; and when his goddess mother said to

him,  in  his  eagerness  to  slay  Hector,  that  if  he  avenged  his  companion

Patroclus, and slew Hector, he would die himself - "Fate," as she said, "waits

upon you next after Hector"; he, hearing this, utterly despised danger and

death, and instead of fearing them, feared rather to live in dishonor, and not

to avenge his friend. "Let me die next," he replies, "and be avenged of my

enemy, rather than abide here by the beaked ships, a scorn and a burden of

the earth." Had Achilles any thought of death and danger? For wherever a

man's place is, whether the place which he has chosen or that in which he has

been placed by a commander, there he ought to remain in the hour of danger;

he should not think of death or of anything, but of disgrace. And this, O men

of Athens, is a true saying.


Strange, indeed, would be my conduct, O men of Athens, if I who, when I

was ordered by the generals whom you chose to command me at Potidaea

and Amphipolis and Delium, remained where they placed me, like any other

man, facing death; if, I say, now, when, as I conceive and imagine, God

orders me to fulfil the philosopher's mission of searching into myself and

other men, I were to desert my post through fear of death, or any other fear;

that would indeed be strange, and I might justly be arraigned in court for

denying the existence of the gods, if I disobeyed the oracle because I was

afraid of death: then I should be fancying that I was wise when I was not

wise. For this fear of death is indeed the pretence of wisdom, and not real

wisdom, being the appearance of knowing the unknown; since no one knows

whether death, which they in their fear apprehend to be the greatest evil, may

not be the greatest good. Is there not here conceit of knowledge, which is a

disgraceful sort of ignorance? And this is the point in which, as I think, I am

superior to men in general, and in which I might perhaps fancy myself wiser

than other men, - that whereas I know but little of the world below, I do not

suppose that I know: but I do know that injustice and disobedience to a better,

whether God or man, is evil and dishonorable, and I will never fear or avoid a

possible good rather than a certain evil. And therefore if you let me go now,

and reject the counsels of Anytus, who said that if I were not put to death I

ought not to have been prosecuted, and that if I escape now, your sons will allbe utterly ruined by listening to my words - if you say to me, Socrates, this

time we will not mind Anytus, and will let you off, but upon one condition,

that are to inquire and speculate in this way any more, and that if you are

caught doing this again you shall die; - if this was the condition on which you

let me go, I should reply: Men of Athens, I honor and love you; but I shall

obey God rather than you, and while I have life and strength I shall never

cease from the practice and teaching of philosophy, exhorting anyone whom I

meet after my manner, and convincing him, saying: O my friend, why do you

who are a citizen of the great and mighty and wise city of Athens, care so

much  about  laying  up  the  greatest  amount  of  money  and  honor  and

reputation, and so little about wisdom and truth and the greatest improvement

of the soul, which you never regard or heed at all? Are you not ashamed of

this? And if the person with whom I am arguing says: Yes, but I do care; I do

not depart or let him go at once; I interrogate and examine and cross-examine

him, and if I think that he has no virtue, but only says that he has, I reproach

him  with  undervaluing  the  greater,  and  overvaluing  the  less.  And  this  I

should say to everyone whom I meet, young and old, citizen and alien, but

especially to the citizens, inasmuch as they are my brethren. For this is the

command of God, as I would have you know; and I believe that to this day no

greater good has ever happened in the state than my service to the God. For I

do nothing but go about persuading you all, old and young alike, not to take

thought for your persons and your properties, but first and chiefly to care

about the greatest improvement of the soul. I tell you that virtue is not given

by money, but that from virtue come money and every other good of man,

public as well as private. This is my teaching, and if this is the doctrine which

corrupts the youth, my influence is ruinous indeed. But if anyone says that

this is not my teaching, he is speaking an untruth. Wherefore, O men of

Athens, I say to you, do as Anytus bids or not as Anytus bids, and either

acquit me or not; but whatever you do, know that I shall never alter my ways,

not even if I have to die many times.


Men  of  Athens,  do  not  interrupt,  but  hear  me;  there  was  an  agreement

between us that you should hear me out. And I think that what I am going to

say will do you good: for I have something more to say, at which you may be

inclined to cry out; but I beg that you will not do this. I would have you know

that, if you kill such a one as I am, you will injure yourselves more than you

will injure me. Meletus and Anytus will not injure me: they cannot; for it isnot in the nature of things that a bad man should injure a better than himself. I

do not deny that he may, perhaps, kill him, or drive him into exile, or deprive

him of civil rights; and he may imagine, and others may imagine, that he is

doing him a great injury: but in that I do not agree with him; for the evil of

doing as Anytus is doing - of unjustly taking away another man's life - is

greater far. And now, Athenians, I am not going to argue for my own sake, as

you may think, but for yours, that you may not sin against the God, or lightly

reject his boon by condemning me. For if you kill me you will not easily find

another like me, who, if I may use such a ludicrous figure of speech, am a

sort of gadfly, given to the state by the God; and the state is like a great and

noble steed who is tardy in his motions owing to his very size, and requires to

be stirred into life. I am that gadfly which God has given the state and all day

long and in all places am always fastening upon you, arousing and persuading

and reproaching you. And as you will not easily find another like me, I would

advise  you  to  spare  me.  I  dare  say  that  you  may  feel  irritated  at  being

suddenly awakened when you are caught napping; and you may think that if

you were to strike me dead, as Anytus advises, which you easily might, then

you would sleep on for the remainder of your lives, unless God in his care of

you gives you another gadfly. And that I am given to you by God is proved

by this: - that if I had been like other men, I should not have neglected all my

own concerns, or patiently seen the neglect of them during all these years,

and have been doing yours, coming to you individually, like a father or elder

brother, exhorting you to regard virtue; this I say, would not be like human

nature. And had I gained anything, or if my exhortations had been paid, there

would have been some sense in that: but now, as you will perceive, not even

the impudence of my accusers dares to say that I have ever exacted or sought

pay of anyone; they have no witness of that. And I have a witness of the truth

of what I say; my poverty is a sufficient witness.


Someone may wonder why I go about in private, giving advice and busying

myself with the concerns of others, but do not venture to come forward in

public and advise the state. I will tell you the reason of this. You have often

heard me speak of an oracle or sign which comes to me, and is the divinity

which Meletus ridicules in the indictment. This sign I have had ever since I

was a child. The sign is a voice which comes to me and always forbids me to

do  something  which  I  am  going  to  do,  but  never  commands  me  to  do

anything, and this is what stands in the way of my being a politician. Andrightly, as I think. For I am certain, O men of Athens, that if I had engaged in

politics, I should have perished long ago and done no good either to you or to

myself. And don't be offended at my telling you the truth: for the truth is that

no man who goes to war with you or any other multitude, honestly struggling

against the commission of unrighteousness and wrong in the state, will save

his life; he who will really fight for the right, if he would live even for a little

while, must have a private station and not a public one.


I can give you as proofs of this, not words only, but deeds, which you value

more than words. Let me tell you a passage of my own life, which will prove

to you that I should never have yielded to injustice from any fear of death,

and that if I had not yielded I should have died at once. I will tell you a story

- tasteless, perhaps, and commonplace, but nevertheless true. The only office

of state which I ever held, O men of Athens, was that of senator; the tribe

Antiochis, which is my tribe, had the presidency at the trial of the generals

who had not taken up the bodies of the slain after the battle of Arginusae; and

you proposed to try them all together, which was illegal, as you all thought

afterwards;  but  at  the  time  I  was  the  only  one  of  the  Prytanes  who  was

opposed  to  the  illegality,  and  I  gave  my  vote  against  you;  and  when  the

orators threatened to impeach and arrest me, and have me taken away, and

you called and shouted, I made up my mind that I would run the risk, having

law and justice with me, rather than take part in your injustice because I

feared imprisonment and death. This happened in the days of the democracy.

But when the oligarchy of the Thirty was in power, they sent for me and four

others into the rotunda, and bade us bring Leon the Salaminian from Salamis,

as they wanted to execute him. This was a specimen of the sort of commands

which  they  were  always  giving  with  the  view  of  implicating  as  many  as

possible in their crimes; and then I showed, not in words only, but in deed,

that, if I may be allowed to use such an expression, I cared not a straw for

death, and that my only fear was the fear of doing an unrighteous or unholy

thing. For the strong arm of that oppressive power did not frighten me into

doing wrong; and when we came out of the rotunda the other four went to

Salamis and fetched Leon, but I went quietly home. For which I might have

lost my life, had not the power of the Thirty shortly afterwards come to an

end. And to this many will witness.


Now do you really imagine that I could have survived all these years, if I hadled a public life, supposing that like a good man I had always supported the

right and had made justice, as I ought, the first thing? No, indeed, men of

Athens, neither I nor any other. But I have been always the same in all my

actions,  public  as  well  as  private,  and  never  have  I  yielded  any  base

compliance  to  those  who  are  slanderously  termed  my  disciples  or  to  any

other. For the truth is that I have no regular disciples: but if anyone likes to

come and hear me while I am pursuing my mission, whether he be young or

old, he may freely come. Nor do I converse with those who pay only, and not

with those who do not pay; but anyone, whether he be rich or poor, may ask

and answer me and listen to my words; and whether he turns out to be a bad

man or a good one, that cannot be justly laid to my charge, as I never taught

him anything. And if anyone says that he has ever learned or heard anything

from me in private which all the world has not heard, I should like you to

know that he is speaking an untruth.


But I shall be asked, Why do people delight in continually conversing with

you? I have told you already, Athenians, the whole truth about this: they like

to  hear  the  cross-examination  of  the  pretenders  to  wisdom;  there  is

amusement in this. And this is a duty which the God has imposed upon me,

as I am assured by oracles, visions, and in every sort of way in which the will

of divine power was ever signified to anyone. This is true, O Athenians; or, if

not true, would be soon refuted. For if I am really corrupting the youth, and

have corrupted some of them already, those of them who have grown up and

have become sensible that I gave them bad advice in the days of their youth

should come forward as accusers and take their revenge; and if they do not

like to come themselves, some of their relatives, fathers, brothers, or other

kinsmen, should say what evil their families suffered at my hands. Now is

their time. Many of them I see in the court. There is Crito, who is of the same

age and of the same deme with myself; and there is Critobulus his son, whom

I also see. Then again there is Lysanias of Sphettus, who is the father of

Aeschines - he is present; and also there is Antiphon of Cephisus, who is the

father of Epignes; and there are the brothers of several who have associated

with me. There is Nicostratus the son of Theosdotides, and the brother of

Theodotus (now Theodotus himself is dead, and therefore he, at any rate, will

not seek to stop him); and there is Paralus the son of Demodocus, who had a

brother Theages; and Adeimantus the son of Ariston, whose brother Plato is

present; and Aeantodorus, who is the brother of Apollodorus, whom I alsosee. I might mention a great many others, any of whom Meletus should have

produced as witnesses in the course of his speech; and let him still produce

them, if he has forgotten - I will make way for him. And let him say, if he has

any testimony of the sort which he can produce. Nay, Athenians, the very

opposite  is  the  truth.  For  all  these  are  ready  to  witness  on  behalf  of  the

corrupter, of the destroyer of their kindred, as Meletus and Anytus call me;

not the corrupted youth only - there might have been a motive for that - but

their uncorrupted elder relatives. Why should they too support me with their

testimony? Why, indeed, except for the sake of truth and justice, and because

they know that I am speaking the truth, and that Meletus is lying.


Well, Athenians, this and the like of this is nearly all the defence which I

have  to  offer.  Yet  a  word  more.  Perhaps  there  may  be  someone  who  is

offended at me, when he calls to mind how he himself, on a similar or even a

less serious occasion, had recourse to prayers and supplications with many

tears,  and  how  he  produced  his  children  in  court,  which  was  a  moving

spectacle, together with a posse of his relations and friends; whereas I, who

am probably in danger of my life, will do none of these things. Perhaps this

may come into his mind, and he may be set against me, and vote in anger

because he is displeased at this. Now if there be such a person among you,

which I am far from affirming, I may fairly reply to him: My friend, I am a

man, and like other men, a creature of flesh and blood, and not of wood or

stone, as Homer says; and I have a family, yes, and sons. O Athenians, three

in number, one of whom is growing up, and the two others are still young;

and yet I will not bring any of them hither in order to petition you for an

acquittal. And why not? Not from any self-will or disregard of you. Whether

I am or am not afraid of death is another question, of which I will not now

speak. But my reason simply is that I feel such conduct to be discreditable to

myself, and you, and the whole state. One who has reached my years, and

who has a name for wisdom, whether deserved or not, ought not to debase

himself. At any rate, the world has decided that Socrates is in some way

superior to other men. And if those among you who are said to be superior in

wisdom and courage, and any other virtue, demean themselves in this way,

how shameful is their conduct! I have seen men of reputation, when they

have  been  condemned,  behaving  in  the  strangest  manner:  they  seemed  to

fancy that they were going to suffer something dreadful if they died, and that

they could be immortal if you only allowed them to live; and I think that theywere a dishonor to the state, and that any stranger coming in would say of

them  that  the  most  eminent  men  of  Athens,  to  whom  the  Athenians

themselves give honor and command, are no better than women. And I say

that these things ought not to be done by those of us who are of reputation;

and if they are done, you ought not to permit them; you ought rather to show

that you are more inclined to condemn, not the man who is quiet, but the man

who gets up a doleful scene, and makes the city ridiculous.


But,  setting  aside  the  question  of  dishonor,  there  seems  to  be  something

wrong  in  petitioning  a  judge,  and  thus  procuring  an  acquittal  instead  of

informing and convincing him. For his duty is, not to make a present of

justice, but to give judgment; and he has sworn that he will judge according

to the laws, and not according to his own good pleasure; and neither he nor

we should get into the habit of perjuring ourselves - there can be no piety in

that. Do not then require me to do what I consider dishonorable and impious

and  wrong,  especially  now,  when  I  am  being  tried  for  impiety  on  the

indictment of Meletus. For if, O men of Athens, by force of persuasion and

entreaty, I could overpower your oaths, then I should be teaching you to

believe that there are no gods, and convict myself, in my own defence, of not

believing in them. But that is not the case; for I do believe that there are gods,

and in a far higher sense than that in which any of my accusers believe in

them. And to you and to God I commit my cause, to be determined by you as

is best for you and me.


The jury finds Socrates guilty.Socrates' Proposal for his Sentence


There are many reasons why I am not grieved, O men of Athens, at the vote

of condemnation. I expected it, and am only surprised that the votes are so

nearly equal; for I had thought that the majority against me would have been

far larger; but now, had thirty votes gone over to the other side, I should have

been acquitted. And I may say that I have escaped Meletus. And I may say

more; for without the assistance of Anytus and Lycon, he would not have had

a fifth part of the votes, as the law requires, in which case he would have

incurred a fine of a thousand drachmae, as is evident.


And so he proposes death as the penalty. And what shall I propose on my

part, O men of Athens? Clearly that which is my due. And what is that which

I ought to pay or to receive? What shall be done to the man who has never

had the wit to be idle during his whole life; but has been careless of what the

many  care  about  -  wealth,  and  family  interests,  and  military  offices,  and

speaking in the assembly, and magistracies, and plots, and parties. Reflecting

that I was really too honest a man to follow in this way and live, I did not go

where I could do no good to you or to myself; but where I could do the

greatest  good  privately  to  everyone  of  you,  thither  I  went,  and  sought  to

persuade every man among you that he must look to himself, and seek virtue

and wisdom before he looks to his private interests, and look to the state

before he looks to the interests of the state; and that this should be the order

which  he  observes  in  all  his  actions.  What  shall  be  done  to  such  a  one?

Doubtless some good thing, O men of Athens, if he has his reward; and the

good should be of a kind suitable to him. What would be a reward suitable to

a poor man who is your benefactor, who desires leisure that he may instruct

you?  There  can  be  no  more  fitting  reward  than  maintenance  in  the

Prytaneum, O men of Athens, a reward which he deserves far more than the

citizen  who  has  won  the  prize  at  Olympia  in  the  horse  or  chariot  race,

whether the chariots were drawn by two horses or by many. For I am in want,

and he has enough; and he only gives you the appearance of happiness, and I

give you the reality. And if I am to estimate the penalty justly, I say that

maintenance in the Prytaneum is the just return.Perhaps you may think that I am braving you in saying this, as in what I said

before about the tears and prayers. But that is not the case. I speak rather

because I am convinced that I never intentionally wronged anyone, although I

cannot convince you of that - for we have had a short conversation only; but

if there were a law at Athens, such as there is in other cities, that a capital

cause should not be decided in one day, then I believe that I should have

convinced you; but now the time is too short. I cannot in a moment refute

great slanders; and, as I am convinced that I never wronged another, I will

assuredly not wrong myself. I will not say of myself that I deserve any evil,

or propose any penalty. Why should I? Because I am afraid of the penalty of

death which Meletus proposes? When I do not know whether death is a good

or an evil, why should I propose a penalty which would certainly be an evil?

Shall I say imprisonment? And why should I live in prison, and be the slave

of the magistrates of the year - of the Eleven? Or shall the penalty be a fine,

and imprisonment until the fine is paid? There is the same objection. I should

have to lie in prison, for money I have none, and I cannot pay. And if I say

exile (and this may possibly be the penalty which you will affix), I must

indeed be blinded by the love of life if I were to consider that when you, who

are my own citizens, cannot endure my discourses and words, and have found

them so grievous and odious that you would fain have done with them, others

are likely to endure me. No, indeed, men of Athens, that is not very likely.

And what a life should I lead, at my age, wandering from city to city, living

in ever-changing exile, and always being driven out! For I am quite sure that

into whatever place I go, as here so also there, the young men will come to

me; and if I drive them away, their elders will drive me out at their desire:

and if I let them come, their fathers and friends will drive me out for their

sakes.


Someone will say: Yes, Socrates, but cannot you hold your tongue, and then

you may go into a foreign city, and no one will interfere with you? Now I

have great difficulty in making you understand my answer to this. For if I tell

you that this would be a disobedience to a divine command, and therefore

that I cannot hold my tongue, you will not believe that I am serious; and if I

say again that the greatest good of man is daily to converse about virtue, and

all that concerning which you hear me examining myself and others, and that

the life which is unexamined is not worth living - that you are still less likely

to believe. And yet what I say is true, although a thing of which it is hard forme to persuade you. Moreover, I am not accustomed to think that I deserve

any punishment. Had I money I might have proposed to give you what I had,

and have been none the worse. But you see that I have none, and can only ask

you to proportion the fine to my means. However, I think that I could afford a

minae,  and  therefore  I  propose  that  penalty;  Plato,  Crito,  Critobulus,  and

Apollodorus, my friends here, bid me say thirty minae, and they will be the

sureties. Well then, say thirty minae, let that be the penalty; for that they will

be ample security to you.


The jury condemns Socrates to death.Socrates' Comments on his Sentence


Not much time will be gained, O Athenians, in return for the evil name which

you will get from the detractors of the city, who will say that you killed

Socrates, a wise man; for they will call me wise even although I am not wise

when they want to reproach you. If you had waited a little while, your desire

would have been fulfilled in the course of nature. For I am far advanced in

years, as you may perceive, and not far from death. I am speaking now only

to those of you who have condemned me to death. And I have another thing

to say to them: You think that I was convicted through deficiency of words - I

mean, that if I had thought fit to leave nothing undone, nothing unsaid, I

might  have  gained  an  acquittal.  Not  so;  the  deficiency  which  led  to  my

conviction was not of words - certainly not. But I had not the boldness or

impudence  or  inclination  to  address  you  as  you  would  have  liked  me  to

address you, weeping and wailing and lamenting, and saying and doing many

things which you have been accustomed to hear from others, and which, as I

say,  are  unworthy  of  me.  But  I  thought  that  I  ought  not  to  do  anything

common or mean in the hour of danger: nor do I now repent of the manner of

my defence, and I would rather die having spoken after my manner, than

speak in your manner and live. For neither in war nor yet at law ought any

man to use every way of escaping death. For often in battle there is no doubt

that if a man will throw away his arms, and fall on his knees before his

pursuers, he may escape death; and in other dangers there are other ways of

escaping death, if a man is willing to say and do anything. The difficulty, my

friends, is not in avoiding death, but in avoiding unrighteousness; for that

runs faster than death. I am old and move slowly, and the slower runner has

overtaken me, and my accusers are keen and quick, and the faster runner,

who  is  unrighteousness,  has  overtaken  them.  And  now  I  depart  hence

condemned by you to suffer the penalty of death, and they, too, go their ways

condemned by the truth to suffer the penalty of villainy and wrong; and I

must abide by my award - let them abide by theirs. I suppose that these things

may be regarded as fated, - and I think that they are well.


And now, O men who have condemned me, I would fain prophesy to you; for

I am about to die, and that is the hour in which men are gifted with propheticpower. And I prophesy to you who are my murderers, that immediately after

my death punishment far heavier than you have inflicted on me will surely

await you. Me you have killed because you wanted to escape the accuser, and

not to give an account of your lives. But that will not be as you suppose: far

otherwise. For I say that there will be more accusers of you than there are

now; accusers whom hitherto I have restrained: and as they are younger they

will be more severe with you, and you will be more offended at them. For if

you think that by killing men you can avoid the accuser censuring your lives,

you are mistaken; that is not a way of escape which is either possible or

honorable; the easiest and noblest way is not to be crushing others, but to be

improving  yourselves.  This  is  the  prophecy  which  I  utter  before  my

departure, to the judges who have condemned me.


Friends, who would have acquitted me, I would like also to talk with you

about this thing which has happened, while the magistrates are busy, and

before I go to the place at which I must die. Stay then awhile, for we may as

well talk with one another while there is time. You are my friends, and I

should like to show you the meaning of this event which has happened to me.

O my judges - for you I may truly call judges - I should like to tell you of a

wonderful  circumstance.  Hitherto  the  familiar  oracle  within  me  has

constantly been in the habit of opposing me even about trifles, if I was going

to make a slip or error about anything; and now as you see there has come

upon me that which may be thought, and is generally believed to be, the last

and worst evil. But the oracle made no sign of opposition, either as I was

leaving my house and going out in the morning, or when I was going up into

this court, or while I was speaking, at anything which I was going to say; and

yet I have often been stopped in the middle of a speech; but now in nothing I

either said or did touching this matter has the oracle opposed me. What do I

take to be the explanation of this? I will tell you. I regard this as a proof that

what has happened to me is a good, and that those of us who think that death

is an evil are in error. This is a great proof to me of what I am saying, for the

customary sign would surely have opposed me had I been going to evil and

not to good.


Let us reflect in another way, and we shall see that there is great reason to

hope that death is a good, for one of two things: - either death is a state of

nothingness and utter unconsciousness, or, as men say, there is a change andmigration of the soul from this world to another. Now if you suppose that

there is no consciousness, but a sleep like the sleep of him who is undisturbed

even by the sight of dreams, death will be an unspeakable gain. For if a

person were to select the night in which his sleep was undisturbed even by

dreams, and were to compare with this the other days and nights of his life,

and then were to tell us how many days and nights he had passed in the

course of his life better and more pleasantly than this one, I think that any

man, I will not say a private man, but even the great king, will not find many

such days or nights, when compared with the others. Now if death is like this,

I say that to die is gain; for eternity is then only a single night. But if death is

the journey to another place, and there, as men say, all the dead are, what

good, O my friends and judges, can be greater than this? If indeed when the

pilgrim arrives in the world below, he is delivered from the professors of

justice in this world, and finds the true judges who are said to give judgment

there, Minos and Rhadamanthus and Aeacus and Triptolemus, and other sons

of God who were righteous in their own life, that pilgrimage will be worth

making. What would not a man give if he might converse with Orpheus and

Musaeus and Hesiod and Homer? Nay, if this be true, let me die again and

again. I, too, shall have a wonderful interest in a place where I can converse

with Palamedes, and Ajax the son of Telamon, and other heroes of old, who

have suffered death through an unjust judgment; and there will be no small

pleasure, as I think, in comparing my own sufferings with theirs. Above all, I

shall be able to continue my search into true and false knowledge; as in this

world, so also in that; I shall find out who is wise, and who pretends to be

wise, and is not. What would not a man give, O judges, to be able to examine

the  leader  of  the  great  Trojan  expedition;  or  Odysseus  or  Sisyphus,  or

numberless others, men and women too! What infinite delight would there be

in conversing with them and asking them questions! For in that world they do

not put a man to death for this; certainly not. For besides being happier in that

world than in this, they will be immortal, if what is said is true.


Wherefore, O judges, be of good cheer about death, and know this of a truth -

that no evil can happen to a good man, either in life or after death. He and his

are not neglected by the gods; nor has my own approaching end happened by

mere chance. But I see clearly that to die and be released was better for me;

and therefore the oracle gave no sign. For which reason also, I am not angry

with my accusers, or my condemners; they have done me no harm, althoughneither of them meant to do me any good; and for this I may gently blame

them.


Still I have a favor to ask of them. When my sons are grown up, I would ask

you, O my friends, to punish them; and I would have you trouble them, as I

have troubled you, if they seem to care about riches, or anything, more than

about virtue; or if they pretend to be something when they are really nothing,

- then reprove them, as I have reproved you, for not caring about that for

which they ought to care, and thinking that they are something when they are

really nothing. And if you do this, I and my sons will have received justice at

your hands.


The hour of departure has arrived, and we go our ways - I to die, and you to

live. Which is better God only knows.                        Charmides Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    Beginning of CharmidesIntroduction to Plato's Charmides


  The  subject  of  the  Charmides  is  Temperance  or  (Greek),  a  peculiarly

Greek notion, which may also be rendered Moderation (Compare Cic. Tusc.

'(Greek),  quam  soleo  equidem  tum  temperantiam,  tum  moderationem

appellare, nonnunquam etiam modestiam.'), Modesty, Discretion, Wisdom,

without completely exhausting by all these terms the various associations of

the word. It may be described as 'mens sana in corpore sano,' the harmony or

due  proportion  of  the  higher  and  lower  elements  of  human  nature  which

'makes a man his own master,' according to the definition of the Republic. In

the accompanying translation the word has been rendered in different places

either Temperance or Wisdom, as the connection seemed to require: for in the

philosophy of Plato (Greek) still retains an intellectual element (as Socrates is

also said to have identified (Greek) with (Greek): Xen. Mem.) and is not yet

relegated  to  the  sphere  of  moral  virtue,  as  in  the  Nicomachean  Ethics  of

Aristotle.


  The beautiful youth, Charmides, who is also the most temperate of human

beings,  is  asked  by  Socrates,  'What  is  Temperance?'  He  answers

characteristically, (1) 'Quietness.' 'But Temperance is a fine and noble thing;

and quietness in many or most cases is not so fine a thing as quickness.' He

tries again and says (2) that temperance is modesty. But this again is set aside

by a sophistical application of Homer: for temperance is good as well as

noble, and Homer has declared that 'modesty is not good for a needy man.'

(3) Once more Charmides makes the attempt. This time he gives a definition

which he has heard, and of which Socrates conjectures that Critias must be

the author: 'Temperance is doing one's own business.' But the artisan who

makes another man's shoes may be temperate, and yet he is not doing his own

business; and temperance defined thus would be opposed to the division of

labour which exists in every temperate or well-ordered state. How is this

riddle to be explained?


  Critias, who takes the place of Charmides, distinguishes in his answer

between 'making' and 'doing,' and with the help of a misapplied quotation

from  Hesiod  assigns  to  the  words  'doing'  and  'work'  an  exclusively  goodsense: Temperance is doing one's own business;--(4) is doing good.


  Still an element of knowledge is wanting which Critias is readily induced

to admit at the suggestion of Socrates; and, in the spirit of Socrates and of

Greek life generally, proposes as a fifth definition, (5) Temperance is self-

knowledge.  But  all  sciences  have  a  subject:  number  is  the  subject  of

arithmetic, health of medicine--what is the subject of temperance or wisdom?

The answer is that (6) Temperance is the knowledge of what a man knows

and of what he does not know. But this is contrary to analogy; there is no

vision of vision, but only of visible things; no love of loves, but only of

beautiful things; how then can there be a knowledge of knowledge? That

which is older, heavier, lighter, is older, heavier, and lighter than something

else, not than itself, and this seems to be true of all relative notions--the

object of relation is outside of them; at any rate they can only have relation to

themselves in the form of that object. Whether there are any such cases of

reflex relation or not, and whether that sort of knowledge which we term

Temperance is of this reflex nature, has yet to be determined by the great

metaphysician.  But  even  if  knowledge  can  know  itself,  how  does  the

knowledge of what we know imply the knowledge of what we do not know?

Besides, knowledge is an abstraction only, and will not inform us of any

particular subject, such as medicine, building, and the like. It may tell us that

we or other men know something, but can never tell us what we know.


  Admitting that there is a knowledge of what we know and of what we do

not know, which would supply a rule and measure of all things, still there

would be no good in this; and the knowledge which temperance gives must

be  of  a  kind  which  will  do  us  good;  for  temperance  is  a  good.  But  this

universal knowledge does not tend to our happiness and good: the only kind

of knowledge which brings happiness is the knowledge of good and evil. To

this Critias replies that the science or knowledge of good and evil, and all the

other  sciences,  are  regulated  by  the  higher  science  or  knowledge  of

knowledge. Socrates replies by again dividing the abstract from the concrete,

and asks how this knowledge conduces to happiness in the same definite way

in which medicine conduces to health.


  And  now,  after  making  all  these  concessions,  which  are  really

inadmissible,  we  are  still  as  far  as  ever  from  ascertaining  the  nature  oftemperance,  which  Charmides  has  already  discovered,  and  had  therefore

better rest in the knowledge that the more temperate he is the happier he will

be, and not trouble himself with the speculations of Socrates.


  In  this  Dialogue  may  be  noted  (1)  The  Greek  ideal  of  beauty  and

goodness, the vision of the fair soul in the fair body, realised in the beautiful

Charmides; (2) The true conception of medicine as a science of the whole as

well as the parts, and of the mind as well as the body, which is playfully

intimated in the story of the Thracian; (3) The tendency of the age to verbal

distinctions, which here, as in the Protagoras and Cratylus, are ascribed to the

ingenuity of Prodicus; and to interpretations or rather parodies of Homer or

Hesiod, which are eminently characteristic of Plato and his contemporaries;

(4) The germ of an ethical principle contained in the notion that temperance

is 'doing one's own business,' which in the Republic (such is the shifting

character  of  the  Platonic  philosophy)  is  given  as  the  definition,  not  of

temperance, but of justice; (5) The impatience which is exhibited by Socrates

of any definition of temperance in which an element of science or knowledge

is not included; (6) The beginning of metaphysics and logic implied in the

two questions: whether there can be a science of science, and whether the

knowledge of what you know is the same as the knowledge of what you do

not know; and also in the distinction between 'what you know' and 'that you

know,' (Greek;) here too is the first conception of an absolute self-determined

science (the claims of which, however, are disputed by Socrates, who asks

cui bono?) as well as the first suggestion of the difficulty of the abstract and

concrete, and one of the earliest anticipations of the relation of subject and

object,  and  of  the  subjective  element  in  knowledge--a  'rich  banquet'  of

metaphysical questions in which we 'taste of many things.' (7) And still the

mind of Plato, having snatched for a moment at these shadows of the future,

quickly rejects them: thus early has he reached the conclusion that there can

be no science which is a 'science of nothing' (Parmen.). (8) The conception of

a  science  of  good  and  evil  also  first  occurs  here,  an  anticipation  of  the

Philebus and Republic as well as of moral philosophy in later ages.


  The  dramatic  interest  of  the  Dialogue  chiefly  centres  in  the  youth

Charmides, with whom Socrates talks in the kindly spirit of an elder. His

childlike simplicity and ingenuousness are contrasted with the dialectical and

rhetorical arts of Critias, who is the grown-up man of the world, having atincture of philosophy. No hint is given, either here or in the Timaeus, of the

infamy which attaches to the name of the latter in Athenian history. He is

simply a cultivated person who, like his kinsman Plato, is ennobled by the

connection of his family with Solon (Tim.), and had been the follower, if not

the disciple, both of Socrates and of the Sophists. In the argument he is not

unfair, if allowance is made for a slight rhetorical tendency, and for a natural

desire to save his reputation with the company; he is sometimes nearer the

truth than Socrates. Nothing in his language or behaviour is unbecoming the

guardian  of  the  beautiful  Charmides.  His  love  of  reputation  is

characteristically Greek, and contrasts with the humility of Socrates. Nor in

Charmides himself do we find any resemblance to the Charmides of history,

except,  perhaps,  the  modest  and  retiring  nature  which,  according  to

Xenophon,  at  one  time  of  his  life  prevented  him  from  speaking  in  the

Assembly  (Mem.);  and  we  are  surprised  to  hear  that,  like  Critias,  he

afterwards became one of the thirty tyrants. In the Dialogue he is a pattern of

virtue, and is therefore in no need of the charm which Socrates is unable to

apply. With youthful naivete, keeping his secret and entering into the spirit of

Socrates, he enjoys the detection of his elder and guardian Critias, who is

easily seen to be the author of the definition which he has so great an interest

in maintaining. The preceding definition, 'Temperance is doing one's own

business,' is assumed to have been borrowed by Charmides from another; and

when the enquiry becomes more abstract he is superseded by Critias (Theaet.;

Euthyd.). Socrates preserves his accustomed irony to the end; he is in the

neighbourhood of several great truths, which he views in various lights, but

always either by bringing them to the test of common sense, or by demanding

too great exactness in the use of words, turns aside from them and comes at

last to no conclusion.


  The definitions of temperance proceed in regular order from the popular

to the philosophical. The first two are simple enough and partially true, like

the  first  thoughts  of  an  intelligent  youth;  the  third,  which  is  a  real

contribution to ethical philosophy, is perverted by the ingenuity of Socrates,

and  hardly  rescued  by  an  equal  perversion  on  the  part  of  Critias.  The

remaining definitions have a higher aim, which is to introduce the element of

knowledge, and at last to unite good and truth in a single science. But the

time has not yet arrived for the realization of this vision of metaphysical

philosophy; and such a science when brought nearer to us in the Philebus andthe Republic will not be called by the name of (Greek). Hence we see with

surprise that Plato, who in his other writings identifies good and knowledge,

here opposes them, and asks, almost in the spirit of Aristotle, how can there

be  a  knowledge  of  knowledge,  and  even  if  attainable,  how  can  such  a

knowledge be of any use?


  The difficulty of the Charmides arises chiefly from the two senses of the

word (Greek), or temperance. From the ethical notion of temperance, which

is variously defined to be quietness, modesty, doing our own business, the

doing of good actions, the dialogue passes onto the intellectual conception of

(Greek), which is declared also to be the science of self-knowledge, or of the

knowledge of what we know and do not know, or of the knowledge of good

and  evil.  The  dialogue  represents  a  stage  in  the  history  of  philosophy  in

which knowledge and action were not yet distinguished. Hence the confusion

between them, and the easy transition from one to the other. The definitions

which are offered are all rejected, but it is to be observed that they all tend to

throw a light on the nature of temperance, and that, unlike the distinction of

Critias  between  (Greek),  none  of  them  are  merely  verbal  quibbles,  it  is

implied  that  this  question,  although  it  has  not  yet  received  a  solution  in

theory, has been already answered by Charmides himself, who has learned to

practise the virtue of self-knowledge which philosophers are vainly trying to

define in words. In a similar spirit we might say to a young man who is

disturbed  by  theological  difficulties,  'Do  not  trouble  yourself  about  such

matters, but only lead a good life;' and yet in either case it is not to be denied

that  right  ideas  of  truth  may  contribute  greatly  to  the  improvement  of

character.


  The reasons why the Charmides, Lysis, Laches have been placed together

and  first  in  the  series  of  Platonic  dialogues,  are:  (i)  Their  shortness  and

simplicity. The Charmides and the Lysis, if not the Laches, are of the same

'quality' as the Phaedrus and Symposium: and it is probable, though far from

certain, that the slighter effort preceded the greater one. (ii) Their eristic, or

rather Socratic character; they belong to the class called dialogues of search

(Greek),  which  have  no  conclusion.  (iii)  The  absence  in  them  of  certain

favourite notions of Plato, such as the doctrine of recollection and of the

Platonic  ideas;  the  questions,  whether  virtue  can  be  taught;  whether  the

virtues are one or many. (iv) They have a want of depth, when compared withthe dialogues of the middle and later period; and a youthful beauty and grace

which is wanting in the later ones. (v) Their resemblance to one another; in

all the three boyhood has a great part. These reasons have various degrees of

weight in determining their place in the catalogue of the Platonic writings,

though they are not conclusive. No arrangement of the Platonic dialogues can

be  strictly  chronological.  The  order  which  has  been  adopted  is  intended

mainly for the convenience of the reader; at the same time, indications of the

date supplied either by Plato himself or allusions found in the dialogues have

not been lost sight of. Much may be said about this subject, but the results

can only be probable; there are no materials which would enable us to attain

to anything like certainty.


  The relations of knowledge and virtue are again brought forward in the

companion dialogues of the Lysis and Laches; and also in the Protagoras and

Euthydemus.  The  opposition  of  abstract  and  particular  knowledge  in  this

dialogue may be compared with a similar opposition of ideas and phenomena

which occurs in the Prologues to the Parmenides, but seems rather to belong

to a later stage of the philosophy of Plato.Charmides, or Temperance


By Plato


Written 380 B.C.E


Translated by Benjamin JowettPersons of the Dialogue: SOCRATES, who is the narrator, CHARMIDES,

CHAEREPHON, CRITIAS


Scene: The Palaestra of Taureas, which is near the Porch of the King Archon.


Yesterday evening I returned from the army at Potidaea, and having been a

good while away, I thought that I should like to go and look at my old haunts.

So I went into the palaestra of Taureas, which is over against the temple

adjoining  the  porch  of  the  King  Archon,  and  there  I  found  a  number  of

persons, most of whom I knew, but not all. My visit was unexpected, and no

sooner did they see me entering than they saluted me from afar on all sides;

and Chaerephon, who is a kind of madman, started up and ran to me, seizing

my hand, and saying, How did you escape, Socrates?-(I should explain that

an engagement had taken place at Potidaea not long before we came away, of

which the news had only just reached Athens.)


You see, I replied, that here I am.


There was a report, he said, that the engagement was very severe, and that

many of our acquaintance had fallen.


That, I replied, was not far from the truth.


I suppose, he said, that you were present.


I was.


Then sit down, and tell us the whole story, which as yet we have only heard

imperfectly.


I took the place which he assigned to me, by the side of Critias the son of

Callaeschrus, and when I had saluted him and the rest of the company, I told

them the news from the army, and answered their several enquiries.


Then, when there had been enough of this, I, in my turn, began to make

enquiries about matters at home-about the present state of philosophy, and

about the youth. I asked whether any of them were remarkable for wisdom orbeauty, or both. Critias, glancing at the door, invited my attention to some

youths who were coming in, and talking noisily to one another, followed by a

crowd. Of the beauties, Socrates, he said, I fancy that you will soon be able to

form a judgment. For those who are just entering are the advanced guard of

the great beauty, as he is thought to be, of the day, and he is likely to be not

far off himself.


Who is he, I said; and who is his father?


Charmides, he replied, is his name; he is my cousin, and the son of my uncle

Glaucon: I rather think that you know him too, although he was not grown up

at the time of your departure.


Certainly, I know him, I said, for he was remarkable even then when he was

still a child, and I should imagine that by this time he must be almost a young

man.


You will see, he said, in a moment what progress he has made and what he is

like. He had scarcely said the word, when Charmides entered.


Now  you  know,  my  friend,  that  I  cannot  measure  anything,  and  of  the

beautiful, I am simply such a measure as a white line is of chalk; for almost

all young persons appear to be beautiful in my eyes. But at that moment,

when I saw him coming in, I confess that I was quite astonished at his beauty

and stature; all the world seemed to be enamoured of him; amazement and

confusion reigned when he entered; and a troop of lovers followed him. That

grown-up men like ourselves should have been affected in this way was not

surprising, but I observed that there was the same feeling among the boys; all

of them, down to the very least child, turned and looked at him, as if he had

been a statue.


Chaerephon called me and said: What do you think of him, Socrates? Has he

not a beautiful face?


Most beautiful, I said.


But you would think nothing of his face, he replied, if you could see hisnaked form: he is absolutely perfect.


And to this they all agreed.


By Heracles, I said, there never was such a paragon, if he has only one other

slight addition.


What is that? said Critias.


If he has a noble soul; and being of your house, Critias, he may be expected

to have this.


He is as fair and good within, as he is without, replied Critias.


Then, before we see his body, should we not ask him to show us his soul,

naked and undisguised? he is just of an age at which he will like to talk.


That he will, said Critias, and I can tell you that he is a philosopher already,

and also a considerable poet, not in his own opinion only, but in that of

others.


That, my dear Critias, I replied, is a distinction which has long been in your

family, and is inherited by you from Solon. But why do you not call him, and

show him to us? for even if he were younger than he is, there could be no

impropriety in his talking to us in the presence of you, who are his guardian

and cousin.


Very well, he said; then I will call him; and turning to the attendant, he said,

Call Charmides, and tell him that I want him to come and see a physician

about the illness of which he spoke to me the day before yesterday. Then

again addressing me, he added: He has been complaining lately of having a

headache when he rises in the morning: now why should you not make him

believe that you know a cure for the headache?


Why not, I said; but will he come?


He will be sure to come, he replied.He came as he was bidden, and sat down between Critias and me. Great

amusement was occasioned by every one pushing with might and main at his

neighbour in order to make a place for him next to themselves, until at the

two ends of the row one had to get up and the other was rolled over sideways.

Now my friend, was beginning to feel awkward; former bold belief in my

powers of conversing with him had vanished. And when Critias told him that

I was the person who had the cure, he looked at me in such an indescribable

manner, and was just going to ask a question. And at that moment all the

people in the palaestra crowded about us, and, O rare! I caught a sight of the

inwards of his garment, and took the flame. Then I could no longer contain

myself. I thought how well Cydias understood the nature of love, when, in

speaking of a fair youth, he warns some one "not to bring the fawn in the

sight of the lion to be devoured by him," for I felt that I had been overcome

by a sort of wild-beast appetite. But I controlled myself, and when he asked

me if I knew the cure of the headache, I answered, but with an effort, that I

did know.


And what is it? he said.


I replied that it was a kind of leaf, which required to be accompanied by a

charm, and if a person would repeat the charm at the same time that he used

the cure, he would be made whole; but that without the charm the leaf would

be of no avail.


Then I will write out the charm from your dictation, he said.


With my consent? I said, or without my consent?


With your consent, Socrates, he said, laughing.


Very good, I said; and are you quite sure that you know my name?


I ought to know you, he replied, for there is a great deal said about you

among my companions; and I remember when I was a child seeing you in

company with my cousin Critias.


I am glad to find that you remember me, I said; for I shall now be more athome with you and shall be better able to explain the nature of the charm,

about which I felt a difficulty before. For the charm will do more, Charmides,

than  only  cure  the  headache.  I  dare  say  that  you  have  heard  eminent

physicians say to a patient who comes to them with bad eyes, that they cannot

cure his eyes by themselves, but that if his eyes are to be cured, his head must

be treated; and then again they say that to think of curing the head alone, and

not the rest of the body also, is the height of folly. And arguing in this way

they apply their methods to the whole body, and try to treat and heal the

whole and the part together. Did you ever observe that this is what they say?


Yes, he said.


And they are right, and you would agree with them?


Yes, he said, certainly I should.


His  approving  answers  reassured  me,  and  I  began  by  degrees  to  regain

confidence, and the vital heat returned. Such, Charmides, I said, is the nature

of the charm, which I learned when serving with the army from one of the

physicians of the Thracian king Zamolxis, who are to be so skilful that they

can even give immortality. This Thracian told me that in these notions of

theirs, which I was just now mentioning, the Greek physicians are quite right

as far as they go; but Zamolxis, he added, our king, who is also a god, says

further, "that as you ought not to attempt to cure the eyes without the head, or

the head without the body, so neither ought you to attempt to cure the body

without the soul; and this," he said, "is the reason why the cure of many

diseases is unknown to the physicians of Hellas, because they are ignorant of

the whole, which ought to be studied also; for the part can never be well

unless the whole is well." For all good and evil, whether in the body or in

human nature, originates, as he declared, in the soul, and overflows from

thence, as if from the head into the eyes. And therefore if the head and body

are to be well, you must begin by curing the soul; that is the first thing. And

the cure, my dear youth, has to be effected by the use of certain charms, and

these charms are fair words; and by them temperance is implanted in the soul,

and where temperance is, there health is speedily imparted, not only to the

head, but to the whole body. And he who taught me the cure and the charm at

the same time added a special direction: "Let no one," he said, "persuade youto cure the head, until he has first given you his soul to be cured by the

charm. For this," he said, "is the great error of our day in the treatment of the

human body, that physicians separate the soul from the body." And he added

with emphasis, at the same time making me swear to his words, "Let no one,

however rich, or noble, or fair, persuade you to give him the cure, without the

charm." Now I have sworn, and I must keep my oath, and therefore if you

will allow me to apply the Thracian charm first to your soul, as the stranger

directed, I will afterwards proceed to apply the cure to your head. But if not, I

do not know what I am to do with you, my dear Charmides.


Critias, when he heard this, said: The headache will be an unexpected gain to

my young relation, if the pain in his head compels him to improve his mind:

and I can tell you, Socrates, that Charmides is not only pre-eminent in beauty

among his equals, but also in that quality which is given by the charm; and

this, as you say, is temperance?


Yes, I said.


Then let me tell you that he is the most temperate of human beings, and for

his age inferior to none in any quality.


Yes, I said, Charmides; and indeed I think that you ought to excel others in

all good qualities; for if I am not mistaken there is no one present who could

easily  point  out  two  Athenian  houses,  whose  union  would  be  likely  to

produce a better or nobler scion than the two from which you are sprung.

There  is  your  father's  house,  which  is  descended  from  Critias  the  son  of

Dropidas, whose family has been commemorated in the panegyrical verses of

Anacreon, Solon, and many other poets, as famous for beauty and virtue and

all other high fortune: and your mother's house is equally distinguished; for

your maternal uncle, Pyrilampes, is reputed never to have found his equal, in

Persia at the court of the great king, or on the continent of Asia, in all the

places to which he went as ambassador, for stature and beauty; that whole

family is not a whit inferior to the other. Having such ancestors you ought to

be first in all things, and, sweet son of Glaucon, your outward form is no

dishonour to any of them. If to beauty you add temperance, and if in other

respects  you  are  what  Critias  declares  you  to  be,  then,  dear  Charmides,

blessed art thou, in being the son of thy mother. And here lies the point; forif, as he declares, you have this gift of temperance already, and are temperate

enough, in that case you have no need of any charms, whether of Zamolxis or

of Abaris the Hyperborean, and I may as well let you have the cure of the

head at once; but if you have not yet acquired this quality, I must use the

charm  before  I  give  you  the  medicine.  Please,  therefore,  to  inform  me

whether you admit the truth of what Critias has been saying;-have you or

have you not this quality of temperance?


Charmides  blushed,  and  the  blush  heightened  his  beauty,  for  modesty  is

becoming in youth; he then said very ingenuously, that he really could not at

once answer, either yes, or no, to the question which I had asked: For, said

he, if I affirm that I am not temperate, that would be a strange thing for me to

say of myself, and also I should give the lie to Critias, and many others who

think as he tells you, that I am temperate: but, on the other hand, if I say that I

am, I shall have to praise myself, which would be ill manners; and therefore I

do not know how to answer you.


I said to him: That is a natural reply, Charmides, and I think that you and I

ought together to enquire whether you have this quality about which I am

asking or not; and then you will not be compelled to say what you do not

like; neither shall I be a rash practitioner of medicine: therefore, if you please,

I will share the enquiry with you, but I will not press you if you would rather

not.


There  is  nothing  which  I  should  like  better,  he  said;  and  as  far  as  I  am

concerned you may proceed in the way which you think best.


I  think,  I  said,  that  I  had  better  begin  by  asking  you  a  question;  for  if

temperance abides in you, you must have an opinion about her; she must give

some intimation of her nature and qualities, which may enable you to form a

notion of her. Is not that true?


Yes, he said, that I think is true.


You know your native language, I said, and therefore you must be able to tell

what you feel about this.Certainly, he said.


In order, then, that I may form a conjecture whether you have temperance

abiding in you or not, tell me, I said, what, in your opinion, is Temperance?


At first he hesitated, and was very unwilling to answer: then he said that he

thought temperance was doing things orderly and quietly, such things for

example as walking in the streets, and talking, or anything else of that nature.

In  a  word,  he  said,  I  should  answer  that,  in  my  opinion,  temperance  is

quietness.


Are you right, Charmides? I said. No doubt some would affirm that the quiet

are the temperate; but let us see whether these words have any meaning; and

first tell me whether you would not acknowledge temperance to be of the

class of the noble and good?


Yes.


But which is best when you are at the writing-master's, to write the same

letters quickly or quietly?


Quickly.


And to read quickly or slowly?


Quickly again.


And in playing the lyre, or wrestling, quickness or sharpness are far better

than quietness and slowness?


Yes.


And the same holds in boxing and in the pancratium?


Certainly.


And in leaping and running and in bodily exercises generally, quickness and

agility are good; slowness, and inactivity, and quietness, are bad?That is evident.


Then, I said, in all bodily actions, not quietness, but the greatest agility and

quickness, is noblest and best?


Yes, certainly.


And is temperance a good?


Yes.


Then, in reference to the body, not quietness, but quickness will be the higher

degree of temperance, if temperance is a good?


True, he said.


And which, I said, is better-facility in learning, or difficulty in learning?


Facility.


Yes,  I  said;  and  facility  in  learning  is  learning  quickly,  and  difficulty  in

learning is learning quietly and slowly?


True.


And is it not better to teach another quickly and energetically, rather than

quietly and slowly?


Yes.


And which is better, to call to mind, and to remember, quickly and readily, or

quietly and slowly?


The former.


And  is  not  shrewdness  a  quickness  or  cleverness  of  the  soul,  and  not  a

quietness?True.


And is it not best to understand what is said, whether at the writing-master's

or the music-master's, or anywhere else, not as quietly as possible, but as

quickly as possible?


Yes.


And  in  the  searchings  or  deliberations  of  the  soul,  not  the  quietest,  as  I

imagine,  and  he  who  with  difficulty  deliberates  and  discovers,  is  thought

worthy of praise, but he who does so most easily and quickly?


Quite true, he said.


And in all that concerns either body or soul, swiftness and activity are clearly

better than slowness and quietness?


Clearly they are.


Then temperance is not quietness, nor is the temperate life quiet,-certainly not

upon this view; for the life which is temperate is supposed to be the good.

And of two things, one is true, either never, or very seldom, do the quiet

actions  in  life  appear  to  be  better  than  the  quick  and  energetic  ones;  or

supposing that of the nobler actions, there are as many quiet, as quick and

vehement: still, even if we grant this, temperance will not be acting quietly

any more than acting quickly and energetically, either in walking or talking

or in anything else; nor will the quiet life be more temperate than the unquiet,

seeing that temperance is admitted by us to be a good and noble thing, and

the quick have been shown to be as good as the quiet.


I think, he said, Socrates, that you are right.


Then  once  more,  Charmides,  I  said,  fix  your  attention,  and  look  within;

consider the effect which temperance has upon yourself, and the nature of

that which has the effect. Think over all this, and, like a brave youth, tell me-

What is temperance?


After a moment's pause, in which he made a real manly effort to think, hesaid:  My  opinion  is,  Socrates,  that  temperance  makes  a  man  ashamed  or

modest, and that temperance is the same as modesty.


Very good, I said; and did you not admit, just now, that temperance is noble?


Yes, certainly, he said.


And the temperate are also good?


Yes.


And can that be good which does not make men good?


Certainly not.


And you would infer that temperance is not only noble, but also good?


That is my opinion.


Well, I said; but surely you would agree with Homer when he says,


Modesty is not good for a needy man?


Yes, he said; I agree.


Then I suppose that modesty is and is not good?


Clearly.


But  temperance,  whose  presence  makes  men  only  good,  and  not  bad,  is

always good?


That appears to me to be as you say.


And the inference is that temperance cannot be modesty-if temperance is a

good, and if modesty is as much an evil as a good?


All that, Socrates, appears to me to be true; but I should like to know whatyou think about another definition of temperance, which I just now remember

to have heard from some one, who said, "That temperance is doing our own

business." Was he right who affirmed that?


You monster! I said; this is what Critias, or some philosopher has told you.


Some one else, then, said Critias; for certainly I have not.


But what matter, said Charmides, from whom I heard this?


No  matter  at  all,  I  replied;  for  the  point  is  not  who  said  the  words,  but

whether they are true or not.


There you are in the right, Socrates, he replied.


To be sure, I said; yet I doubt whether we shall ever be able to discover their

truth or falsehood; for they are a kind of riddle.


What makes you think so? he said.


Because, I said, he who uttered them seems to me to have meant one thing,

and said another. Is the scribe, for example, to be regarded as doing nothing

when he reads or writes?


I should rather think that he was doing something.


And does the scribe write or read, or teach you boys to write or read, your

own names only, or did you write your enemies' names as well as your own

and your friends'?


As much one as the other.


And was there anything meddling or intemperate in this?


Certainly not.


And yet if reading and writing are the same as doing, you were doing what

was not your own business?But they are the same as doing.


And  the  healing  art,  my  friend,  and  building,  and  weaving,  and  doing

anything whatever which is done by art,-these all clearly come under the head

of doing?


Certainly.


And  do  you  think  that  a  state  would  be  well  ordered  by  a  law  which

compelled every man to weave and wash his own coat, and make his own

shoes, and his own flask and strigil, and other implements, on this principle

of every one doing and performing his own, and abstaining from what is not

his own?


I think not, he said.


But, I said, a temperate state will be a well ordered state.


Of course, he replied.


Then temperance, I said, will not be doing one's own business; not at least in

this way, or doing things of this sort?


Clearly not.


Then, as I was just now saying, he who declared that temperance is a man

doing his own business had another and a hidden meaning; for I do not think

that he could have been such a fool as to mean this. Was he a fool who told

you, Charmides?


Nay, he replied, I certainly thought him a very wise man.


Then I am quite certain that he put forth his definition as a riddle, thinking

that no one would know the meaning of the words "doing his own business."


I dare say, he replied.


And what is the meaning of a man doing his own business? Can you tell me?Indeed, I cannot; and I should not wonder if the man himself who used this

phrase did not understand what he was saying. Whereupon he laughed slyly,

and looked at Critias.


Critias had long been showing uneasiness, for he felt that he had a reputation

to maintain with Charmides and the rest of the company. He had, however,

hitherto managed to restrain himself; but now he could no longer forbear, and

I am convinced of the truth of the suspicion which I entertained at the time,

that Charmides had heard this answer about temperance from Critias. And

Charmides, who did not want to answer himself, but to make Critias answer,

tried to stir him up. He went on pointing out that he had been refuted, at

which Critias grew angry, and appeared, as I thought, inclined to quarrel with

him; just as a poet might quarrel with an actor who spoiled his poems in

repeating them; so he looked hard at him and said--


Do you imagine, Charmides, that the author of this definition of temperance

did  not  understand  the  meaning  of  his  own  words,  because  you  do  not

understand them?


Why, at his age, I said, most excellent Critias, he can hardly be expected to

understand; but you, who are older, and have studied, may well be assumed

to know the meaning of them; and therefore, if you agree with him, and

accept his definition of temperance, I would much rather argue with you than

with him about the truth or falsehood of the definition.


I entirely agree, said Critias, and accept the definition.


Very good, I said; and now let me repeat my question-Do you admit, as I was

just now saying, that all craftsmen make or do something?


I do.


And do they make or do their own business only, or that of others also?


They make or do that of others also.


And are they temperate, seeing that they make not for themselves or theirown business only?


Why not? he said.


No objection on my part, I said, but there may be a difficulty on his who

proposes as a definition of temperance, "doing one's own business," and then

says that there is no reason why those who do the business of others should

not be temperate.


Nay, said he; did I ever acknowledge that those who do the business of others

are temperate? I said, those who make, not those who do.


What! I asked; do you mean to say that doing and making are not the same?


No more, he replied, than making or working are the same; thus much I have

learned  from  Hesiod,  who  says  that  "work  is  no  disgrace."  Now  do  you

imagine that if he had meant by working and doing such things as you were

describing,  he  would  have  said  that  there  was  no  disgrace  in  them-for

example, in the manufacture of shoes, or in selling pickles, or sitting for hire

in a house of ill-fame? That, Socrates, is not to be supposed: but I conceive

him to have distinguished making from doing and work; and, while admitting

that  the  making  anything  might  sometimes  become  a  disgrace,  when  the

employment was not honourable, to have thought that work was never any

disgrace at all. For things nobly and usefully made he called works; and such

makings he called workings, and doings; and he must be supposed to have

called such things only man's proper business, and what is hurtful, not his

business:  and  in  that  sense  Hesiod,  and  any  other  wise  man,  may  be

reasonably supposed to call him wise who does his own work.


O Critias, I said, no sooner had you opened your mouth, than I pretty well

knew that you would call that which is proper to a man, and that which is his

own, good; and that the markings of the good you would call doings, for I am

no stranger to the endless distinctions which Prodicus draws about names.

Now I have no objection to your giving names any signification which you

please, if you will only tell me what you mean by them. Please then to begin

again, and be a little plainer. Do you mean that this doing or making, or

whatever is the word which you would use, of good actions, is temperance?I do, he said.


Then not he who does evil, but he who does good, is temperate?


Yes, he said; and you, friend, would agree.


No matter whether I should or not; just now, not what I think, but what you

are saying, is the point at issue.


Well, he answered; I mean to say, that he who does evil, and not good, is not

temperate;  and  that  he  is  temperate  who  does  good,  and  not  evil:  for

temperance I define in plain words to be the doing of good actions.


And you may be very likely right in what you are saying; but I am curious to

know whether you imagine that temperate men are ignorant of their own

temperance?


I do not think so, he said.


And yet were you not saying, just now, that craftsmen might be temperate in

doing another's work, as well as in doing their own?


I was, he replied; but what is your drift?


I  have  no  particular  drift,  but  I  wish  that  you  would  tell  me  whether  a

physician who cures a patient may do good to himself and good to another

also?


I think that he may.


And he who does so does his duty?


Yes.


And does not he who does his duty act temperately or wisely?


Yes, he acts wisely.But  must  the  physician  necessarily  know  when  his  treatment  is  likely  to

prove  beneficial,  and  when  not?  or  must  the  craftsman  necessarily  know

when he is likely to be benefited, and when not to be benefited, by the work

which he is doing?


I suppose not.


Then, I said, he may sometimes do good or harm, and not know what he is

himself doing, and yet, in doing good, as you say, he has done temperately or

wisely. Was not that your statement?


Yes.


Then, as would seem, in doing good, he may act wisely or temperately, and

be wise or temperate, but not know his own wisdom or temperance?


But  that,  Socrates,  he  said,  is  impossible;  and  therefore  if  this  is,  as  you

imply, the necessary consequence of any of my previous admissions, I will

withdraw them, rather than admit that a man can be temperate or wise who

does not know himself; and I am not ashamed to confess that I was in error.

For  self-knowledge  would  certainly  be  maintained  by  me  to  be  the  very

essence  of  knowledge,  and  in  this  I  agree  with  him  who  dedicated  the

inscription, "Know thyself!" at Delphi. That word, if I am not mistaken, is put

there as a sort of salutation which the god addresses to those who enter the

temple; as much as to say that the ordinary salutation of "Hail!" is not right,

and that the exhortation "Be temperate!" would be a far better way of saluting

one  another.  The  notion  of  him  who  dedicated  the  inscription  was,  as  I

believe, that the god speaks to those who enter his temple, not as men speak;

but,  when  a  worshipper  enters,  the  first  word  which  he  hears  is  "Be

temperate!" This, however, like a prophet he expresses in a sort of riddle, for

"Know thyself!" and "Be temperate!" are the same, as I maintain, and as the

letters  imply,  and  yet  they  may  be  easily  misunderstood;  and  succeeding

sages who added "Never too much," or, "Give a pledge, and evil is nigh at

hand," would appear to have so misunderstood them; for they imagined that

"Know  thyself!"  was  a  piece  of  advice  which  the  god  gave,  and  not  his

salutation of the worshippers at their first coming in; and they dedicated their

own inscription under the idea that they too would give equally useful piecesof advice. Shall I tell you, Socrates, why I say all this? My object is to leave

the previous discussion (in which I know not whether you or I are more right,

but, at any rate, no clear result was attained), and to raise a new one in which

I will attempt to prove, if you deny, that temperance is self-knowledge.


Yes, I said, Critias; but you come to me as though I professed to know about

the questions which I ask, and as though I could, if I only would, agree with

you. Whereas the fact is that I enquire with you into the truth of that which is

advanced from time to time, just because I do not know; and when I have

enquired, I will say whether I agree with you or not. Please then to allow me

time to reflect.


Reflect, he said.


I  am  reflecting,  I  replied,  and  discover  that  temperance,  or  wisdom,  if

implying  a  knowledge  of  anything,  must  be  a  science,  and  a  science  of

something.


Yes, he said; the science of itself.


Is not medicine, I said, the science of health?


True.


And suppose, I said, that I were asked by you what is the use or effect of

medicine, which is this science of health, I should answer that medicine is of

very great use in producing health, which, as you will admit, is an excellent

effect.


Granted.


And if you were to ask me, what is the result or effect of architecture, which

is the science of building, I should say houses, and so of other arts, which all

have  their  different  results.  Now  I  want  you,  Critias,  to  answer  a  similar

question  about  temperance,  or  wisdom,  which,  according  to  you,  is  the

science of itself. Admitting this view, I ask of you, what good work, worthy

of the name wise, does temperance or wisdom, which is the science of itself,effect? Answer me.


That  is  not  the  true  way  of  pursuing  the  enquiry,  Socrates,  he  said;  for

wisdom  is  not  like  the  other  sciences,  any  more  than  they  are  like  one

another: but you proceed as if they were alike. For tell me, he said, what

result is there of computation or geometry, in the same sense as a house is the

result of building, or a garment of weaving, or any other work of any other

art? Can you show me any such result of them? You cannot.


That is true, I said; but still each of these sciences has a subject which is

different from the science. I can show you that the art of computation has to

do with odd and even numbers in their numerical relations to themselves and

to each other. Is not that true?


Yes, he said.


And the odd and even numbers are not the same with the art of computation?


They are not.


The art of weighing, again, has to do with lighter and heavier; but the art of

weighing is one thing, and the heavy and the light another. Do you admit

that?


Yes.


Now,  I  want  to  know,  what  is  that  which  is  not  wisdom,  and  of  which

wisdom is the science?


You are just falling into the old error, Socrates, he said. You come asking in

what wisdom or temperance differs from the other sciences, and then you try

to discover some respect in which they are alike; but they are not, for all the

other sciences are of something else, and not of themselves; wisdom alone is

a science of other sciences, and of itself. And of this, as I believe, you are

very well aware: and that you are only doing what you denied that you were

doing just now, trying to refute me, instead of pursuing the argument.


And what if I am? How can you think that I have any other motive in refutingyou but what I should have in examining into myself? which motive would

be just a fear of my unconsciously fancying that I knew something of which I

was ignorant. And at this moment I pursue the argument chiefly for my own

sake, and perhaps in some degree also for the sake of my other friends. For is

not the discovery of things as they truly are, a good common to all mankind?


Yes, certainly, Socrates, he said.


Then, I said, be cheerful, sweet sir, and give your opinion in answer to the

question which I asked, never minding whether Critias or Socrates is the

person refuted; attend only to the argument, and see what will come of the

refutation.


I think that you are right, he replied; and I will do as you say.


Tell me, then, I said, what you mean to affirm about wisdom.


I mean to say that wisdom is the only science which is the science of itself as

well as of the other sciences.


But the science of science, I said, will also be the science of the absence of

science.


Very true, he said.


Then the wise or temperate man, and he only, will know himself, and be able

to examine what he knows or does not know, and to see what others know

and think that they know and do really know; and what they do not know,

and fancy that they know, when they do not. No other person will be able to

do this. And this is wisdom and temperance and self-knowledge-for a man to

know what he knows, and what he does not know. That is your meaning?


Yes, he said.


Now then, I said, making an offering of the third or last argument to Zeus the

Saviour, let us begin again, and ask, in the first place, whether it is or is not

possible for a person to know that he knows and does not know what he

knows and does not know; and in the second place, whether, if perfectlypossible, such knowledge is of any use.


That is what we have to consider, he said.


And here, Critias, I said, I hope that you will find a way out of a difficulty

into which I have got myself. Shall I tell you the nature of the difficulty?


By all means, he replied.


Does not what you have been saying, if true, amount to this: that there must

be a single science which is wholly a science of itself and of other sciences,

and that the same is also the science of the absence of science?


Yes.


But consider how monstrous this proposition is, my friend: in any parallel

case, the impossibility will be transparent to you.


How is that? and in what cases do you mean?


In such cases as this: Suppose that there is a kind of vision which is not like

ordinary vision, but a vision of itself and of other sorts of vision, and of the

defect of them, which in seeing sees no colour, but only itself and other sorts

of vision: Do you think that there is such a kind of vision?


Certainly not.


Or is there a kind of hearing which hears no sound at all, but only itself and

other sorts of hearing, or the defects of them?


There is not.


Or take all the senses: can you imagine that there is any sense of itself and of

other senses, but which is incapable of perceiving the objects of the senses?


I think not.


Could there be any desire which is not the desire of any pleasure, but of itself,and of all other desires?


Certainly not.


Or can you imagine a wish which wishes for no good, but only for itself and

all other wishes?


I should answer, No.


Or would you say that there is a love which is not the love of beauty, but of

itself and of other loves?


I should not.


Or did you ever know of a fear which fears itself or other fears, but has no

object of fear?


I never did, he said.


Or of an opinion which is an opinion of itself and of other opinions, and

which has no opinion on the subjects of opinion in general?


Certainly not.


But surely we are assuming a science of this kind, which, having no subject-

matter, is a science of itself and of the other sciences?


Yes, that is what is affirmed.


But  how  strange  is  this,  if  it  be  indeed  true:  must  not  however  as  yet

absolutely deny the possibility of such a science; let us rather consider the

matter.


You are quite right.


Well then, this science of which we are speaking is a science of something,

and is of a nature to be a science of something?Yes.


Just as that which is greater is of a nature to be greater than something else?


Yes.


Which is less, if the other is conceived to be greater?


To be sure.


And if we could find something which is at once greater than itself, and

greater  than  other  great  things,  but  not  greater  than  those  things  in

comparison of which the others are greater, then that thing would have the

property of being greater and also less than itself?


That, Socrates, he said, is the inevitable inference.


Or if there be a double which is double of itself and of other doubles, these

will be halves; for the double is relative to the half?


That is true.


And  that  which  is  greater  than  itself  will  also  be  less,  and  that  which  is

heavier will also be lighter, and that which is older will also be younger: and

the same of other things; that which has a nature relative to self will retain

also the nature of its object: I mean to say, for example, that hearing is, as we

say, of sound or voice. Is that true?


Yes.


Then if hearing hears itself, it must hear a voice; for there is no other way of

hearing.


Certainly.


And sight also, my excellent friend, if it sees itself must see a colour, for

sight cannot see that which has no colour.No.


Do you remark, Critias, that in several of the examples which have been

recited the notion of a relation to self is altogether inadmissible, and in other

cases hardly credible-inadmissible, for example, in the case of magnitudes,

numbers, and the like?


Very true.


But in the case of hearing and sight, or in the power of self-motion, and the

power of heat to burn, this relation to self will be regarded as incredible by

some, but perhaps not by others. And some great man, my friend, is wanted,

who will satisfactorily determine for us, whether there is nothing which has

an inherent property of relation to self, or some things only and not others;

and whether in this class of self-related things, if there be such a class, that

science  which  is  called  wisdom  or  temperance  is  included.  I  altogether

distrust my own power of determining these matters: I am not certain whether

there is such a science of science at all; and even if there be, I should not

acknowledge this to be wisdom or temperance, until I can also see whether

such a science would or would not do us any good; for I have an impression

that  temperance  is  a  benefit  and  a  good.  And  therefore,  O  son  of

Callaeschrus,  as  you  maintain  that  temperance  or  wisdom  is  a  science  of

science, and also of the absence of science, I will request you to show in the

first place, as I was saying before, the possibility, and in the second place, the

advantage, of such a science; and then perhaps you may satisfy me that you

are right in your view of temperance.


Critias heard me say this, and saw that I was in a difficulty; and as one person

when another yawns in his presence catches the infection of yawning from

him, so did he seem to be driven into a difficulty by my difficulty. But as he

had a reputation to maintain, he was ashamed to admit before the company

that he could not answer my challenge or determine the question at issue; and

he made an unintelligible attempt to hide his perplexity. In order that the

argument might proceed, I said to him, Well then Critias, if you like, let us

assume that there is this science of science; whether the assumption is right or

wrong may hereafter be investigated. Admitting the existence of it, will you

tell me how such a science enables us to distinguish what we know or do notknow, which, as we were saying, is self-knowledge or wisdom: so we were

saying?


Yes, Socrates, he said; and that I think is certainly true: for he who has this

science or knowledge which knows itself will become like the knowledge

which he has, in the same way that he who has swiftness will be swift, and he

who has beauty will be beautiful, and he who has knowledge will know. In

the same way he who has that knowledge which is self-knowing, will know

himself.


I do not doubt, I said, that a man will know himself, when he possesses that

which has self-knowledge: but what necessity is there that, having this, he

should know what he knows and what he does not know?


Because, Socrates, they are the same.


Very  likely,  I  said;  but  I  remain  as  stupid  as  ever;  for  still  I  fail  to

comprehend how this knowing what you know and do not know is the same

as the knowledge of self.


What do you mean? he said.


This is what I mean, I replied: I will admit that there is a science of science;-

can this do more than determine that of two things one is and the other is not

science or knowledge?


No, just that.


But is knowledge or want of knowledge of health the same as knowledge or

want of knowledge of justice?


Certainly not.


The one is medicine, and the other is politics; whereas that of which we are

speaking is knowledge pure and simple.


Very true.And if a man knows only, and has only knowledge of knowledge, and has no

further knowledge of health and justice, the probability is that he will only

know  that  he  knows  something,  and  has  a  certain  knowledge,  whether

concerning himself or other men.


True.


Then how will this knowledge or science teach him to know what he knows?

Say that he knows health;-not wisdom or temperance, but the art of medicine

has taught it to him; and he has learned harmony from the art of music, and

building from the art of building, neither, from wisdom or temperance: and

the same of other things.


That is evident.


How will wisdom, regarded only as a knowledge of knowledge or science of

science, ever teach him that he knows health, or that he knows building?


It is impossible.


Then he who is ignorant of these things will only know that he knows, but

not what he knows?


True.


Then wisdom or being wise appears to be not the knowledge of the things

which we do or do not know, but only the knowledge that we know or do not

know?


That is the inference.


Then  he  who  has  this  knowledge  will  not  be  able  to  examine  whether  a

pretender knows or does not know that which he says that he knows: he will

only know that he has a knowledge of some kind; but wisdom will not show

him of what the knowledge is?


Plainly not.Neither will he be able to distinguish the pretender in medicine from the true

physician, nor between any other true and false professor of knowledge. Let

us consider the matter in this way: If the wise man or any other man wants to

distinguish the true physician from the false, how will he proceed? He will

not talk to him about medicine; and that, as we were saying, is the only thing

which the physician understands.


True.


And, on the other hand, the physician knows nothing of science, for this has

been assumed to be the province of wisdom.


True.


And further, since medicine is science, we must infer that he does not know

anything of medicine.


Exactly.


Then the wise man may indeed know that the physician has some kind of

science or knowledge; but when he wants to discover the nature of this he

will  ask,  What  is  the  subject-matter?  For  the  several  sciences  are

distinguished not by the mere fact that they are sciences, but by the nature of

their subjects. Is not that true?


Quite true.


And  medicine  is  distinguished  from  other  sciences  as  having  the  subject-

matter of health and disease?


Yes.


And  he  who  would  enquire  into  the  nature  of  medicine  must  pursue  the

enquiry into health and disease, and not into what is extraneous?


True.


And he who judges rightly will judge of the physician as a physician in whatrelates to these?


He will.


He will consider whether what he says is true, and whether what he does is

right, in relation to health and disease?


He will.


But can any one attain the knowledge of either unless he have a of medicine?


He cannot.


No one at all, it would seem, except the physician can have this knowledge;

and therefore not the wise man; he would have to be a physician as well as a

wise man.


Very true.


Then, assuredly, wisdom or temperance, if only a science of science, and of

the  absence  of  science  or  knowledge,  will  not  be  able  to  distinguish  the

physician who knows from one who does not know but pretends or thinks

that he knows, or any other professor of anything at all; like any other artist,

he will only know his fellow in art or wisdom, and no one else.


That is evident, he said.


But  then  what  profit,  Critias,  I  said,  is  there  any  longer  in  wisdom  or

temperance which yet remains, if this is wisdom? If, indeed, as we were

supposing at first, the wise man had been able to distinguish what he knew

and did not know, and that he knew the one and did not know the other, and

to recognize a similar faculty of discernment in others, there would certainly

have been a great advantage in being wise; for then we should never have

made a mistake, but have passed through life the unerring guides of ourselves

and of those who are under us; and we should not have attempted to do what

we did not know, but we should have found out those who knew, and have

handed the business over to them and trusted in them; nor should we have

allowed those who were under us to do anything which they were not likelyto do well and they would be likely to do well just that of which they had

knowledge; and the house or state which was ordered or administered under

the guidance of wisdom, and everything else of which wisdom was the lord,

would  have  been  well  ordered;  for  truth  guiding,  and  error  having  been

eliminated, in all their doings, men would have done well, and would have

been happy. Was not this, Critias, what we spoke of as the great advantage of

wisdom to know what is known and what is unknown to us?


Very true, he said.


And now you perceive, I said, that no such science is to be found anywhere.


I perceive, he said.


May we assume then, I said, that wisdom, viewed in this new light merely as

a knowledge of knowledge and ignorance, has this advantage:-that he who

possesses such knowledge will more easily learn anything which he learns;

and  that  everything  will  be  clearer  to  him,  because,  in  addition  to  the

knowledge of individuals, he sees the science, and this also will better enable

him  to  test  the  knowledge  which  others  have  of  what  he  knows  himself;

whereas the enquirer who is without this knowledge may be supposed to have

a feebler and weaker insight? Are not these, my friend, the real advantages

which are to be gained from wisdom? And are not we looking and seeking

after something more than is to be found in her?


That is very likely, he said.


That is very likely, I said; and very likely, too, we have been enquiring to no

purpose; as I am led to infer, because I observe that if this is wisdom, some

strange  consequences  would  follow.  Let  us,  if  you  please,  assume  the

possibility of this science of sciences, and further admit and allow, as was

originally suggested, that wisdom is the knowledge of what we know and do

not know. Assuming all this, still, upon further consideration, I am doubtful,

Critias, whether wisdom, such as this, would do us much good. For we were

wrong, I think, in supposing, as we were saying just now, that such wisdom

ordering the government of house or state would be a great benefit.How so? he said.


Why, I said, we were far too ready to admit the great benefits which mankind

would obtain from their severally doing the things which they knew, and

committing the things of which they are ignorant to those who were better

acquainted with them.


Were we not right in making that admission?


I think not.


How very strange, Socrates!


By the dog of Egypt, I said, there I agree with you; and I was thinking as

much just now when I said that strange consequences would follow, and that

I was afraid we were on the wrong track; for however ready we may be to

admit that this is wisdom, I certainly cannot make out what good this sort of

thing does to us.


What do you mean? he said; I wish that you could make me understand what

you mean.


I dare say that what I am saying is nonsense, I replied; and yet if a man has

any feeling of what is due to himself, he cannot let the thought which comes

into his mind pass away unheeded and unexamined.


I like that, he said.


Hear, then, I said, my own dream; whether coming through the horn or the

ivory gate, I cannot tell. The dream is this: Let us suppose that wisdom is

such as we are now defining, and that she has absolute sway over us; then

each  action  will  be  done  according  to  the  arts  or  sciences,  and  no  one

professing to be a pilot when he is not, or any physician or general, or any

one else pretending to know matters of which he is ignorant, will deceive or

elude us; our health will be improved; our safety at sea, and also in battle,

will  be  assured;  our  coats  and  shoes,  and  all  other  instruments  and

implements will be skilfully made, because the workmen will be good andtrue. Aye, and if you please, you may suppose that prophecy, which is the

knowledge of the future, will be under the control of wisdom, and that she

will deter deceivers and set up the true prophets in their place as the revealers

of the future. Now I quite agree that mankind, thus provided, would live and

act according to knowledge, for wisdom would watch and prevent ignorance

from intruding on us. But whether by acting according to knowledge we shall

act well and be happy, my dear Critias,-this is a point which we have not yet

been able to determine.


Yet I think, he replied, that if you discard knowledge, you will hardly find the

crown of happiness in anything else.


But of what is this knowledge? I said. Just answer me that small question. Do

you mean a knowledge of shoemaking?


God forbid.


Or of working in brass?


Certainly not.


Or in wool, or wood, or anything of that sort?


No, I do not.


Then, I said, we are giving up the doctrine that he who lives according to

knowledge is happy, for these live according to knowledge, and yet they are

not  allowed  by  you  to  be  happy;  but  I  think  that  you  mean  to  confine

happiness to particular individuals who live according to knowledge, such for

example as the prophet, who, as I was saying, knows the future. Is it of him

you are speaking or of some one else?


Yes, I mean him, but there are others as well.


Yes, I said, some one who knows the past and present as well as the future,

and is ignorant of nothing. Let us suppose that there is such a person, and if

there is, you will allow that he is the most knowing of all living men.Certainly he is.


Yet I should like to know one thing more: which of the different kinds of

knowledge makes him happy? or do all equally make him happy?


Not all equally, he replied.


But  which  most  tends  to  make  him  happy?  the  knowledge  of  what  past,

present, or future thing? May I infer this to be the knowledge of the game of

draughts?


Nonsense about the game of draughts.


Or of computation?


No.


Or of health?


That is nearer the truth, he said.


And that knowledge which is nearest of all, I said, is the knowledge of what?


The knowledge with which he discerns good and evil.


Monster! I said; you have been carrying me round in a circle, and all this time

hiding from me the fact that the life according to knowledge is not that which

makes men act rightly and be happy, not even if knowledge include all the

sciences, but one science only, that of good and evil. For, let me ask you,

Critias, whether, if you take away this, medicine will not equally give health,

and shoemaking equally produce shoes, and the art of the weaver clothes?-

whether the art of the pilot will not equally save our lives at sea, and the art of

the general in war?


Quite so.


And yet, my dear Critias, none of these things will be well or beneficially

done, if the science of the good be wanting.True.


But  that  science  is  not  wisdom  or  temperance,  but  a  science  of  human

advantage; not a science of other sciences, or of ignorance, but of good and

evil: and if this be of use, then wisdom or temperance will not be of use.


And why, he replied, will not wisdom be of use? For, however much we

assume  that  wisdom  is  a  science  of  sciences,  and  has  a  sway  over  other

sciences, surely she will have this particular science of the good under her

control, and in this way will benefit us.


And will wisdom give health? I said; is not this rather the effect of medicine?

Or does wisdom do the work any of the other arts, do they not each of them

do their own work? Have we not long ago asseverated that wisdom is only

the knowledge of knowledge and of ignorance, and of nothing else?


That is obvious.


Then wisdom will not be the producer of health.


Certainly not.


The art of health is different.


Yes, different.


Nor does wisdom give advantage, my good friend; for that again we have just

now been attributing to another art.


Very true.


How then can wisdom be advantageous, when giving no advantage?


That, Socrates, is certainly inconceivable.


You see then, Critias, that I was not far wrong in fearing that I could have no

sound notion about wisdom; I was quite right in depreciating myself; for that

which is admitted to be the best of all things would never have seemed to ususeless, if I had been good for anything at an enquiry. But now I have been

utterly defeated, and have failed to discover what that is to which the imposer

of names gave this name of temperance or wisdom. And yet many more

admissions were made by us than could be fairly granted; for we admitted

that  there  was  a  science  of  science,  although  the  argument  said  No,  and

protested  against  us;  and  we  admitted  further,  that  this  science  knew  the

works of the other sciences (although this too was denied by the argument),

because we wanted to show that the wise man had knowledge of what he

knew  and  did  not  know;  also  we  nobly  disregarded,  and  never  even

considered, the impossibility of a man knowing in a sort of way that which he

does not know at all; for our assumption was, that he knows that which he

does not know; than which nothing, as I think, can be more irrational. And

yet, after finding us so easy and good-natured, the enquiry is still unable to

discover the truth; but mocks us to a degree, and has gone out of its way to

prove the inutility of that which we admitted only by a sort of supposition

and fiction to be the true definition of temperance or wisdom: which result, as

far as I am concerned, is not so much to be lamented, I said. But for your

sake,  Charmides,  I  am  very  sorry-that  you,  having  such  beauty  and  such

wisdom and temperance of soul, should have no profit or good in life from

your wisdom and temperance. And still more am I grieved about the charm

which I learned with so much pain, and to so little profit, from the Thracian,

for the sake of a thing which is nothing worth. I think indeed that there is a

mistake,  and  that  I  must  be  a  bad  enquirer,  for  wisdom  or  temperance  I

believe  to  be  really  a  great  good;  and  happy  are  you,  Charmides,  if  you

certainly possess it. Wherefore examine yourself, and see whether you have

this gift and can do without the charm; for if you can, I would rather advise

you to regard me simply as a fool who is never able to reason out anything;

and to rest assured that the more wise and temperate you are, the happier you

will be.


Charmides said: I am sure that I do not know, Socrates, whether I have or

have not this gift of wisdom and temperance; for how can I know whether I

have  a  thing,  of  which  even  you  and  Critias  are,  as  you  say,  unable  to

discover the nature?-(not that I believe you.) And further, I am sure, Socrates,

that I do need the charm, and as far as I am concerned, I shall be willing to be

charmed by you daily, until you say that I have had enough.Very good, Charmides, said Critias; if you do this I shall have a proof of your

temperance, that is, if you allow yourself to be charmed by Socrates, and

never desert him at all.


You may depend on my following and not deserting him, said Charmides: if

you who are my guardian command me, I should be very wrong not to obey

you.


And I do command you, he said.


Then I will do as you say, and begin this very day.


You sirs, I said, what are you conspiring about?


We are not conspiring, said Charmides, we have conspired already.


And are you about to use violence, without even going through the forms of

justice?


Yes, I shall use violence, he replied, since he orders me; and therefore you

had better consider well.


But the time for consideration has passed, I said, when violence is employed;

and you, when you are determined on anything, and in the mood of violence,

are irresistible.


Do not you resist me then, he said.


I will not resist you, I replied.


THE END                          Cratylus Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    Beginning of CratylusIntroduction to Plato's Craytulus


  The Cratylus has always been a source of perplexity to the student of

Plato. While in fancy and humour, and perfection of style and metaphysical

originality, this dialogue may be ranked with the best of the Platonic writings,

there  has  been  an  uncertainty  about  the  motive  of  the  piece,  which

interpreters have hitherto not succeeded in dispelling. We need not suppose

that Plato used words in order to conceal his thoughts, or that he would have

been  unintelligible  to  an  educated  contemporary.  In  the  Phaedrus  and

Euthydemus we also find a difficulty in determining the precise aim of the

author. Plato wrote satires in the form of dialogues, and his meaning, like that

of other satirical writers, has often slept in the ear of posterity. Two causes

may be assigned for this obscurity: 1st, the subtlety and allusiveness of this

species of composition; 2nd, the difficulty of reproducing a state of life and

literature which has passed away. A satire is unmeaning unless we can place

ourselves back among the persons and thoughts of the age in which it was

written. Had the treatise of Antisthenes upon words, or the speculations of

Cratylus, or some other Heracleitean of the fourth century B.C., on the nature

of language been preserved to us; or if we had lived at the time, and been

'rich enough to attend the fifty-drachma course of Prodicus,' we should have

understood Plato better, and many points which are now attributed to the

extravagance of Socrates' humour would have been found, like the allusions

of  Aristophanes  in  the  Clouds,  to  have  gone  home  to  the  sophists  and

grammarians of the day.


  For  the  age  was  very  busy  with  philological  speculation;  and  many

questions were beginning to be asked about language which were parallel to

other questions about justice, virtue, knowledge, and were illustrated in a

similar manner by the analogy of the arts. Was there a correctness in words,

and were they given by nature or convention? In the presocratic philosophy

mankind had been striving to attain an expression of their ideas, and now

they were beginning to ask themselves whether the expression might not be

distinguished from the idea? They were also seeking to distinguish the parts

of speech and to enquire into the relation of subject and predicate. Grammar

and logic were moving about somewhere in the depths of the human soul, butthey were not yet awakened into consciousness and had not found names for

themselves, or terms by which they might be expressed. Of these beginnings

of  the  study  of  language  we  know  little,  and  there  necessarily  arises  an

obscurity when the surroundings of such a work as the Cratylus are taken

away. Moreover, in this, as in most of the dialogues of Plato, allowance has

to be made for the character of Socrates. For the theory of language can only

be  propounded  by  him  in  a  manner  which  is  consistent  with  his  own

profession of ignorance. Hence his ridicule of the new school of etymology is

interspersed  with  many  declarations  'that  he  knows  nothing,'  'that  he  has

learned from Euthyphro,' and the like. Even the truest things which he says

are depreciated by himself. He professes to be guessing, but the guesses of

Plato are better than all the other theories of the ancients respecting language

put together.


  The dialogue hardly derives any light from Plato's other writings, and still

less from Scholiasts and Neoplatonist writers. Socrates must be interpreted

from  himself,  and  on  first  reading  we  certainly  have  a  difficulty  in

understanding his drift, or his relation to the two other interlocutors in the

dialogue. Does he agree with Cratylus or with Hermogenes, and is he serious

in those fanciful etymologies, extending over more than half the dialogue,

which he seems so greatly to relish? Or is he serious in part only; and can we

separate his jest from his earnest?--Sunt bona, sunt quaedum mediocria, sunt

mala  plura.  Most  of  them  are  ridiculously  bad,  and  yet  among  them  are

found, as if by accident, principles of philology which are unsurpassed in any

ancient writer, and even in advance of any philologer of the last century. May

we suppose that Plato, like Lucian, has been amusing his fancy by writing a

comedy in the form of a prose dialogue? And what is the final result of the

enquiry? Is Plato an upholder of the conventional theory of language, which

he acknowledges to be imperfect? or does he mean to imply that a perfect

language can only be based on his own theory of ideas? Or if this latter

explanation is refuted by his silence, then in what relation does his account of

language stand to the rest of his philosophy? Or may we be so bold as to deny

the connexion between them? (For the allusion to the ideas at the end of the

dialogue is merely intended to show that we must not put words in the place

of things or realities, which is a thesis strongly insisted on by Plato in many

other passages)...These are some of the first thoughts which arise in the mind

of the reader of the Cratylus. And the consideration of them may form aconvenient introduction to the general subject of the dialogue.


  We must not expect all the parts of a dialogue of Plato to tend equally to

some  clearly-defined  end.  His  idea  of  literary  art  is  not  the  absolute

proportion of the whole, such as we appear to find in a Greek temple or

statue; nor should his works be tried by any such standard. They have often

the beauty of poetry, but they have also the freedom of conversation. 'Words

are more plastic than wax' (Rep.), and may be moulded into any form. He

wanders on from one topic to another, careless of the unity of his work, not

fearing any 'judge, or spectator, who may recall him to the point' (Theat.),

'whither  the  argument  blows  we  follow'  (Rep.).  To  have  determined

beforehand,  as  in  a  modern  didactic  treatise,  the  nature  and  limits  of  the

subject, would have been fatal to the spirit of enquiry or discovery, which is

the soul of the dialogue...These remarks are applicable to nearly all the works

of  Plato,  but  to  the  Cratylus  and  Phaedrus  more  than  any  others.  See

Phaedrus, Introduction.


  There is another aspect under which some of the dialogues of Plato may

be more truly viewed:--they are dramatic sketches of an argument. We have

found that in the Lysis, Charmides, Laches, Protagoras, Meno, we arrived at

no conclusion--the different sides of the argument were personified in the

different speakers; but the victory was not distinctly attributed to any of them,

nor the truth wholly the property of any. And in the Cratylus we have no

reason to assume that Socrates is either wholly right or wholly wrong, or that

Plato, though he evidently inclines to him, had any other aim than that of

personifying, in the characters of Hermogenes, Socrates, and Cratylus, the

three theories of language which are respectively maintained by them.


  The two subordinate persons of the dialogue, Hermogenes and Cratylus,

are at the opposite poles of the argument. But after a while the disciple of the

Sophist and the follower of Heracleitus are found to be not so far removed

from one another as at first sight appeared; and both show an inclination to

accept  the  third  view  which  Socrates  interposes  between  them.  First,

Hermogenes, the poor brother of the rich Callias, expounds the doctrine that

names are conventional; like the names of slaves, they may be given and

altered at pleasure. This is one of those principles which, whether applied to

society or language, explains everything and nothing. For in all things there isan  element  of  convention;  but  the  admission  of  this  does  not  help  us  to

understand  the  rational  ground  or  basis  in  human  nature  on  which  the

convention proceeds. Socrates first of all intimates to Hermogenes that his

view of language is only a part of a sophistical whole, and ultimately tends to

abolish  the  distinction  between  truth  and  falsehood.  Hermogenes  is  very

ready  to  throw  aside  the  sophistical  tenet,  and  listens  with  a  sort  of  half

admiration, half belief, to the speculations of Socrates.


  Cratylus is of opinion that a name is either a true name or not a name at

all. He is unable to conceive of degrees of imitation; a word is either the

perfect expression of a thing, or a mere inarticulate sound (a fallacy which is

still prevalent among theorizers about the origin of language). He is at once a

philosopher  and  a  sophist;  for  while  wanting  to  rest  language  on  an

immutable basis, he would deny the possibility of falsehood. He is inclined to

derive  all  truth  from  language,  and  in  language  he  sees  reflected  the

philosophy  of  Heracleitus.  His  views  are  not  like  those  of  Hermogenes,

hastily  taken  up,  but  are  said  to  be  the  result  of  mature  consideration,

although he is described as still a young man. With a tenacity characteristic of

the Heracleitean philosophers, he clings to the doctrine of the flux. (Compare

Theaet.) Of the real Cratylus we know nothing, except that he is recorded by

Aristotle to have been the friend or teacher of Plato; nor have we any proof

that he resembled the likeness of him in Plato any more than the Critias of

Plato is like the real Critias, or the Euthyphro in this dialogue like the other

Euthyphro, the diviner, in the dialogue which is called after him.


    Between  these  two  extremes,  which  have  both  of  them  a  sophistical

character, the view of Socrates is introduced, which is in a manner the union

of  the  two.  Language  is  conventional  and  also  natural,  and  the  true

conventional-natural is the rational. It is a work not of chance, but of art; the

dialectician  is  the  artificer  of  words,  and  the  legislator  gives  authority  to

them. They are the expressions or imitations in sound of things. In a sense,

Cratylus is right in saying that things have by nature names; for nature is not

opposed either to art or to law. But vocal imitation, like any other copy, may

be imperfectly executed; and in this way an element of chance or convention

enters in. There is much which is accidental or exceptional in language. Some

words have had their original meaning so obscured, that they require to be

helped out by convention. But still the true name is that which has a naturalmeaning. Thus nature, art, chance, all combine in the formation of language.

And  the  three  views  respectively  propounded  by  Hermogenes,  Socrates,

Cratylus, may be described as the conventional, the artificial or rational, and

the natural. The view of Socrates is the meeting-point of the other two, just as

conceptualism is the meeting-point of nominalism and realism.


  We can hardly say that Plato was aware of the truth, that 'languages are

not made, but grow.' But still, when he says that 'the legislator made language

with the dialectician standing on his right hand,' we need not infer from this

that he conceived words, like coins, to be issued from the mint of the State.

The creator of laws and of social life is naturally regarded as the creator of

language, according to Hellenic notions, and the philosopher is his natural

advisor.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  legislator  is  performing  any

extraordinary  function;  he  is  merely  the  Eponymus  of  the  State,  who

prescribes rules for the dialectician and for all other artists. According to a

truly Platonic mode of approaching the subject, language, like virtue in the

Republic, is examined by the analogy of the arts. Words are works of art

which may be equally made in different materials, and are well made when

they  have  a  meaning.  Of  the  process  which  he  thus  describes,  Plato  had

probably  no  very  definite  notion.  But  he  means  to  express  generally  that

language is the product of intelligence, and that languages belong to States

and not to individuals.


  A better conception of language could not have been formed in Plato's

age, than that which he attributes to Socrates. Yet many persons have thought

that the mind of Plato is more truly seen in the vague realism of Cratylus.

This misconception has probably arisen from two causes: first, the desire to

bring Plato's theory of language into accordance with the received doctrine of

the Platonic ideas; secondly, the impression created by Socrates himself, that

he is not in earnest, and is only indulging the fancy of the hour.


  1. We shall have occasion to show more at length, in the Introduction to

future dialogues, that the so-called Platonic ideas are only a semi- mythical

form, in which he attempts to realize abstractions, and that they are replaced

in his later writings by a rational theory of psychology. (See introductions to

the Meno and the Sophist.) And in the Cratylus he gives a general account of

the nature and origin of language, in which Adam Smith, Rousseau, and otherwriters of the last century, would have substantially agreed. At the end of the

dialogue, he speaks as in the Symposium and Republic of absolute beauty

and good; but he never supposed that they were capable of being embodied in

words. Of the names of the ideas, he would have said, as he says of the names

of the Gods, that we know nothing. Even the realism of Cratylus is not based

upon the ideas of Plato, but upon the flux of Heracleitus. Here, as in the

Sophist  and  Politicus,  Plato  expressly  draws  attention  to  the  want  of

agreement in words and things. Hence we are led to infer, that the view of

Socrates is not the less Plato's own, because not based upon the ideas; 2nd,

that  Plato's  theory  of  language  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  rest  of  his

philosophy.


  2. We do not deny that Socrates is partly in jest and partly in earnest. He

is  discoursing  in  a  high-flown  vein,  which  may  be  compared  to  the

'dithyrambics of the Phaedrus.' They are mysteries of which he is speaking,

and he professes a kind of ludicrous fear of his imaginary wisdom. When he

is  arguing  out  of  Homer,  about  the  names  of  Hector's  son,  or  when  he

describes himself as inspired or maddened by Euthyphro, with whom he has

been sitting from the early dawn (compare Phaedrus and Lysias; Phaedr.) and

expresses his intention of yielding to the illusion to-day, and to-morrow he

will go to a priest and be purified, we easily see that his words are not to be

taken seriously. In this part of the dialogue his dread of committing impiety,

the pretended derivation of his wisdom from another, the extravagance of

some of his etymologies, and, in general, the manner in which the fun, fast

and furious, vires acquirit eundo, remind us strongly of the Phaedrus. The jest

is  a  long  one,  extending  over  more  than  half  the  dialogue.  But  then,  we

remember that the Euthydemus is a still longer jest, in which the irony is

preserved to the very end. There he is parodying the ingenious follies of early

logic; in the Cratylus he is ridiculing the fancies of a new school of sophists

and grammarians. The fallacies of the Euthydemus are still retained at the end

of our logic books; and the etymologies of the Cratylus have also found their

way into later writers. Some of these are not much worse than the conjectures

of Hemsterhuis, and other critics of the last century; but this does not prove

that they are serious. For Plato is in advance of his age in his conception of

language,  as  much  as  he  is  in  his  conception  of  mythology.  (Compare

Phaedrus.)  When the fervour of his etymological enthusiasm has abated, Socrates

ends,  as  he  has  begun,  with  a  rational  explanation  of  language.  Still  he

preserves his 'know nothing' disguise, and himself declares his first notions

about  names  to  be  reckless  and  ridiculous.  Having  explained  compound

words by resolving them into their original elements, he now proceeds to

analyse  simple  words  into  the  letters  of  which  they  are  composed.  The

Socrates who 'knows nothing,' here passes into the teacher, the dialectician,

the arranger of species. There is nothing in this part of the dialogue which is

either weak or extravagant. Plato is a supporter of the Onomatopoetic theory

of language; that is to say, he supposes words to be formed by the imitation

of ideas in sounds; he also recognises the effect of time, the influence of

foreign languages, the desire of euphony, to be formative principles; and he

admits a certain element of chance. But he gives no imitation in all this that

he is preparing the way for the construction of an ideal language. Or that he

has any Eleatic speculation to oppose to the Heracleiteanism of Cratylus.


  The  theory  of  language  which  is  propounded  in  the  Cratylus  is  in

accordance with the later phase of the philosophy of Plato, and would have

been regarded by him as in the main true. The dialogue is also a satire on the

philological  fancies  of  the  day.  Socrates  in  pursuit  of  his  vocation  as  a

detector of false knowledge, lights by accident on the truth. He is guessing,

he is dreaming; he has heard, as he says in the Phaedrus, from another: no

one is more surprised than himself at his own discoveries. And yet some of

his best remarks, as for example his view of the derivation of Greek words

from  other  languages,  or  of  the  permutations  of  letters,  or  again,  his

observation that in speaking of the Gods we are only speaking of our names

of them, occur among these flights of humour.


  We can imagine a character having a profound insight into the nature of

men  and  things,  and  yet  hardly  dwelling  upon  them  seriously;  blending

inextricably sense and nonsense; sometimes enveloping in a blaze of jests the

most  serious  matters,  and  then  again  allowing  the  truth  to  peer  through;

enjoying the flow of his own humour, and puzzling mankind by an ironical

exaggeration of their absurdities. Such were Aristophanes and Rabelais; such,

in a different style, were Sterne, Jean Paul, Hamann,-- writers who sometimes

become unintelligible through the extravagance of their fancies. Such is the

character  which  Plato  intends  to  depict  in  some  of  his  dialogues  as  theSilenus Socrates; and through this medium we have to receive our theory of

language.


  There remains a difficulty which seems to demand a more exact answer:

In what relation does the satirical or etymological portion of the dialogue

stand to the serious? Granting all that can be said about the provoking irony

of Socrates, about the parody of Euthyphro, or Prodicus, or Antisthenes, how

does the long catalogue of etymologies furnish any answer to the question of

Hermogenes, which is evidently the main thesis of the dialogue: What is the

truth, or correctness, or principle of names?


  After illustrating the nature of correctness by the analogy of the arts, and

then, as in the Republic, ironically appealing to the authority of the Homeric

poems, Socrates shows that the truth or correctness of names can only be

ascertained by an appeal to etymology. The truth of names is to be found in

the analysis of their elements. But why does he admit etymologies which are

absurd,  based  on  Heracleitean  fancies,  fourfold  interpretations  of  words,

impossible unions and separations of syllables and letters?


  1.  The  answer  to  this  difficulty  has  been  already  anticipated  in  part:

Socrates is not a dogmatic teacher, and therefore he puts on this wild and

fanciful disguise, in order that the truth may be permitted to appear: 2. as

Benfey remarks, an erroneous example may illustrate a principle of language

as well as a true one: 3. many of these etymologies, as, for example, that of

dikaion, are indicated, by the manner in which Socrates speaks of them, to

have been current in his own age: 4. the philosophy of language had not made

such progress as would have justified Plato in propounding real derivations.

Like  his  master  Socrates,  he  saw  through  the  hollowness  of  the  incipient

sciences of the day, and tries to move in a circle apart from them, laying

down  the  conditions  under  which  they  are  to  be  pursued,  but,  as  in  the

Timaeus, cautious and tentative, when he is speaking of actual phenomena.

To have made etymologies seriously, would have seemed to him like the

interpretation of the myths in the Phaedrus, the task 'of a not very fortunate

individual, who had a great deal of time on his hands.' The irony of Socrates

places him above and beyond the errors of his contemporaries.


  The Cratylus is full of humour and satirical touches: the inspiration whichcomes  from  Euthyphro,  and  his  prancing  steeds,  the  light  admixture  of

quotations from Homer, and the spurious dialectic which is applied to them;

the jest about the fifty-drachma course of Prodicus, which is declared on the

best  authority,  viz.  his  own,  to  be  a  complete  education  in  grammar  and

rhetoric; the double explanation of the name Hermogenes, either as 'not being

in  luck,'  or  'being  no  speaker;'  the  dearly-bought  wisdom  of  Callias,  the

Lacedaemonian whose name was 'Rush,' and, above all, the pleasure which

Socrates expresses in his own dangerous discoveries, which 'to-morrow he

will  purge  away,'  are  truly  humorous.  While  delivering  a  lecture  on  the

philosophy of language, Socrates is also satirizing the endless fertility of the

human mind in spinning arguments out of nothing, and employing the most

trifling and fanciful analogies in support of a theory. Etymology in ancient as

in modern times was a favourite recreation; and Socrates makes merry at the

expense of the etymologists. The simplicity of Hermogenes, who is ready to

believe anything that he is told, heightens the effect. Socrates in his genial

and ironical mood hits right and left at his adversaries: Ouranos is so called

apo tou oran ta ano, which, as some philosophers say, is the way to have a

pure mind; the sophists are by a fanciful explanation converted into heroes;

'the givers of names were like some philosophers who fancy that the earth

goes round because their heads are always going round.' There is a great deal

of 'mischief' lurking in the following: 'I found myself in greater perplexity

about justice than I was before I began to learn;' 'The rho in katoptron must

be the addition of some one who cares nothing about truth, but thinks only of

putting the mouth into shape;' 'Tales and falsehoods have generally to do with

the  Tragic  and  goatish  life,  and  tragedy  is  the  place  of  them.'  Several

philosophers  and  sophists  are  mentioned  by  name:  first,  Protagoras  and

Euthydemus are assailed; then the interpreters of Homer, oi palaioi Omerikoi

(compare Arist. Met.) and the Orphic poets are alluded to by the way; then he

discovers a hive of wisdom in the philosophy of Heracleitus;-- the doctrine of

the flux is contained in the word ousia (= osia the pushing principle), an

anticipation of Anaxagoras is found in psuche and selene. Again, he ridicules

the  arbitrary  methods  of  pulling  out  and  putting  in  letters  which  were  in

vogue among the philologers of his time; or slightly scoffs at contemporary

religious beliefs. Lastly, he is impatient of hearing from the half-converted

Cratylus the doctrine that falsehood can neither be spoken, nor uttered, nor

addressed; a piece of sophistry attributed to Gorgias, which reappears in the

Sophist. And he proceeds to demolish, with no less delight than he had set up,the Heracleitean theory of language.


  In the latter part of the dialogue Socrates becomes more serious, though

he does not lay aside but rather aggravates his banter of the Heracleiteans,

whom here, as in the Theaetetus, he delights to ridicule. What was the origin

of this enmity we can hardly determine:--was it due to the natural dislike

which may be supposed to exist between the 'patrons of the flux' and the

'friends of the ideas' (Soph.)? or is it to be attributed to the indignation which

Plato  felt  at  having  wasted  his  time  upon  'Cratylus  and  the  doctrines  of

Heracleitus'  in  the  days  of  his  youth?  Socrates,  touching  on  some  of  the

characteristic  difficulties  of  early  Greek  philosophy,  endeavours  to  show

Cratylus  that  imitation  may  be  partial  or  imperfect,  that  a  knowledge  of

things  is  higher  than  a  knowledge  of  names,  and  that  there  can  be  no

knowledge if all things are in a state of transition. But Cratylus, who does not

easily apprehend the argument from common sense, remains unconvinced,

and  on  the  whole  inclines  to  his  former  opinion.  Some  profound

philosophical remarks are scattered up and down, admitting of an application

not only to language but to knowledge generally; such as the assertion that

'consistency is no test of truth:' or again, 'If we are over-precise about words,

truth will say "too late" to us as to the belated traveller in Aegina.'


  The  place  of  the  dialogue  in  the  series  cannot  be  determined  with

certainty.  The  style  and  subject,  and  the  treatment  of  the  character  of

Socrates, have a close resemblance to the earlier dialogues, especially to the

Phaedrus and Euthydemus. The manner in which the ideas are spoken of at

the  end  of  the  dialogue,  also  indicates  a  comparatively  early  date.  The

imaginative element is still in full vigour; the Socrates of the Cratylus is the

Socrates  of  the  Apology  and  Symposium,  not  yet  Platonized;  and  he

describes, as in the Theaetetus, the philosophy of Heracleitus by 'unsavoury'

similes--he cannot believe that the world is like 'a leaky vessel,' or 'a man

who has a running at the nose'; he attributes the flux of the world to the

swimming in some folks' heads. On the other hand, the relation of thought to

language is omitted here, but is treated of in the Sophist. These grounds are

not sufficient to enable us to arrive at a precise conclusion. But we shall not

be far wrong in placing the Cratylus about the middle, or at any rate in the

first half, of the series.  Cratylus, the Heracleitean philosopher, and Hermogenes, the brother of

Callias, have been arguing about names; the former maintaining that they are

natural, the latter that they are conventional. Cratylus affirms that his own is a

true name, but will not allow that the name of Hermogenes is equally true.

Hermogenes asks Socrates to explain to him what Cratylus means; or, far

rather, he would like to know, What Socrates himself thinks about the truth or

correctness of names? Socrates replies, that hard is knowledge, and the nature

of names is a considerable part of knowledge: he has never been to hear the

fifty-drachma  course  of  Prodicus;  and  having  only  attended  the  single-

drachma course, he is not competent to give an opinion on such matters.

When Cratylus denies that Hermogenes is a true name, he supposes him to

mean that he is not a true son of Hermes, because he is never in luck. But he

would like to have an open council and to hear both sides.


    Hermogenes is of opinion that there is no principle in names; they may be

changed, as we change the names of slaves, whenever we please, and the

altered name is as good as the original one.


  You mean to say, for instance, rejoins Socrates, that if I agree to call a

man a horse, then a man will be rightly called a horse by me, and a man by

the rest of the world? But, surely, there is in words a true and a false, as there

are true and false propositions. If a whole proposition be true or false, then

the parts of a proposition may be true or false, and the least parts as well as

the greatest; and the least parts are names, and therefore names may be true

or  false.  Would  Hermogenes  maintain  that  anybody  may  give  a  name  to

anything, and as many names as he pleases; and would all these names be

always true at the time of giving them? Hermogenes replies that this is the

only way in which he can conceive that names are correct; and he appeals to

the  practice  of  different  nations,  and  of  the  different  Hellenic  tribes,  in

confirmation  of  his  view.  Socrates  asks,  whether  the  things  differ  as  the

words which represent them differ:-- Are we to maintain with Protagoras, that

what  appears  is?  Hermogenes  has  always  been  puzzled  about  this,  but

acknowledges, when he is pressed by Socrates, that there are a few very good

men in the world, and a great many very bad; and the very good are the wise,

and the very bad are the foolish; and this is not mere appearance but reality.

Nor is he disposed to say with Euthydemus, that all things equally and always

belong to all men; in that case, again, there would be no distinction betweenbad and good men. But then, the only remaining possibility is, that all things

have their several distinct natures, and are independent of our notions about

them. And not only things, but actions, have distinct natures, and are done by

different processes. There is a natural way of cutting or burning, and a natural

instrument with which men cut or burn, and any other way will fail;--this is

true of all actions. And speaking is a kind of action, and naming is a kind of

speaking,  and  we  must  name  according  to  a  natural  process,  and  with  a

proper instrument. We cut with a knife, we pierce with an awl, we weave

with a shuttle, we name with a name. And as a shuttle separates the warp

from the woof, so a name distinguishes the natures of things. The weaver will

use the shuttle well,--that is, like a weaver; and the teacher will use the name

well,--that is, like a teacher. The shuttle will be made by the carpenter; the

awl by the smith or skilled person. But who makes a name? Does not the law

give names, and does not the teacher receive them from the legislator? He is

the skilled person who makes them, and of all skilled workmen he is the

rarest. But how does the carpenter make or repair the shuttle, and to what will

he look? Will he not look at the ideal which he has in his mind? And as the

different kinds of work differ, so ought the instruments which make them to

differ. The several kinds of shuttles ought to answer in material and form to

the several kinds of webs. And the legislator ought to know the different

materials and forms of which names are made in Hellas and other countries.

But who is to be the judge of the proper form? The judge of shuttles is the

weaver who uses them; the judge of lyres is the player of the lyre; the judge

of ships is the pilot. And will not the judge who is able to direct the legislator

in his work of naming, be he who knows how to use the names--he who can

ask  and  answer  questions--in  short,  the  dialectician?  The  pilot  directs  the

carpenter how to make the rudder, and the dialectician directs the legislator

how  he  is  to  impose  names;  for  to  express  the  ideal  forms  of  things  in

syllables and letters is not the easy task, Hermogenes, which you imagine.


  'I should be more readily persuaded, if you would show me this natural

correctness of names.'


  Indeed I cannot; but I see that you have advanced; for you now admit that

there is a correctness of names, and that not every one can give a name. But

what  is  the  nature  of  this  correctness  or  truth,  you  must  learn  from  the

Sophists, of whom your brother Callias has bought his reputation for wisdomrather dearly; and since they require to be paid, you, having no money, had

better  learn  from  him  at  second-hand.  'Well,  but  I  have  just  given  up

Protagoras, and I should be inconsistent in going to learn of him.' Then if you

reject  him  you  may  learn  of  the  poets,  and  in  particular  of  Homer,  who

distinguishes the names given by Gods and men to the same things, as in the

verse about the river God who fought with Hephaestus, 'whom the Gods call

Xanthus, and men call Scamander;' or in the lines in which he mentions the

bird which the Gods call 'Chalcis,' and men 'Cymindis;' or the hill which men

call 'Batieia,' and the Gods 'Myrinna's Tomb.' Here is an important lesson; for

the Gods must of course be right in their use of names. And this is not the

only truth about philology which may be learnt from Homer. Does he not say

that Hector's son had two names--


  'Hector called him Scamandrius, but the others Astyanax'?


  Now, if the men called him Astyanax, is it not probable that the other

name was conferred by the women? And which are more likely to be right--

the wiser or the less wise, the men or the women? Homer evidently agreed

with the men: and of the name given by them he offers an explanation;--the

boy was called Astyanax ('king of the city'), because his father saved the city.

The names Astyanax and Hector, moreover, are really the same,--the one

means a king, and the other is 'a holder or possessor.' For as the lion's whelp

may be called a lion, or the horse's foal a foal, so the son of a king may be

called a king. But if the horse had produced a calf, then that would be called a

calf.  Whether  the  syllables  of  a  name  are  the  same  or  not  makes  no

difference,  provided  the  meaning  is  retained.  For  example;  the  names  of

letters, whether vowels or consonants, do not correspond to their sounds, with

the exception of epsilon, upsilon, omicron, omega. The name Beta has three

letters added to the sound--and yet this does not alter the sense of the word,

or prevent the whole name having the value which the legislator intended.

And the same may be said of a king and the son of a king, who like other

animals resemble each other in the course of nature; the words by which they

are  signified  may  be  disguised,  and  yet  amid  differences  of  sound  the

etymologist may recognise the same notion, just as the physician recognises

the power of the same drugs under different disguises of colour and smell.

Hector  and  Astyanax  have  only  one  letter  alike,  but  they  have  the  same

meaning; and Agis (leader) is altogether different in sound from Polemarchus(chief in war), or Eupolemus (good warrior); but the two words present the

same idea of leader or general, like the words Iatrocles and Acesimbrotus,

which equally denote a physician. The son succeeds the father as the foal

succeeds the horse, but when, out of the course of nature, a prodigy occurs,

and the offspring no longer resembles the parent, then the names no longer

agree.  This  may  be  illustrated  by  the  case  of  Agamemnon  and  his  son

Orestes, of whom the former has a name significant of his patience at the

siege of Troy; while the name of the latter indicates his savage, man-of-the-

mountain nature. Atreus again, for his murder of Chrysippus, and his cruelty

to Thyestes, is rightly named Atreus, which, to the eye of the etymologist, is

ateros (destructive), ateires (stubborn), atreotos (fearless); and Pelops is o ta

pelas oron (he who sees what is near only), because in his eagerness to win

Hippodamia,  he  was  unconscious  of  the  remoter  consequences  which  the

murder of Myrtilus would entail upon his race. The name Tantalus, if slightly

changed, offers two etymologies; either apo tes tou lithou talanteias, or apo

tou talantaton einai, signifying at once the hanging of the stone over his head

in the world below, and the misery which he brought upon his country. And

the name of his father, Zeus, Dios, Zenos, has an excellent meaning, though

hard to be understood, because really a sentence which is divided into two

parts (Zeus, Dios). For he, being the lord and king of all, is the author of our

being, and in him all live: this is implied in the double form, Dios, Zenos,

which being put together and interpreted is di on ze panta. There may, at first

sight, appear to be some irreverence in calling him the son of Cronos, who is

a proverb for stupidity; but the meaning is that Zeus himself is the son of a

mighty intellect; Kronos, quasi koros, not in the sense of a youth, but quasi to

katharon kai akeraton tou nou--the pure and garnished mind, which in turn is

begotten  of  Uranus,  who  is  so  called  apo  tou  oran  ta  ano,  from  looking

upwards; which, as philosophers say, is the way to have a pure mind. The

earlier portion of Hesiod's genealogy has escaped my memory, or I would try

more conclusions of the same sort. 'You talk like an oracle.' I caught the

infection from Euthyphro, who gave me a long lecture which began at dawn,

and has not only entered into my ears, but filled my soul, and my intention is

to yield to the inspiration to-day; and to-morrow I will be exorcised by some

priest or sophist. 'Go on; I am anxious to hear the rest.' Now that we have a

general  notion,  how  shall  we  proceed?  What  names  will  afford  the  most

crucial test of natural fitness? Those of heroes and ordinary men are often

deceptive, because they are patronymics or expressions of a wish; let us trygods and demi-gods. Gods are so called, apo tou thein, from the verb 'to run;'

because the sun, moon, and stars run about the heaven; and they being the

original gods of the Hellenes, as they still are of the Barbarians, their name is

given to all Gods. The demons are the golden race of Hesiod, and by golden

he means not literally golden, but good; and they are called demons, quasi

daemones, which in old Attic was used for daimones--good men are well said

to become daimones when they die, because they are knowing. Eros (with an

epsilon) is the same word as eros (with an eta): 'the sons of God saw the

daughters  of  men  that  they  were  fair;'  or  perhaps  they  were  a  species  of

sophists or rhetoricians, and so called apo tou erotan, or eirein, from their

habit of spinning questions; for eirein is equivalent to legein. I get all this

from Euthyphro; and now a new and ingenious idea comes into my mind,

and, if I am not careful, I shall be wiser than I ought to be by to-morrow's

dawn. My idea is, that we may put in and pull out letters at pleasure and alter

the accents (as, for example, Dii philos may be turned into Diphilos), and we

may  make  words  into  sentences  and  sentences  into  words.  The  name

anthrotos  is  a  case  in  point,  for  a  letter  has  been  omitted  and  the  accent

changed; the original meaning being o anathron a opopen--he who looks up

at what he sees. Psuche may be thought to be the reviving, or refreshing, or

animating principle--e anapsuchousa to soma; but I am afraid that Euthyphro

and his disciples will scorn this derivation, and I must find another: shall we

identify the soul with the 'ordering mind' of Anaxagoras, and say that psuche,

quasi phuseche = e phusin echei or ochei?--this might easily be refined into

psyche. 'That is a more artistic etymology.'


  After psuche follows soma; this, by a slight permutation, may be either =

(1) the 'grave' of the soul, or (2) may mean 'that by which the soul signifies

(semainei) her wishes.' But more probably, the word is Orphic, and simply

denotes  that  the  body  is  the  place  of  ward  in  which  the  soul  suffers  the

penalty of sin,--en o sozetai. 'I should like to hear some more explanations of

the names of the Gods, like that excellent one of Zeus.' The truest names of

the Gods are those which they give themselves; but these are unknown to us.

Less true are those by which we propitiate them, as men say in prayers, 'May

he graciously receive any name by which I call him.' And to avoid offence, I

should like to let them know beforehand that we are not presuming to enquire

about them, but only about the names which they usually bear. Let us begin

with Hestia. What did he mean who gave the name Hestia? 'That is a verydifficult question.' O, my dear Hermogenes, I believe that there was a power

of philosophy and talk among the first inventors of names, both in our own

and in other languages; for even in foreign words a principle is discernible.

Hestia is the same with esia, which is an old form of ousia, and means the

first  principle  of  things:  this  agrees  with  the  fact  that  to  Hestia  the  first

sacrifices are offered. There is also another reading--osia, which implies that

'pushing'  (othoun)  is  the  first  principle  of  all  things.  And  here  I  seem  to

discover  a  delicate  allusion  to  the  flux  of  Heracleitus--that  antediluvian

philosopher who cannot walk twice in the same stream; and this flux of his

may accomplish yet greater marvels. For the names Cronos and Rhea cannot

have been accidental; the giver of them must have known something about

the doctrine of Heracleitus. Moreover, there is a remarkable coincidence in

the words of Hesiod, when he speaks of Oceanus, 'the origin of Gods;' and in

the verse of Orpheus, in which he describes Oceanus espousing his sister

Tethys. Tethys is nothing more than the name of a spring--to diattomenon kai

ethoumenon.  Poseidon  is  posidesmos,  the  chain  of  the  feet,  because  you

cannot  walk  on  the  sea--the  epsilon  is  inserted  by  way  of  ornament;  or

perhaps the name may have been originally polleidon, meaning, that the God

knew many things (polla eidos): he may also be the shaker, apo tou seiein,--in

this case, pi and delta have been added. Pluto is connected with ploutos,

because wealth comes out of the earth; or the word may be a euphemism for

Hades,  which  is  usually  derived  apo  tou  aeidous,  because  the  God  is

concerned with the invisible. But the name Hades was really given him from

his knowing (eidenai) all good things. Men in general are foolishly afraid of

him, and talk with horror of the world below from which no one may return.

The reason why his subjects never wish to come back, even if they could, is

that the God enchains them by the strongest of spells, namely by the desire of

virtue, which they hope to obtain by constant association with him. He is the

perfect and accomplished Sophist and the great benefactor of the other world;

for he has much more than he wants there, and hence he is called Pluto or the

rich. He will have nothing to do with the souls of men while in the body,

because he cannot work his will with them so long as they are confused and

entangled  by  fleshly  lusts.  Demeter  is  the  mother  and  giver  of  food--e

didousa meter tes edodes. Here is erate tis, or perhaps the legislator may have

been thinking of the weather, and has merely transposed the letters of the

word aer. Pherephatta, that word of awe, is pheretapha, which is only an

euphonious contraction of e tou pheromenou ephaptomene,--all things are inmotion, and she in her wisdom moves with them, and the wise God Hades

consorts with her--there is nothing very terrible in this, any more than in the

her other appellation Persephone, which is also significant of her wisdom

(sophe). Apollo is another name, which is supposed to have some dreadful

meaning, but is susceptible of at least four perfectly innocent explanations.

First, he is the purifier or purger or absolver (apolouon); secondly, he is the

true diviner, Aplos, as he is called in the Thessalian dialect (aplos = aplous,

sincere);  thirdly,  he  is  the  archer  (aei  ballon),  always  shooting;  or  again,

supposing alpha to mean ama or omou, Apollo becomes equivalent to ama

polon, which points to both his musical and his heavenly attributes; for there

is a 'moving together' alike in music and in the harmony of the spheres. The

second  lambda  is  inserted  in  order  to  avoid  the  ill-omened  sound  of

destruction. The Muses are so called--apo tou mosthai. The gentle Leto or

Letho is named from her willingness (ethelemon), or because she is ready to

forgive  and  forget  (lethe).  Artemis  is  so  called  from  her  healthy  well-

balanced nature, dia to artemes, or as aretes istor; or as a lover of virginity,

aroton misesasa. One of these explanations is probably true,--perhaps all of

them. Dionysus is o didous ton oinon, and oinos is quasi oionous because

wine makes those think (oiesthai) that they have a mind (nous) who have

none. The established derivation of Aphrodite dia ten tou athrou genesin may

be accepted on the authority of Hesiod. Again, there is the name of Pallas, or

Athene, which we, who are Athenians, must not forget. Pallas is derived from

armed  dances--apo  tou  pallein  ta  opla.  For  Athene  we  must  turn  to  the

allegorical interpreters of Homer, who make the name equivalent to theonoe,

or possibly the word was originally ethonoe and signified moral intelligence

(en ethei noesis). Hephaestus, again, is the lord of light--o tou phaeos istor.

This is a good notion; and, to prevent any other getting into our heads, let us

go on to Ares. He is the manly one (arren), or the unchangeable one (arratos).

Enough of the Gods; for, by the Gods, I am afraid of them; but if you suggest

other words, you will see how the horses of Euthyphro prance. 'Only one

more  God;  tell  me  about  my  godfather  Hermes.'  He  is  ermeneus,  the

messenger  or  cheater  or  thief  or  bargainer;  or  o  eirein  momenos,  that  is,

eiremes or ermes--the speaker or contriver of speeches. 'Well said Cratylus,

then, that I am no son of Hermes.' Pan, as the son of Hermes, is speech or the

brother of speech, and is called Pan because speech indicates everything--o

pan menuon. He has two forms, a true and a false; and is in the upper part

smooth, and in the lower part shaggy. He is the goat of Tragedy, in whichthere are plenty of falsehoods.


  'Will you go on to the elements--sun, moon, stars, earth, aether, air, fire,

water, seasons, years?' Very good: and which shall I take first? Let us begin

with elios, or the sun. The Doric form elios helps us to see that he is so called

because at his rising he gathers (alizei) men together, or because he rolls

about (eilei) the earth, or because he variegates (aiolei = poikillei) the earth.

Selene  is  an  anticipation  of  Anaxagoras,  being  a  contraction  of

selaenoneoaeia, the light (selas) which is ever old and new, and which, as

Anaxagoras says, is borrowed from the sun; the name was harmonized into

selanaia, a form which is still in use. 'That is a true dithyrambic name.' Meis

is so called apo tou meiousthai, from suffering diminution, and astron is from

astrape (lightning), which is an improvement of anastrope, that which turns

the eyes inside out. 'How do you explain pur n udor?' I suspect that pur,

which, like udor n kuon, is found in Phrygian, is a foreign word; for the

Hellenes have borrowed much from the barbarians, and I always resort to this

theory of a foreign origin when I am at a loss. Aer may be explained, oti airei

ta apo tes ges; or, oti aei rei; or, oti pneuma ex autou ginetai (compare the

poetic word aetai). So aither quasi aeitheer oti aei thei peri ton aera: ge, gaia

quasi genneteira (compare the Homeric form gegaasi); ora (with an omega),

or, according to the old Attic form ora (with an omicron), is derived apo tou

orizein, because it divides the year; eniautos and etos are the same thought--o

en eauto etazon, cut into two parts, en eauto and etazon, like di on ze into

Dios and Zenos.


  'You make surprising progress.' True; I am run away with, and am not

even yet at my utmost speed. 'I should like very much to hear your account of

the virtues. What principle of correctness is there in those charming words,

wisdom, understanding, justice, and the rest?' To explain all that will be a

serious business; still, as I have put on the lion's skin, appearances must be

maintained.  My  opinion  is,  that  primitive  men  were  like  some  modern

philosophers, who, by always going round in their search after the nature of

things, become dizzy; and this phenomenon, which was really in themselves,

they  imagined  to  take  place  in  the  external  world.  You  have  no  doubt

remarked, that the doctrine of the universal flux, or generation of things, is

indicated in names. 'No, I never did.' Phronesis is only phoras kai rou noesis,

or  perhaps  phoras  onesis,  and  in  any  case  is  connected  with  pheresthai;gnome is gones skepsis kai nomesis; noesis is neou or gignomenon esis; the

word neos implies that creation is always going on--the original form was

neoesis;  sophrosune  is  soteria  phroneseos;  episteme  is  e  epomene  tois

pragmasin--the faculty which keeps close, neither anticipating nor lagging

behind; sunesis is equivalent to sunienai, sumporeuesthai ten psuche, and is a

kind of conclusion--sullogismos tis, akin therefore in idea to episteme; sophia

is very difficult, and has a foreign look--the meaning is, touching the motion

or stream of things, and may be illustrated by the poetical esuthe and the

Lacedaemonian  proper  name  Sous,  or  Rush;  agathon  is  ro  agaston  en  te

tachuteti,--for  all  things  are  in  motion,  and  some  are  swifter  than  others:

dikaiosune  is  clearly  e  tou  dikaiou  sunesis.  The  word  dikaion  is  more

troublesome, and appears to mean the subtle penetrating power which, as the

lovers of motion say, preserves all things, and is the cause of all things, quasi

diaion going through--the letter kappa being inserted for the sake of euphony.

This is a great mystery which has been confided to me; but when I ask for an

explanation I am thought obtrusive, and another derivation is proposed to me.

Justice is said to be o kaion, or the sun; and when I joyfully repeat this

beautiful notion, I am answered, 'What, is there no justice when the sun is

down?' And when I entreat my questioner to tell me his own opinion, he

replies, that justice is fire in the abstract, or heat in the abstract; which is not

very intelligible. Others laugh at such notions, and say with Anaxagoras, that

justice is the ordering mind. 'I think that some one must have told you this.'

And not the rest? Let me proceed then, in the hope of proving to you my

originality. Andreia is quasi anpeia quasi e ano roe, the stream which flows

upwards, and is opposed to injustice, which clearly hinders the principle of

penetration; arren and aner have a similar derivation; gune is the same as

gone; thelu is derived apo tes theles, because the teat makes things flourish

(tethelenai), and the word thallein itself implies increase of youth, which is

swift and sudden ever (thein and allesthai). I am getting over the ground fast:

but much has still to be explained. There is techne, for instance. This, by an

aphaeresis  of  tau  and  an  epenthesis  of  omicron  in  two  places,  may  be

identified with echonoe, and signifies 'that which has mind.'


  'A very poor etymology.' Yes; but you must remember that all language is

in process of change; letters are taken in and put out for the sake of euphony,

and time is also a great alterer of words. For example, what business has the

letter rho in the word katoptron, or the letter sigma in the word sphigx? Theadditions are often such that it is impossible to make out the original word;

and yet, if you may put in and pull out, as you like, any name is equally good

for  any  object.  The  fact  is,  that  great  dictators  of  literature  like  yourself

should observe the rules of moderation. 'I will do my best.' But do not be too

much of a precisian, or you will paralyze me. If you will let me add mechane,

apo tou mekous, which means polu, and anein, I shall be at the summit of my

powers, from which elevation I will examine the two words kakia and arete.

The first is easily explained in accordance with what has preceded; for all

things being in a flux, kakia is to kakos ion. This derivation is illustrated by

the word deilia, which ought to have come after andreia, and may be regarded

as o lian desmos tes psuches, just as aporia signifies an impediment to motion

(from alpha not, and poreuesthai to go), and arete is euporia, which is the

opposite of this--the everflowing (aei reousa or aeireite), or the eligible, quasi

airete. You will think that I am inventing, but I say that if kakia is right, then

arete is also right. But what is kakon? That is a very obscure word, to which I

can only apply my old notion and declare that kakon is a foreign word. Next,

let  us  proceed  to  kalon,  aischron.  The  latter  is  doubtless  contracted  from

aeischoroun, quasi aei ischon roun. The inventor of words being a patron of

the flux, was a great enemy to stagnation. Kalon is to kaloun ta pragmata--

this is mind (nous or dianoia); which is also the principle of beauty; and

which doing the works of beauty, is therefore rightly called the beautiful. The

meaning of sumpheron is explained by previous examples;--like episteme,

signifying  that  the  soul  moves  in  harmony  with  the  world  (sumphora,

sumpheronta). Kerdos is to pasi kerannumenon--that which mingles with all

things: lusiteloun is equivalent to to tes phoras luon to telos, and is not to be

taken in the vulgar sense of gainful, but rather in that of swift, being the

principle which makes motion immortal and unceasing; ophelimon is apo tou

ophellein--that  which  gives  increase:  this  word,  which  is  Homeric,  is  of

foreign origin. Blaberon is to blamton or boulomenon aptein tou rou-- that

which  injures  or  seeks  to  bind  the  stream.  The  proper  word  would  be

boulapteroun, but this is too much of a mouthful--like a prelude on the flute

in honour of Athene. The word zemiodes is difficult; great changes, as I was

saying, have been made in words, and even a small change will alter their

meaning very much. The word deon is one of these disguised words. You

know that according to the old pronunciation, which is especially affected by

the women, who are great conservatives, iota and delta were used where we

should  now  use  eta  and  zeta:  for  example,  what  we  now  call  emera  wasformerly called imera; and this shows the meaning of the word to have been

'the desired one coming after night,' and not, as is often supposed, 'that which

makes things gentle' (emera). So again, zugon is duogon, quasi desis duein

eis agogen--(the binding of two together for the purpose of drawing. Deon, as

ordinarily  written,  has  an  evil  sense,  signifying  the  chain  (desmos)  or

hindrance of motion; but in its ancient form dion is expressive of good, quasi

diion, that which penetrates or goes through all. Zemiodes is really demiodes,

and means that which binds motion (dounti to ion): edone is e pros ten onrsin

teinousa praxis--the delta is an insertion: lupe is derived apo tes dialuseos tou

somatos: ania is from alpha and ienai, to go: algedon is a foreign word, and is

so called apo tou algeinou: odune is apo tes enduseos tes lupes: achthedon is

in its very sound a burden: chapa expresses the flow of soul: terpsis is apo tou

terpnou, and terpnon is properly erpnon, because the sensation of pleasure is

likened to a breath (pnoe) which creeps (erpei) through the soul: euphrosune

is named from pheresthai, because the soul moves in harmony with nature:

epithumia is e epi ton thumon iousa dunamis: thumos is apo tes thuseos tes

psuches: imeros--oti eimenos pei e psuche: pothos, the desire which is in

another place, allothi pou: eros was anciently esros, and so called because it

flows  into  (esrei)  the  soul  from  without:  doxa  is  e  dioxis  tou  eidenai,  or

expresses  the  shooting  from  a  bow  (toxon).  The  latter  etymology  is

confirmed by the words boulesthai, boule, aboulia, which all have to do with

shooting (bole): and similarly oiesis is nothing but the movement (oisis) of

the soul towards essence. Ekousion is to eikon--the yielding--anagke is e an

agke iousa, the passage through ravines which impede motion: aletheia is

theia  ale,  divine  motion.  Pseudos  is  the  opposite  of  this,  implying  the

principle of constraint and forced repose, which is expressed under the figure

of sleep, to eudon; the psi is an addition. Onoma, a name, affirms the real

existence of that which is sought after--on ou masma estin. On and ousia are

only ion with an iota broken off; and ouk on is ouk ion. 'And what are ion,

reon, doun?' One way of explaining them has been already suggested--they

may  be  of  foreign  origin;  and  possibly  this  is  the  true  answer.  But  mere

antiquity  may  often  prevent  our  recognizing  words,  after  all  the

complications  which  they  have  undergone;  and  we  must  remember  that

however far we carry back our analysis some ultimate elements or roots will

remain which can be no further analyzed. For example; the word agathos was

supposed by us to be a compound of agastos and thoos, and probably thoos

may  be  further  resolvable.  But  if  we  take  a  word  of  which  no  furtherresolution seems attainable, we may fairly conclude that we have reached one

of these original elements, and the truth of such a word must be tested by

some new method. Will you help me in the search?


  All names, whether primary or secondary, are intended to show the nature

of things; and the secondary, as I conceive, derive their significance from the

primary. But then, how do the primary names indicate anything? And let me

ask  another  question,--If  we  had  no  faculty  of  speech,  how  should  we

communicate with one another? Should we not use signs, like the deaf and

dumb? The elevation of our hands would mean lightness--heaviness would be

expressed  by  letting  them  drop.  The  running  of  any  animal  would  be

described by a similar movement of our own frames. The body can only

express anything by imitation; and the tongue or mouth can imitate as well as

the rest of the body. But this imitation of the tongue or voice is not yet a

name,  because  people  may  imitate  sheep  or  goats  without  naming  them.

What,  then,  is  a  name?  In  the  first  place,  a  name  is  not  a  musical,  or,

secondly, a pictorial imitation, but an imitation of that kind which expresses

the nature of a thing; and is the invention not of a musician, or of a painter,

but of a namer.


  And now, I think that we may consider the names about which you were

asking. The way to analyze them will be by going back to the letters, or

primary elements of which they are composed. First, we separate the alphabet

into  classes  of  letters,  distinguishing  the  consonants,  mutes,  vowels,  and

semivowels; and when we have learnt them singly, we shall learn to know

them in their various combinations of two or more letters; just as the painter

knows how to use either a single colour, or a combination of colours. And

like the painter, we may apply letters to the expression of objects, and form

them into syllables; and these again into words, until the picture or figure--

that is, language--is completed. Not that I am literally speaking of ourselves,

but  I  mean  to  say  that  this  was  the  way  in  which  the  ancients  framed

language. And this leads me to consider whether the primary as well as the

secondary elements are rightly given. I may remark, as I was saying about the

Gods, that we can only attain to conjecture of them. But still we insist that

ours  is  the  true  and  only  method  of  discovery;  otherwise  we  must  have

recourse, like the tragic poets, to a Deus ex machina, and say that God gave

the first names, and therefore they are right; or that the barbarians are olderthan we are, and that we learnt of them; or that antiquity has cast a veil over

the truth. Yet all these are not reasons; they are only ingenious excuses for

having no reasons.


  I will freely impart to you my own notions, though they are somewhat

crude:--the letter rho appears to me to be the general instrument which the

legislator has employed to express all motion or kinesis. (I ought to explain

that  kinesis  is  just  iesis  (going),  for  the  letter  eta  was  unknown  to  the

ancients; and the root, kiein, is a foreign form of ienai: of kinesis or eisis, the

opposite is stasis). This use of rho is evident in the words tremble, break,

crush, crumble, and the like; the imposer of names perceived that the tongue

is most agitated in the pronunciation of this letter, just as he used iota to

express the subtle power which penetrates through all things. The letters phi,

psi, sigma, zeta, which require a great deal of wind, are employed in the

imitation of such notions as shivering, seething, shaking, and in general of

what is windy. The letters delta and tau convey the idea of binding and rest in

a place: the lambda denotes smoothness, as in the words slip, sleek, sleep,

and the like. But when the slipping tongue is detained by the heavier sound of

gamma, then arises the notion of a glutinous clammy nature: nu is sounded

from within, and has a notion of inwardness: alpha is the expression of size;

eta of length; omicron of roundness, and therefore there is plenty of omicron

in the word goggulon. That is my view, Hermogenes, of the correctness of

names; and I should like to hear what Cratylus would say. 'But, Socrates, as I

was telling you, Cratylus mystifies me; I should like to ask him, in your

presence, what he means by the fitness of names?' To this appeal, Cratylus

replies 'that he cannot explain so important a subject all in a moment.' 'No,

but you may "add little to little," as Hesiod says.' Socrates here interposes his

own request, that Cratylus will give some account of his theory. Hermogenes

and himself are mere sciolists, but Cratylus has reflected on these matters,

and has had teachers. Cratylus replies in the words of Achilles: '"Illustrious

Ajax, you have spoken in all things much to my mind," whether Euthyphro,

or some Muse inhabiting your own breast, was the inspirer.' Socrates replies,

that he is afraid of being self-deceived, and therefore he must 'look fore and

aft,' as Homer remarks. Does not Cratylus agree with him that names teach us

the  nature  of  things?  'Yes.'  And  naming  is  an  art,  and  the  artists  are

legislators, and like artists in general, some of them are better and some of

them are worse than others, and give better or worse laws, and make better orworse names. Cratylus cannot admit that one name is better than another;

they are either true names, or they are not names at all; and when he is asked

about the name of Hermogenes, who is acknowledged to have no luck in him,

he affirms this to be the name of somebody else. Socrates supposes him to

mean that falsehood is impossible, to which his own answer would be, that

there  has  never  been  a  lack  of  liars.  Cratylus  presses  him  with  the  old

sophistical argument, that falsehood is saying that which is not, and therefore

saying nothing;--you cannot utter the word which is not. Socrates complains

that this argument is too subtle for an old man to understand: Suppose a

person  addressing  Cratylus  were  to  say,  Hail,  Athenian  Stranger,

Hermogenes! would these words be true or false? 'I should say that they

would be mere unmeaning sounds, like the hammering of a brass pot.' But

you would acknowledge that names, as well as pictures, are imitations, and

also  that  pictures  may  give  a  right  or  wrong  representation  of  a  man  or

woman:--why  may  not  names  then  equally  give  a  representation  true  and

right or false and wrong? Cratylus admits that pictures may give a true or

false representation, but denies that names can. Socrates argues, that he may

go up to a man and say 'this is year picture,' and again, he may go and say to

him 'this is your name'--in the one case appealing to his sense of sight, and in

the other to his sense of hearing;--may he not? 'Yes.' Then you will admit that

there is a right or a wrong assignment of names, and if of names, then of

verbs and nouns; and if of verbs and nouns, then of the sentences which are

made up of them; and comparing nouns to pictures, you may give them all

the appropriate sounds, or only some of them. And as he who gives all the

colours makes a good picture, and he who gives only some of them, a bad or

imperfect one, but still a picture; so he who gives all the sounds makes a

good name, and he who gives only some of them, a bad or imperfect one, but

a name still. The artist of names, that is, the legislator, may be a good or he

may be a bad artist. 'Yes, Socrates, but the cases are not parallel; for if you

subtract or misplace a letter, the name ceases to be a name.' Socrates admits

that the number 10, if an unit is subtracted, would cease to be 10, but denies

that names are of this purely quantitative nature. Suppose that there are two

objects--Cratylus and the image of Cratylus; and let us imagine that some

God makes them perfectly alike, both in their outward form and in their inner

nature  and  qualities:  then  there  will  be  two  Cratyluses,  and  not  merely

Cratylus and the image of Cratylus. But an image in fact always falls short in

some degree of the original, and if images are not exact counterparts, whyshould names be? if they were, they would be the doubles of their originals,

and indistinguishable from them; and how ridiculous would this be! Cratylus

admits the truth of Socrates' remark. But then Socrates rejoins, he should

have the courage to acknowledge that letters may be wrongly inserted in a

noun, or a noun in a sentence; and yet the noun or the sentence may retain a

meaning. Better to admit this, that we may not be punished like the traveller

in Egina who goes about at night, and that Truth herself may not say to us,

'Too late.' And, errors excepted, we may still affirm that a name to be correct

must have proper letters, which bear a resemblance to the thing signified. I

must remind you of what Hermogenes and I were saying about the letter rho

accent, which was held to be expressive of motion and hardness, as lambda is

of smoothness;--and this you will admit to be their natural meaning. But then,

why do the Eritreans call that skleroter which we call sklerotes? We can

understand one another, although the letter rho accent is not equivalent to the

letter s: why is this? You reply, because the two letters are sufficiently alike

for the purpose of expressing motion. Well, then, there is the letter lambda;

what business has this in a word meaning hardness? 'Why, Socrates, I retort

upon you, that we put in and pull out letters at pleasure.' And the explanation

of this is custom or agreement: we have made a convention that the rho shall

mean s and a convention may indicate by the unlike as well as by the like.

How  could  there  be  names  for  all  the  numbers  unless  you  allow  that

convention is used? Imitation is a poor thing, and has to be supplemented by

convention,  which  is  another  poor  thing;  although  I  agree  with  you  in

thinking that the most perfect form of language is found only where there is a

perfect correspondence of sound and meaning. But let me ask you what is the

use and force of names? 'The use of names, Socrates, is to inform, and he

who knows names knows things.' Do you mean that the discovery of names is

the same as the discovery of things? 'Yes.' But do you not see that there is a

degree  of  deception  about  names?  He  who  first  gave  names,  gave  them

according to his conception, and that may have been erroneous. 'But then,

why, Socrates, is language so consistent? all words have the same laws.' Mere

consistency is no test of truth. In geometrical problems, for example, there

may  be  a  flaw  at  the  beginning,  and  yet  the  conclusion  may  follow

consistently.  And,  therefore,  a  wise  man  will  take  especial  care  of  first

principles. But are words really consistent; are there not as many terms of

praise which signify rest as which signify motion? There is episteme, which

is  connected  with  stasis,  as  mneme  is  with  meno.  Bebaion,  again,  is  theexpression  of  station  and  position;  istoria  is  clearly  descriptive  of  the

stopping istanai of the stream; piston indicates the cessation of motion; and

there are many words having a bad sense, which are connected with ideas of

motion, such as sumphora, amartia, etc.: amathia, again, might be explained,

as e ama theo iontos poreia, and akolasia as e akolouthia tois pragmasin. Thus

the  bad  names  are  framed  on  the  same  principle  as  the  good,  and  other

examples might be given, which would favour a theory of rest rather than of

motion. 'Yes; but the greater number of words express motion.' Are we to

count them, Cratylus; and is correctness of names to be determined by the

voice of a majority?


  Here is another point: we were saying that the legislator gives names; and

therefore we must suppose that he knows the things which he names: but how

can  he  have  learnt  things  from  names  before  there  were  any  names?  'I

believe, Socrates, that some power more than human first gave things their

names, and that these were necessarily true names.' Then how came the giver

of names to contradict himself, and to make some names expressive of rest,

and others of motion? 'I do not suppose that he did make them both.' Then

which did he make--those which are expressive of rest, or those which are

expressive of motion?...But if some names are true and others false, we can

only decide between them, not by counting words, but by appealing to things.

And, if so, we must allow that things may be known without names; for

names, as we have several times admitted, are the images of things; and the

higher knowledge is of things, and is not to be derived from names; and

though I do not doubt that the inventors of language gave names, under the

idea that all things are in a state of motion and flux, I believe that they were

mistaken; and that having fallen into a whirlpool themselves, they are trying

to drag us after them. For is there not a true beauty and a true good, which is

always beautiful and always good? Can the thing beauty be vanishing away

from us while the words are yet in our mouths? And they could not be known

by any one if they are always passing away--for if they are always passing

away, the observer has no opportunity of observing their state. Whether the

doctrine of the flux or of the eternal nature be the truer, is hard to determine.

But no man of sense will put himself, or the education of his mind, in the

power of names: he will not condemn himself to be an unreal thing, nor will

he believe that everything is in a flux like the water in a leaky vessel, or that

the world is a man who has a running at the nose. This doctrine may be true,Cratylus, but is also very likely to be untrue; and therefore I would have you

reflect while you are young, and find out the truth, and when you know come

and tell me. 'I have thought, Socrates, and after a good deal of thinking I

incline to Heracleitus.' Then another day, my friend, you shall give me a

lesson. 'Very good, Socrates, and I hope that you will continue to study these

things yourself.'


  ...


  We may now consider (I) how far Plato in the Cratylus has discovered the

true  principles  of  language,  and  then  (II)  proceed  to  compare  modern

speculations  respecting  the  origin  and  nature  of  language  with  the

anticipations of his genius.


  I. (1) Plato is aware that language is not the work of chance; nor does he

deny that there is a natural fitness in names. He only insists that this natural

fitness shall be intelligibly explained. But he has no idea that language is a

natural organism. He would have heard with surprise that languages are the

common work of whole nations in a primitive or semi- barbarous age. How,

he would probably have argued, could men devoid of art have contrived a

structure  of  such  complexity?  No  answer  could  have  been  given  to  this

question, either in ancient or in modern times, until the nature of primitive

antiquity had been thoroughly studied, and the instincts of man had been

shown to exist in greater force, when his state approaches more nearly to that

of  children  or  animals.  The  philosophers  of  the  last  century,  after  their

manner, would have vainly endeavoured to trace the process by which proper

names were converted into common, and would have shown how the last

effort  of  abstraction  invented  prepositions  and  auxiliaries.  The  theologian

would have proved that language must have had a divine origin, because in

childhood, while the organs are pliable, the intelligence is wanting, and when

the intelligence is able to frame conceptions, the organs are no longer able to

express them. Or, as others have said: Man is man because he has the gift of

speech; and he could not have invented that which he is. But this would have

been  an  'argument  too  subtle'  for  Socrates,  who  rejects  the  theological

account of the origin of language 'as an excuse for not giving a reason,' which

he compares to the introduction of the 'Deus ex machina' by the tragic poets

when  they  have  to  solve  a  difficulty;  thus  anticipating  many  moderncontroversies in which the primary agency of the divine Being is confused

with the secondary cause; and God is assumed to have worked a miracle in

order to fill up a lacuna in human knowledge. (Compare Timaeus.)


  Neither is Plato wrong in supposing that an element of design and art

enters  into  language.  The  creative  power  abating  is  supplemented  by  a

mechanical process. 'Languages are not made but grow,' but they are made as

well as grow; bursting into life like a plant or a flower, they are also capable

of being trained and improved and engrafted upon one another. The change in

them is effected in earlier ages by musical and euphonic improvements, at a

later stage by the influence of grammar and logic, and by the poetical and

literary use of words. They develope rapidly in childhood, and when they are

full grown and set they may still put forth intellectual powers, like the mind

in the body, or rather we may say that the nobler use of language only begins

when the frame-work is complete. The savage or primitive man, in whom the

natural  instinct  is  strongest,  is  also  the  greatest  improver  of  the  forms  of

language.  He  is  the  poet  or  maker  of  words,  as  in  civilised  ages  the

dialectician is the definer or distinguisher of them. The latter calls the second

world of abstract terms into existence, as the former has created the picture

sounds which represent natural objects or processes. Poetry and philosophy--

these two, are the two great formative principles of language, when they have

passed  their  first  stage,  of  which,  as  of  the  first  invention  of  the  arts  in

general, we only entertain conjecture. And mythology is a link between them,

connecting the visible and invisible, until at length the sensuous exterior falls

away, and the severance of the inner and outer world, of the idea and the

object of sense, becomes complete. At a later period, logic and grammar,

sister arts, preserve and enlarge the decaying instinct of language, by rule and

method, which they gather from analysis and observation.


  (2) There is no trace in any of Plato's writings that he was acquainted with

any  language  but  Greek.  Yet  he  has  conceived  very  truly  the  relation  of

Greek to foreign languages, which he is led to consider, because he finds that

many Greek words are incapable of explanation. Allowing a good deal for

accident, and also for the fancies of the conditores linguae Graecae, there is

an element of which he is unable to give an account. These unintelligible

words he supposes to be of foreign origin, and to have been derived from a

time  when  the  Greeks  were  either  barbarians,  or  in  close  relations  to  thebarbarians. Socrates is aware that this principle is liable to great abuse; and,

like the 'Deus ex machina,' explains nothing. Hence he excuses himself for

the employment of such a device, and remarks that in foreign words there is

still  a  principle  of  correctness,  which  applies  equally  both  to  Greeks  and

barbarians.


  (3) But the greater number of primary words do not admit of derivation

from foreign languages; they must be resolved into the letters out of which

they  are  composed,  and  therefore  the  letters  must  have  a  meaning.  The

framers of language were aware of this; they observed that alpha was adapted

to express size; eta length; omicron roundness; nu inwardness; rho accent

rush or roar; lambda liquidity; gamma lambda the detention of the liquid or

slippery element; delta and tau binding; phi, psi, sigma, xi, wind and cold,

and so on. Plato's analysis of the letters of the alphabet shows a wonderful

insight  into  the  nature  of  language.  He  does  not  expressively  distinguish

between mere imitation and the symbolical use of sound to express thought,

but he recognises in the examples which he gives both modes of imitation.

Gesture is the mode which a deaf and dumb person would take of indicating

his meaning. And language is the gesture of the tongue; in the use of the

letter rho accent, to express a rushing or roaring, or of omicron to express

roundness, there is a direct imitation; while in the use of the letter alpha to

express size, or of eta to express length, the imitation is symbolical. The use

of analogous or similar sounds, in order to express similar analogous ideas,

seems to have escaped him.


  In passing from the gesture of the body to the movement of the tongue,

Plato makes a great step in the physiology of language. He was probably the

first who said that 'language is imitative sound,' which is the greatest and

deepest truth of philology; although he is not aware of the laws of euphony

and association by which imitation must be regulated. He was probably also

the first who made a distinction between simple and compound words, a truth

second only in importance to that which has just been mentioned. His great

insight in one direction curiously contrasts with his blindness in another; for

he appears to be wholly unaware (compare his derivation of agathos from

agastos and thoos) of the difference between the root and termination. But we

must recollect that he was necessarily more ignorant than any schoolboy of

Greek grammar, and had no table of the inflexions of verbs and nouns beforehis eyes, which might have suggested to him the distinction.


  (4) Plato distinctly affirms that language is not truth, or 'philosophie une

langue bien faite.' At first, Socrates has delighted himself with discovering

the flux of Heracleitus in language. But he is covertly satirising the pretence

of  that  or  any  other  age  to  find  philosophy  in  words;  and  he  afterwards

corrects  any  erroneous  inference  which  might  be  gathered  from  his

experiment. For he finds as many, or almost as many, words expressive of

rest, as he had previously found expressive of motion. And even if this had

been otherwise, who would learn of words when he might learn of things?

There is a great controversy and high argument between Heracleiteans and

Eleatics, but no man of sense would commit his soul in such enquiries to the

imposers  of  names...In  this  and  other  passages  Plato  shows  that  he  is  as

completely emancipated from the influence of 'Idols of the tribe' as Bacon

himself.


  The lesson which may be gathered from words is not metaphysical or

moral,  but  historical.  They  teach  us  the  affinity  of  races,  they  tell  us

something  about  the  association  of  ideas,  they  occasionally  preserve  the

memory of a disused custom; but we cannot safely argue from them about

right  and  wrong,  matter  and  mind,  freedom  and  necessity,  or  the  other

problems of moral and metaphysical philosophy. For the use of words on

such  subjects  may  often  be  metaphorical,  accidental,  derived  from  other

languages, and may have no relation to the contemporary state of thought and

feeling. Nor in any case is the invention of them the result of philosophical

reflection; they have been commonly transferred from matter to mind, and

their meaning is the very reverse of their etymology. Because there is or is

not a name for a thing, we cannot argue that the thing has or has not an actual

existence;  or  that  the  antitheses,  parallels,  conjugates,  correlatives  of

language have anything corresponding to them in nature. There are too many

words as well as too few; and they generalize the objects or ideas which they

represent. The greatest lesson which the philosophical analysis of language

teaches us is, that we should be above language, making words our servants,

and not allowing them to be our masters.


  Plato does not add the further observation, that the etymological meaning

of  words  is  in  process  of  being  lost.  If  at  first  framed  on  a  principle  ofintelligibility, they would gradually cease to be intelligible, like those of a

foreign  language,  he  is  willing  to  admit  that  they  are  subject  to  many

changes, and put on many disguises. He acknowledges that the 'poor creature'

imitation is supplemented by another 'poor creature,'-- convention. But he

does not see that 'habit and repute,' and their relation to other words, are

always exercising an influence over them. Words appear to be isolated, but

they are really the parts of an organism which is always being reproduced.

They  are  refined  by  civilization,  harmonized  by  poetry,  emphasized  by

literature, technically applied in philosophy and art; they are used as symbols

on the border-ground of human knowledge; they receive a fresh impress from

individual genius, and come with a new force and association to every lively-

minded person. They are fixed by the simultaneous utterance of millions, and

yet are always imperceptibly changing;--not the inventors of language, but

writing and speaking, and particularly great writers, or works which pass into

the  hearts  of  nations,  Homer,  Shakespear,  Dante,  the  German  or  English

Bible, Kant and Hegel, are the makers of them in later ages. They carry with

them the faded recollection of their own past history; the use of a word in a

striking and familiar passage gives a complexion to its use everywhere else,

and the new use of an old and familiar phrase has also a peculiar power over

us. But these and other subtleties of language escaped the observation of

Plato. He is not aware that the languages of the world are organic structures,

and that every word in them is related to every other; nor does he conceive of

language as the joint work of the speaker and the hearer, requiring in man a

faculty not only of expressing his thoughts but of understanding those of

others.


  On the other hand, he cannot be justly charged with a desire to frame

language on artificial principles. Philosophers have sometimes dreamed of a

technical or scientific language, in words which should have fixed meanings,

and stand in the same relation to one another as the substances which they

denote. But there is no more trace of this in Plato than there is of a language

corresponding to the ideas; nor, indeed, could the want of such a language be

felt until the sciences were far more developed. Those who would extend the

use of technical phraseology beyond the limits of science or of custom, seem

to forget that freedom and suggestiveness and the play of association are

essential characteristics of language. The great master has shown how he

regarded pedantic distinctions of words or attempts to confine their meaningin the satire on Prodicus in the Protagoras.


  (5)  In  addition  to  these  anticipations  of  the  general  principles  of

philology, we may note also a few curious observations on words and sounds.

'The  Eretrians  say  sklerotes  for  skleroter;'  'the  Thessalians  call  Apollo

Amlos;' 'The Phrygians have the words pur, udor, kunes slightly changed;'

'there  is  an  old  Homeric  word  emesato,  meaning  "he  contrived";'  'our

forefathers,  and  especially  the  women,  who  are  most  conservative  of  the

ancient language, loved the letters iota and delta; but now iota is changed into

eta and epsilon, and delta into zeta; this is supposed to increase the grandeur

of the sound.' Plato was very willing to use inductive arguments, so far as

they were within his reach; but he would also have assigned a large influence

to chance. Nor indeed is induction applicable to philology in the same degree

as to most of the physical sciences. For after we have pushed our researches

to the furthest point, in language as in all the other creations of the human

mind, there will always remain an element of exception or accident or free-

will, which cannot be eliminated.


  The  question,  'whether  falsehood  is  impossible,'  which  Socrates

characteristically sets aside as too subtle for an old man (compare Euthyd.),

could only have arisen in an age of imperfect consciousness, which had not

yet learned to distinguish words from things. Socrates replies in effect that

words have an independent existence; thus anticipating the solution of the

mediaeval  controversy  of  Nominalism  and  Realism.  He  is  aware  too  that

languages exist in various degrees of perfection, and that the analysis of them

can only be carried to a certain point. 'If we could always, or almost always,

use likenesses, which are the appropriate expressions, that would be the most

perfect state of language.' These words suggest a question of deeper interest

than the origin of language; viz. what is the ideal of language, how far by any

correction of their usages existing languages might become clearer and more

expressive than they are, more poetical, and also more logical; or whether

they are now finally fixed and have received their last impress from time and

authority.


  On the whole, the Cratylus seems to contain deeper truths about language

than any other ancient writing. But feeling the uncertain ground upon which

he is walking, and partly in order to preserve the character of Socrates, Platoenvelopes the whole subject in a robe of fancy, and allows his principles to

drop out as if by accident.


  II. What is the result of recent speculations about the origin and nature of

language? Like other modern metaphysical enquiries, they end at last in a

statement  of  facts.  But,  in  order  to  state  or  understand  the  facts,  a

metaphysical insight seems to be required. There are more things in language

than  the  human  mind  easily  conceives.  And  many  fallacies  have  to  be

dispelled,  as  well  as  observations  made.  The  true  spirit  of  philosophy  or

metaphysics can alone charm away metaphysical illusions, which are always

reappearing,  formerly  in  the  fancies  of  neoplatonist  writers,  now  in  the

disguise of experience and common sense. An analogy, a figure of speech, an

intelligible theory, a superficial observation of the individual, have often been

mistaken for a true account of the origin of language.


    Speaking  is  one  of  the  simplest  natural  operations,  and  also  the  most

complex. Nothing would seem to be easier or more trivial than a few words

uttered by a child in any language. Yet into the formation of those words

have entered causes which the human mind is not capable of calculating.

They are a drop or two of the great stream or ocean of speech which has been

flowing  in  all  ages.  They  have  been  transmitted  from  one  language  to

another; like the child himself, they go back to the beginnings of the human

race. How they originated, who can tell? Nevertheless we can imagine a stage

of human society in which the circle of men's minds was narrower and their

sympathies and instincts stronger; in which their organs of speech were more

flexible, and the sense of hearing finer and more discerning; in which they

lived more in company, and after the manner of children were more given to

express their feelings; in which 'they moved all together,' like a herd of wild

animals,  'when  they  moved  at  all.'  Among  them,  as  in  every  society,  a

particular  person  would  be  more  sensitive  and  intelligent  than  the  rest.

Suddenly, on some occasion of interest (at the approach of a wild beast, shall

we say?), he first, they following him, utter a cry which resounds through the

forest. The cry is almost or quite involuntary, and may be an imitation of the

roar of the animal. Thus far we have not speech, but only the inarticulate

expression of feeling or emotion in no respect differing from the cries of

animals; for they too call to one another and are answered. But now suppose

that some one at a distance not only hears the sound, but apprehends themeaning: or we may imagine that the cry is repeated to a member of the

society who had been absent; the others act the scene over again when he

returns home in the evening. And so the cry becomes a word. The hearer in

turn  gives  back  the  word  to  the  speaker,  who  is  now  aware  that  he  has

acquired a new power. Many thousand times he exercises this power; like a

child  learning  to  talk,  he  repeats  the  same  cry  again,  and  again  he  is

answered; he tries experiments with a like result, and the speaker and the

hearer rejoice together in their newly-discovered faculty. At first there would

be few such cries, and little danger of mistaking or confusing them. For the

mind of primitive man had a narrow range of perceptions and feelings; his

senses  were  microscopic;  twenty  or  thirty  sounds  or  gestures  would  be

enough for him, nor would he have any difficulty in finding them. Naturally

he broke out into speech--like the young infant he laughed and babbled; but

not until there were hearers as well as speakers did language begin. Not the

interjection or the vocal imitation of the object, but the interjection or the

vocal  imitation  of  the  object  understood,  is  the  first  rudiment  of  human

speech.


  After  a  while  the  word  gathers  associations,  and  has  an  independent

existence. The imitation of the lion's roar calls up the fears and hopes of the

chase, which are excited by his appearance. In the moment of hearing the

sound, without any appreciable interval, these and other latent experiences

wake up in the mind of the hearer. Not only does he receive an impression,

but he brings previous knowledge to bear upon that impression. Necessarily

the pictorial image becomes less vivid, while the association of the nature and

habits of the animal is more distinctly perceived. The picture passes into a

symbol, for there would be too many of them and they would crowd the

mind; the vocal imitation, too, is always in process of being lost and being

renewed, just as the picture is brought back again in the description of the

poet. Words now can be used more freely because there are more of them.

What was once an involuntary expression becomes voluntary. Not only can

men utter a cry or call, but they can communicate and converse; they can not

only use words, but they can even play with them. The word is separated both

from the object and from the mind; and slowly nations and individuals attain

to a fuller consciousness of themselves.


  Parallel with this mental process the articulation of sounds is graduallybecoming  perfected.  The  finer  sense  detects  the  differences  of  them,  and

begins, first to agglomerate, then to distinguish them. Times, persons, places,

relations of all kinds, are expressed by modifications of them. The earliest

parts of speech, as we may call them by anticipation, like the first utterances

of children, probably partook of the nature of interjections and nouns; then

came verbs; at length the whole sentence appeared, and rhythm and metre

followed. Each stage in the progress of language was accompanied by some

corresponding stage in the mind and civilisation of man. In time, when the

family became a nation, the wild growth of dialects passed into a language.

Then arose poetry and literature. We can hardly realize to ourselves how

much with each improvement of language the powers of the human mind

were enlarged; how the inner world took the place of outer; how the pictorial

or symbolical or analogical word was refined into a notion; how language,

fair and large and free, was at last complete.


  So we may imagine the speech of man to have begun as with the cries of

animals, or the stammering lips of children, and to have attained by degrees

the perfection of Homer and Plato. Yet we are far from saying that this or any

other theory of language is proved by facts. It is not difficult to form an

hypothesis which by a series of imaginary transitions will bridge over the

chasm which separates man from the animals. Differences of kind may often

be thus resolved into differences of degree. But we must not assume that we

have in this way discovered the true account of them. Through what struggles

the harmonious use of the organs of speech was acquired; to what extent the

conditions of human life were different; how far the genius of individuals

may have contributed to the discovery of this as of the other arts, we cannot

say: Only we seem to see that language is as much the creation of the ear as

of the tongue, and the expression of a movement stirring the hearts not of one

man only but of many, 'as the trees of the wood are stirred by the wind.' The

theory is consistent or not inconsistent with our own mental experience, and

throws some degree of light upon a dark corner of the human mind.


  In the later analysis of language, we trace the opposite and contrasted

elements of the individual and nation, of the past and present, of the inward

and outward, of the subject and object, of the notional and relational, of the

root or unchanging part of the word and of the changing inflexion, if such a

distinction  be  admitted,  of  the  vowel  and  the  consonant,  of  quantity  andaccent,  of  speech  and  writing,  of  poetry  and  prose.  We  observe  also  the

reciprocal  influence  of  sounds  and  conceptions  on  each  other,  like  the

connexion of body and mind; and further remark that although the names of

objects were originally proper names, as the grammarian or logician might

call them, yet at a later stage they become universal notions, which combine

into  particulars  and  individuals,  and  are  taken  out  of  the  first  rude

agglomeration of sounds that they may be replaced in a higher and more

logical order. We see that in the simplest sentences are contained grammar

and  logic--the  parts  of  speech,  the  Eleatic  philosophy  and  the  Kantian

categories.  So  complex  is  language,  and  so  expressive  not  only  of  the

meanest wants of man, but of his highest thoughts; so various are the aspects

in which it is regarded by us. Then again, when we follow the history of

languages, we observe that they are always slowly moving, half dead, half

alive,  half  solid,  half  fluid;  the  breath  of  a  moment,  yet  like  the  air,

continuous in all ages and countries,--like the glacier, too, containing within

them  a  trickling  stream  which  deposits  debris  of  the  rocks  over  which  it

passes. There were happy moments, as we may conjecture, in the lives of

nations, at which they came to the birth--as in the golden age of literature, the

man and the time seem to conspire; the eloquence of the bard or chief, as in

later times the creations of the great writer who is the expression of his age,

became impressed on the minds of their countrymen, perhaps in the hour of

some crisis of national development--a migration, a conquest, or the like. The

picture of the word which was beginning to be lost, is now revived; the sound

again  echoes  to  the  sense;  men  find  themselves  capable  not  only  of

expressing more feelings, and describing more objects, but of expressing and

describing them better. The world before the flood, that is to say, the world of

ten, twenty, a hundred thousand years ago, has passed away and left no sign.

But  the  best  conception  that  we  can  form  of  it,  though  imperfect  and

uncertain, is gained from the analogy of causes still in action, some powerful

and sudden, others working slowly in the course of infinite ages. Something

too may be allowed to 'the persistency of the strongest,' to 'the survival of the

fittest,' in this as in the other realms of nature.


  These  are  some  of  the  reflections  which  the  modern  philosophy  of

language suggests to us about the powers of the human mind and the forces

and influences by which the efforts of men to utter articulate sounds were

inspired. Yet in making these and similar generalizations we may note alsodangers to which we are exposed. (1) There is the confusion of ideas with

facts--of mere possibilities, and generalities, and modes of conception with

actual  and  definite  knowledge.  The  words  'evolution,'  'birth,'  'law,'

development,'  'instinct,'  'implicit,'  'explicit,'  and  the  like,  have  a  false

clearness or comprehensiveness, which adds nothing to our knowledge. The

metaphor of a flower or a tree, or some other work of nature or art, is often in

like manner only a pleasing picture. (2) There is the fallacy of resolving the

languages which we know into their parts, and then imagining that we can

discover  the  nature  of  language  by  reconstructing  them.  (3)  There  is  the

danger of identifying language, not with thoughts but with ideas. (4) There is

the error of supposing that the analysis of grammar and logic has always

existed,  or  that  their  distinctions  were  familiar  to  Socrates  and  Plato.  (5)

There  is  the  fallacy  of  exaggerating,  and  also  of  diminishing  the  interval

which separates articulate from inarticulate language--the cries of animals

from the speech of man--the instincts of animals from the reason of man. (6)

There is the danger which besets all enquiries into the early history of man--

of interpreting the past by the present, and of substituting the definite and

intelligible  for  the  true  but  dim  outline  which  is  the  horizon  of  human

knowledge.


  The greatest light is thrown upon the nature of language by analogy. We

have the analogy of the cries of animals, of the songs of birds ('man, like the

nightingale, is a singing bird, but is ever binding up thoughts with musical

notes'), of music, of children learning to speak, of barbarous nations in which

the linguistic instinct is still undecayed, of ourselves learning to think and

speak a new language, of the deaf and dumb who have words without sounds,

of  the  various  disorders  of  speech;  and  we  have  the  after-growth  of

mythology, which, like language, is an unconscious creation of the human

mind. We can observe the social and collective instincts of animals, and may

remark how, when domesticated, they have the power of understanding but

not of speaking, while on the other hand, some birds which are comparatively

devoid of intelligence, make a nearer approach to articulate speech. We may

note how in the animals there is a want of that sympathy with one another

which appears to be the soul of language. We can compare the use of speech

with other mental and bodily operations; for speech too is a kind of gesture,

and in the child or savage accompanied with gesture. We may observe that

the child learns to speak, as he learns to walk or to eat, by a natural impulse;yet in either case not without a power of imitation which is also natural to

him--he is taught to read, but he breaks forth spontaneously in speech. We

can trace the impulse to bind together the world in ideas beginning in the first

efforts to speak and culminating in philosophy. But there remains an element

which cannot be explained, or even adequately described. We can understand

how man creates or constructs consciously and by design; and see, if we do

not understand, how nature, by a law, calls into being an organised structure.

But the intermediate organism which stands between man and nature, which

is the work of mind yet unconscious, and in which mind and matter seem to

meet, and mind unperceived to herself is really limited by all other minds, is

neither understood nor seen by us, and is with reluctance admitted to be a

fact.


  Language  is  an  aspect  of  man,  of  nature,  and  of  nations,  the

transfiguration of the world in thought, the meeting-point of the physical and

mental sciences, and also the mirror in which they are reflected, present at

every moment to the individual, and yet having a sort of eternal or universal

nature.  When  we  analyze  our  own  mental  processes,  we  find  words

everywhere  in  every  degree  of  clearness  and  consistency,  fading  away  in

dreams and more like pictures, rapidly succeeding one another in our waking

thoughts, attaining a greater distinctness and consecutiveness in speech, and a

greater still in writing, taking the place of one another when we try to become

emancipated from their influence. For in all processes of the mind which are

conscious we are talking to ourselves; the attempt to think without words is a

mere illusion,--they are always reappearing when we fix our thoughts. And

speech is not a separate faculty, but the expression of all our faculties, to

which all our other powers of expression, signs, looks, gestures, lend their

aid, of which the instrument is not the tongue only, but more than half the

human frame.


  The minds of men are sometimes carried on to think of their lives and of

their  actions  as  links  in  a  chain  of  causes  and  effects  going  back  to  the

beginning  of  time.  A  few  have  seemed  to  lose  the  sense  of  their  own

individuality in the universal cause or nature. In like manner we might think

of the words which we daily use, as derived from the first speech of man, and

of all the languages in the world, as the expressions or varieties of a single

force or life of language of which the thoughts of men are the accident. Sucha conception enables us to grasp the power and wonder of languages, and is

very  natural  to  the  scientific  philologist.  For  he,  like  the  metaphysician,

believes in the reality of that which absorbs his own mind. Nor do we deny

the enormous influence which language has exercised over thought. Fixed

words,  like  fixed  ideas,  have  often  governed  the  world.  But  in  such

representations we attribute to language too much the nature of a cause, and

too  little  of  an  effect,--too  much  of  an  absolute,  too  little  of  a  relative

character,--too much of an ideal, too little of a matter-of-fact existence.


  Or again, we may frame a single abstract notion of language of which all

existent languages may be supposed to be the perversion. But we must not

conceive that this logical figment had ever a real existence, or is anything

more than an effort of the mind to give unity to infinitely various phenomena.

There is no abstract language 'in rerum natura,' any more than there is an

abstract tree, but only languages in various stages of growth, maturity, and

decay.  Nor  do  other  logical  distinctions  or  even  grammatical  exactly

correspond to the facts of language; for they too are attempts to give unity

and regularity to a subject which is partly irregular.


  We find, however, that there are distinctions of another kind by which

this  vast  field  of  language  admits  of  being  mapped  out.  There  is  the

distinction between biliteral and triliteral roots, and the various inflexions

which accompany them; between the mere mechanical cohesion of sounds or

words, and the 'chemical' combination of them into a new word; there is the

distinction between languages which have had a free and full development of

their organisms, and languages which have been stunted in their growth,--

lamed in their hands or feet, and never able to acquire afterwards the powers

in  which  they  are  deficient;  there  is  the  distinction  between  synthetical

languages like Greek and Latin, which have retained their inflexions, and

analytical  languages  like  English  or  French,  which  have  lost  them.

Innumerable  as  are  the  languages  and  dialects  of  mankind,  there  are

comparatively few classes to which they can be referred.


  Another road through this chaos is provided by the physiology of speech.

The organs of language are the same in all mankind, and are only capable of

uttering a certain number of sounds. Every man has tongue, teeth, lips, palate,

throat,  mouth,  which  he  may  close  or  open,  and  adapt  in  various  ways;making, first, vowels and consonants; and secondly, other classes of letters.

The elements of all speech, like the elements of the musical scale, are few

and  simple,  though  admitting  of  infinite  gradations  and  combinations.

Whatever slight differences exist in the use or formation of these organs,

owing to climate or the sense of euphony or other causes, they are as nothing

compared with their agreement. Here then is a real basis of unity in the study

of philology, unlike that imaginary abstract unity of which we were just now

speaking.


  Whether  we  regard  language  from  the  psychological,  or  historical,  or

physiological  point  of  view,  the  materials  of  our  knowledge  are

inexhaustible. The comparisons of children learning to speak, of barbarous

nations,  of  musical  notes,  of  the  cries  of  animals,  of  the  song  of  birds,

increase  our  insight  into  the  nature  of  human  speech.  Many  observations

which would otherwise have escaped us are suggested by them. But they do

not explain why, in man and in man only, the speaker met with a response

from  the  hearer,  and  the  half  articulate  sound  gradually  developed  into

Sanscrit and Greek. They hardly enable us to approach any nearer the secret

of  the  origin  of  language,  which,  like  some  of  the  other  great  secrets  of

nature,--the origin of birth and death, or of animal life,-- remains inviolable.

That problem is indissolubly bound up with the origin of man; and if we ever

know more of the one, we may expect to know more of the other. (Compare

W. Humboldt, 'Ueber die Verschiedenheit des menschlichen Sprachbaues;'

M. Muller, 'Lectures on the Science of Language;' Steinthal, 'Einleitung in die

Psychologie und Sprachwissenschaft.'


  ...


  It is more than sixteen years since the preceding remarks were written,

which with a few alterations have now been reprinted. During the interval the

progress  of  philology  has  been  very  great.  More  languages  have  been

compared; the inner structure of language has been laid bare; the relations of

sounds  have  been  more  accurately  discriminated;  the  manner  in  which

dialects affect or are affected by the literary or principal form of a language is

better understood. Many merely verbal questions have been eliminated; the

remains of the old traditional methods have died away. The study has passed

from  the  metaphysical  into  an  historical  stage.  Grammar  is  no  longerconfused with language, nor the anatomy of words and sentences with their

life and use. Figures of speech, by which the vagueness of theories is often

concealed, have been stripped off; and we see language more as it truly was.

The immensity of the subject is gradually revealed to us, and the reign of law

becomes apparent. Yet the law is but partially seen; the traces of it are often

lost in the distance. For languages have a natural but not a perfect growth;

like other creations of nature into which the will of man enters, they are full

of what we term accident and irregularity. And the difficulties of the subject

become not less, but greater, as we proceed--it is one of those studies in

which we seem to know less as we know more; partly because we are no

longer satisfied with the vague and superficial ideas of it which prevailed

fifty years ago; partly also because the remains of the languages with which

we are acquainted always were, and if they are still living, are, in a state of

transition; and thirdly, because there are lacunae in our knowledge of them

which can never be filled up. Not a tenth, not a hundredth part of them has

been preserved. Yet the materials at our disposal are far greater than any

individual can use. Such are a few of the general reflections which the present

state of philology calls up.


  (1)  Language  seems  to  be  composite,  but  into  its  first  elements  the

philologer has never been able to penetrate. However far he goes back, he

never arrives at the beginning; or rather, as in Geology or in Astronomy,

there  is  no  beginning.  He  is  too  apt  to  suppose  that  by  breaking  up  the

existing forms of language into their parts he will arrive at a previous stage of

it, but he is merely analyzing what never existed, or is never known to have

existed, except in a composite form. He may divide nouns and verbs into

roots and inflexions, but he has no evidence which will show that the omega

of tupto or the mu of tithemi, though analogous to ego, me, either became

pronouns or were generated out of pronouns. To say that 'pronouns, like ripe

fruit, dropped out of verbs,' is a misleading figure of speech. Although all

languages have some common principles, there is no primitive form or forms

of language known to us, or to be reasonably imagined, from which they are

all descended. No inference can be drawn from language, either for or against

the unity of the human race. Nor is there any proof that words were ever used

without  any  relation  to  each  other.  Whatever  may  be  the  meaning  of  a

sentence or a word when applied to primitive language, it is probable that the

sentence is more akin to the original form than the word, and that the laterstage of language is the result rather of analysis than of synthesis, or possibly

is a combination of the two. Nor, again, are we sure that the original process

of learning to speak was the same in different places or among different races

of men. It may have been slower with some, quicker with others. Some tribes

may have used shorter, others longer words or cries: they may have been

more or less inclined to agglutinate or to decompose them: they may have

modified them by the use of prefixes, suffixes, infixes; by the lengthening

and strengthening of vowels or by the shortening and weakening of them, by

the  condensation  or  rarefaction  of  consonants.  But  who  gave  to  language

these primeval laws; or why one race has triliteral, another biliteral roots; or

why in some members of a group of languages b becomes p, or d, t, or ch, k;

or why two languages resemble one another in certain parts of their structure

and differ in others; or why in one language there is a greater development of

vowels, in another of consonants, and the like--are questions of which we

only 'entertain conjecture.' We must remember the length of time that has

elapsed  since  man  first  walked  upon  the  earth,  and  that  in  this  vast  but

unknown  period  every  variety  of  language  may  have  been  in  process  of

formation and decay, many times over.


  (Compare Plato, Laws):--


    'ATHENIAN STRANGER: And what then is to be regarded as the origin

of government? Will not a man be able to judge best from a point of view in

which he may behold the progress of states and their transitions to good and

evil?


    CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


    ATHENIAN STRANGER: I mean that he might watch them from the

point of view of time, and observe the changes which take place in them

during infinite ages.


    CLEINIAS: How so?


    ATHENIAN STRANGER: Why, do you think that you can reckon the

time which has elapsed since cities first existed and men were citizens of

them?    CLEINIAS: Hardly.


    ATHENIAN STRANGER: But you are quite sure that it must be vast and

incalculable?


    CLEINIAS: No doubt.


    ATHENIAN  STRANGER:  And  have  there  not  been  thousands  and

thousands  of  cities  which  have  come  into  being  and  perished  during  this

period? And has not every place had endless forms of government, and been

sometimes rising, and at other times falling, and again improving or waning?'


  Aristot. Metaph.:--


  'And if a person should conceive the tales of mythology to mean only that

men thought the gods to be the first essences of things, he would deem the

reflection to have been inspired and would consider that, whereas probably

every art and part of wisdom had been DISCOVERED AND LOST MANY

TIMES  OVER,  such  notions  were  but  a  remnant  of  the  past  which  has

survived to our day.')


  It can hardly be supposed that any traces of an original language still

survive, any more than of the first huts or buildings which were constructed

by man. Nor are we at all certain of the relation, if any, in which the greater

families of languages stand to each other. The influence of individuals must

always have been a disturbing element. Like great writers in later times, there

may have been many a barbaric genius who taught the men of his tribe to

sing or speak, showing them by example how to continue or divide their

words, charming their souls with rhythm and accent and intonation, finding in

familiar objects the expression of their confused fancies--to whom the whole

of language might in truth be said to be a figure of speech. One person may

have introduced a new custom into the formation or pronunciation of a word;

he may have been imitated by others, and the custom, or form, or accent, or

quantity, or rhyme which he introduced in a single word may have become

the type on which many other words or inflexions of words were framed, and

may  have  quickly  ran  through  a  whole  language.  For  like  the  other  gifts

which nature has bestowed upon man, that of speech has been conveyed tohim through the medium, not of the many, but of the few, who were his 'law-

givers'--'the  legislator  with  the  dialectician  standing  on  his  right  hand,'  in

Plato's  striking  image,  who  formed  the  manners  of  men  and  gave  them

customs,  whose  voice  and  look  and  behaviour,  whose  gesticulations  and

other peculiarities were instinctively imitated by them,--the 'king of men' who

was their priest, almost their God...But these are conjectures only: so little do

we know of the origin of language that the real scholar is indisposed to touch

the subject at all.


  (2) There are other errors besides the figment of a primitive or original

language which it is time to leave behind us. We no longer divide languages

into synthetical and analytical, or suppose similarity of structure to be the

safe or only guide to the affinities of them. We do not confuse the parts of

speech with the categories of Logic. Nor do we conceive languages any more

than civilisations to be in a state of dissolution; they do not easily pass away,

but are far more tenacious of life than the tribes by whom they are spoken.

'Where two or three are gathered together,' they survive. As in the human

frame, as in the state, there is a principle of renovation as well as of decay

which is at work in all of them. Neither do we suppose them to be invented

by the wit of man. With few exceptions, e.g. technical words or words newly

imported from a foreign language, and the like, in which art has imitated

nature,  'words  are  not  made  but  grow.'  Nor  do  we  attribute  to  them  a

supernatural  origin.  The  law  which  regulates  them  is  like  the  law  which

governs the circulation of the blood, or the rising of the sap in trees; the

action of it is uniform, but the result, which appears in the superficial forms

of men and animals or in the leaves of trees, is an endless profusion and

variety. The laws of vegetation are invariable, but no two plants, no two

leaves  of  the  forest  are  precisely  the  same.  The  laws  of  language  are

invariable, but no two languages are alike, no two words have exactly the

same  meaning.  No  two  sounds  are  exactly  of  the  same  quality,  or  give

precisely the same impression.


  It would be well if there were a similar consensus about some other points

which appear to be still in dispute. Is language conscious or unconscious? In

speaking or writing have we present to our minds the meaning or the sound

or the construction of the words which we are using?--No more than the

separate drops of water with which we quench our thirst are present: thewhole draught may be conscious, but not the minute particles of which it is

made up: So the whole sentence may be conscious, but the several words,

syllables, letters are not thought of separately when we are uttering them.

Like other natural operations, the process of speech, when most perfect, is

least observed by us. We do not pause at each mouthful to dwell upon the

taste of it: nor has the speaker time to ask himself the comparative merits of

different  modes  of  expression  while  he  is  uttering  them.  There  are  many

things in the use of language which may be observed from without, but which

cannot be explained from within. Consciousness carries us but a little way in

the investigation of the mind; it is not the faculty of internal observation, but

only the dim light which makes such observation possible. What is supposed

to be our consciousness of language is really only the analysis of it, and this

analysis admits of innumerable degrees. But would it not be better if this

term, which is so misleading, and yet has played so great a part in mental

science,  were  either  banished  or  used  only  with  the  distinct  meaning  of

'attention to our own minds,' such as is called forth, not by familiar mental

processes, but by the interruption of them? Now in this sense we may truly

say that we are not conscious of ordinary speech, though we are commonly

roused to attention by the misuse or mispronunciation of a word. Still less,

even in schools and academies, do we ever attempt to invent new words or to

alter  the  meaning  of  old  ones,  except  in  the  case,  mentioned  above,  of

technical or borrowed words which are artificially made or imported because

a  need  of  them  is  felt.  Neither  in  our  own  nor  in  any  other  age  has  the

conscious effort of reflection in man contributed in an appreciable degree to

the formation of language. 'Which of us by taking thought' can make new

words  or  constructions?  Reflection  is  the  least  of  the  causes  by  which

language is affected, and is likely to have the least power, when the linguistic

instinct is greatest, as in young children and in the infancy of nations.


  A kindred error is the separation of the phonetic from the mental element

of  language;  they  are  really  inseparable--no  definite  line  can  be  drawn

between them, any more than in any other common act of mind and body. It

is true that within certain limits we possess the power of varying sounds by

opening and closing the mouth, by touching the palate or the teeth with the

tongue, by lengthening or shortening the vocal instrument, by greater or less

stress, by a higher or lower pitch of the voice, and we can substitute one note

or accent for another. But behind the organs of speech and their action thereremains the informing mind, which sets them in motion and works together

with them. And behind the great structure of human speech and the lesser

varieties of language which arise out of the many degrees and kinds of human

intercourse, there is also the unknown or over-ruling law of God or nature

which gives order to it in its infinite greatness, and variety in its infinitesimal

minuteness--both  equally  inscrutable  to  us.  We  need  no  longer  discuss

whether philology is to be classed with the Natural or the Mental sciences, if

we frankly recognize that, like all the sciences which are concerned with

man, it has a double aspect,--inward and outward; and that the inward can

only  be  known  through  the  outward.  Neither  need  we  raise  the  question

whether the laws of language, like the other laws of human action, admit of

exceptions. The answer in all cases is the same--that the laws of nature are

uniform,  though  the  consistency  or  continuity  of  them  is  not  always

perceptible to us. The superficial appearances of language, as of nature, are

irregular,  but  we  do  not  therefore  deny  their  deeper  uniformity.  The

comparison of the growth of language in the individual and in the nation

cannot be wholly discarded, for nations are made up of individuals. But in

this, as in the other political sciences, we must distinguish between collective

and individual actions or processes, and not attribute to the one what belongs

to  the  other.  Again,  when  we  speak  of  the  hereditary  or  paternity  of  a

language, we must remember that the parents are alive as well as the children,

and that all the preceding generations survive (after a manner) in the latest

form of it. And when, for the purposes of comparison, we form into groups

the roots or terminations of words, we should not forget how casual is the

manner in which their resemblances have arisen--they were not first written

down by a grammarian in the paradigms of a grammar and learned out of a

book, but were due to many chance attractions of sound or of meaning, or of

both combined. So many cautions have to be borne in mind, and so many

first thoughts to be dismissed, before we can proceed safely in the path of

philological  enquiry.  It  might  be  well  sometimes  to  lay  aside  figures  of

speech, such as the 'root' and the 'branches,' the 'stem,' the 'strata' of Geology,

the  'compounds'  of  Chemistry,  'the  ripe  fruit  of  pronouns  dropping  from

verbs' (see above), and the like, which are always interesting, but are apt to be

delusive. Yet such figures of speech are far nearer the truth than the theories

which attribute the invention and improvement of language to the conscious

action  of  the  human  mind...Lastly,  it  is  doubted  by  recent  philologians

whether  climate  can  be  supposed  to  have  exercised  any  influence  worthspeaking of on a language: such a view is said to be unproven: it had better

therefore not be silently assumed.


  'Natural selection' and the 'survival of the fittest' have been applied in the

field of philology, as well as in the other sciences which are concerned with

animal and vegetable life. And a Darwinian school of philologists has sprung

up, who are sometimes accused of putting words in the place of things. It

seems to be true, that whether applied to language or to other branches of

knowledge,  the  Darwinian  theory,  unless  very  precisely  defined,  hardly

escapes  from  being  a  truism.  If  by  'the  natural  selection'  of  words  or

meanings  of  words  or  by  the  'persistence  and  survival  of  the  fittest'  the

maintainer of the theory intends to affirm nothing more than this--that the

word  'fittest  to  survive'  survives,  he  adds  not  much  to  the  knowledge  of

language. But if he means that the word or the meaning of the word or some

portion of the word which comes into use or drops out of use is selected or

rejected on the ground of economy or parsimony or ease to the speaker or

clearness or euphony or expressiveness, or greater or less demand for it, or

anything of this sort, he is affirming a proposition which has several senses,

and in none of these senses can be assisted to be uniformly true. For the laws

of language are precarious, and can only act uniformly when there is such

frequency of intercourse among neighbours as is sufficient to enforce them.

And  there  are  many  reasons  why  a  man  should  prefer  his  own  way  of

speaking to that of others, unless by so doing he becomes unintelligible. The

struggle for existence among words is not of that fierce and irresistible kind

in which birds, beasts and fishes devour one another, but of a milder sort,

allowing one usage to be substituted for another, not by force, but by the

persuasion, or rather by the prevailing habit, of a majority. The favourite

figure, in this, as in some other uses of it, has tended rather to obscure than

explain the subject to which it has been applied. Nor in any case can the

struggle for existence be deemed to be the sole or principal cause of changes

in language, but only one among many, and one of which we cannot easily

measure the importance. There is a further objection which may be urged

equally against all applications of the Darwinian theory. As in animal life and

likewise in vegetable, so in languages, the process of change is said to be

insensible: sounds, like animals, are supposed to pass into one another by

imperceptible  gradation.  But  in  both  cases  the  newly-created  forms  soon

become fixed; there are few if any vestiges of the intermediate links, and sothe better half of the evidence of the change is wanting.


  (3) Among the incumbrances or illusions of language may be reckoned

many of the rules and traditions of grammar, whether ancient grammar or the

corrections of it which modern philology has introduced. Grammar, like law,

delights in definition: human speech, like human action, though very far from

being a mere chaos, is indefinite, admits of degrees, and is always in a state

of change or transition. Grammar gives an erroneous conception of language:

for it reduces to a system that which is not a system. Its figures of speech,

pleonasms, ellipses, anacolutha, pros to semainomenon, and the like have no

reality; they do not either make conscious expressions more intelligible or

show the way in which they have arisen; they are chiefly designed to bring an

earlier  use  of  language  into  conformity  with  the  later.  Often  they  seem

intended only to remind us that great poets like Aeschylus or Sophocles or

Pindar  or  a  great  prose  writer  like  Thucydides  are  guilty  of  taking

unwarrantable  liberties  with  grammatical  rules;  it  appears  never  to  have

occurred to the inventors of them that these real 'conditores linguae Graecae'

lived in an age before grammar, when 'Greece also was living Greece.' It is

the  anatomy,  not  the  physiology  of  language,  which  grammar  seeks  to

describe:  into  the  idiom  and  higher  life  of  words  it  does  not  enter.  The

ordinary  Greek  grammar  gives  a  complete  paradigm  of  the  verb,  without

suggesting that the double or treble forms of Perfects, Aorists, etc. are hardly

ever contemporaneous. It distinguishes Moods and Tenses, without observing

how much of the nature of one passes into the other. It makes three Voices,

Active, Passive, and Middle, but takes no notice of the precarious existence

and uncertain character of the last of the three. Language is a thing of degrees

and relations and associations and exceptions: grammar ties it up in fixed

rules. Language has many varieties of usage: grammar tries to reduce them to

a single one. Grammar divides verbs into regular and irregular: it does not

recognize that the irregular, equally with the regular, are subject to law, and

that a language which had no exceptions would not be a natural growth: for it

could  not  have  been  subjected  to  the  influences  by  which  language  is

ordinarily affected. It is always wanting to describe ancient languages in the

terms of a modern one. It has a favourite fiction that one word is put in the

place of another; the truth is that no word is ever put for another. It has

another fiction, that a word has been omitted: words are omitted because they

are  no  longer  needed;  and  the  omission  has  ceased  to  be  observed.  Thecommon explanation of kata or some other preposition 'being understood' in a

Greek sentence is another fiction of the same kind, which tends to disguise

the fact that under cases were comprehended originally many more relations,

and  that  prepositions  are  used  only  to  define  the  meaning  of  them  with

greater precision. These instances are sufficient to show the sort of errors

which  grammar  introduces  into  language.  We  are  not  considering  the

question  of  its  utility  to  the  beginner  in  the  study.  Even  to  him  the  best

grammar is the shortest and that in which he will have least to unlearn. It may

be said that the explanations here referred to are already out of date, and that

the study of Greek grammar has received a new character from comparative

philology. This is true; but it is also true that the traditional grammar has still

a great hold on the mind of the student.


    Metaphysics are even more troublesome than the figments of grammar,

because they wear the appearance of philosophy and there is no test to which

they can be subjected. They are useful in so far as they give us an insight into

the history of the human mind and the modes of thought which have existed

in former ages; or in so far as they furnish wider conceptions of the different

branches of knowledge and of their relation to one another. But they are

worse than useless when they outrun experience and abstract the mind from

the  observation  of  facts,  only  to  envelope  it  in  a  mist  of  words.  Some

philologers, like Schleicher, have been greatly influenced by the philosophy

of Hegel; nearly all of them to a certain extent have fallen under the dominion

of physical science. Even Kant himself thought that the first principles of

philosophy  could  be  elicited  from  the  analysis  of  the  proposition,  in  this

respect falling short of Plato. Westphal holds that there are three stages of

language: (1) in which things were characterized independently, (2) in which

they were regarded in relation to human thought, and (3) in relation to one

another.  But  are  not  such  distinctions  an  anachronism?  for  they  imply  a

growth of abstract ideas which never existed in early times. Language cannot

be explained by Metaphysics; for it is prior to them and much more nearly

allied to sense. It is not likely that the meaning of the cases is ultimately

resolvable  into  relations  of  space  and  time.  Nor  can  we  suppose  the

conception of cause and effect or of the finite and infinite or of the same and

other to be latent in language at a time when in their abstract form they had

never entered into the mind of man...If the science of Comparative Philology

had possessed 'enough of Metaphysics to get rid of Metaphysics,' it wouldhave made far greater progress.


  (4) Our knowledge of language is almost confined to languages which are

fully developed. They are of several patterns; and these become altered by

admixture in various degrees,--they may only borrow a few words from one

another and retain their life comparatively unaltered, or they may meet in a

struggle for existence until one of the two is overpowered and retires from the

field. They attain the full rights and dignity of language when they acquire

the use of writing and have a literature of their own; they pass into dialects

and grow out of them, in proportion as men are isolated or united by locality

or occupation. The common language sometimes reacts upon the dialects and

imparts to them also a literary character. The laws of language can be best

discerned in the great crises of language, especially in the transitions from

ancient to modern forms of them, whether in Europe or Asia. Such changes

are the silent notes of the world's history; they mark periods of unknown

length in which war and conquest were running riot over whole continents,

times of suffering too great to be endured by the human race, in which the

masters became subjects and the subject races masters, in which driven by

necessity or impelled by some instinct, tribes or nations left their original

homes and but slowly found a resting-place. Language would be the greatest

of all historical monuments, if it could only tell us the history of itself.


  (5)  There  are  many  ways  in  which  we  may  approach  this  study.  The

simplest of all is to observe our own use of language in conversation or in

writing,  how  we  put  words  together,  how  we  construct  and  connect

sentences, what are the rules of accent and rhythm in verse or prose, the

formation and composition of words, the laws of euphony and sound, the

affinities of letters, the mistakes to which we are ourselves most liable of

spelling or pronunciation. We may compare with our own language some

other, even when we have only a slight knowledge of it, such as French or

German. Even a little Latin will enable us to appreciate the grand difference

between ancient and modern European languages. In the child learning to

speak we may note the inherent strength of language, which like 'a mountain

river' is always forcing its way out. We may witness the delight in imitation

and repetition, and some of the laws by which sounds pass into one another.

We may learn something also from the falterings of old age, the searching for

words,  and  the  confusion  of  them  with  one  another,  the  forgetfulness  ofproper names (more commonly than of other words because they are more

isolated),  aphasia,  and  the  like.  There  are  philological  lessons  also  to  be

gathered from nicknames, from provincialisms, from the slang of great cities,

from the argot of Paris (that language of suffering and crime, so pathetically

described by Victor Hugo), from the imperfect articulation of the deaf and

dumb, from the jabbering of animals, from the analysis of sounds in relation

to the organs of speech. The phonograph affords a visible evidence of the

nature and divisions of sound; we may be truly said to know what we can

manufacture. Artificial languages, such as that of Bishop Wilkins, are chiefly

useful in showing what language is not. The study of any foreign language

may  be  made  also  a  study  of  Comparative  Philology.  There  are  several

points, such as the nature of irregular verbs, of indeclinable parts of speech,

the influence of euphony, the decay or loss of inflections, the elements of

syntax, which may be examined as well in the history of our own language as

of any other. A few well- selected questions may lead the student at once into

the heart of the mystery: such as, Why are the pronouns and the verb of

existence generally more irregular than any other parts of speech? Why is the

number of words so small in which the sound is an echo of the sense? Why

does the meaning of words depart so widely from their etymology? Why do

substantives often differ in meaning from the verbs to which they are related,

adverbs from adjectives? Why do words differing in origin coalesce in the

same sound though retaining their differences of meaning? Why are some

verbs impersonal? Why are there only so many parts of speech, and on what

principle are they divided? These are a few crucial questions which give us

an insight from different points of view into the true nature of language.


  (6) Thus far we have been endeavouring to strip off from language the

false appearances in which grammar and philology, or the love of system

generally, have clothed it. We have also sought to indicate the sources of our

knowledge of it and the spirit in which we should approach it, we may now

proceed to consider some of the principles or natural laws which have created

or modified it.


  i. The first and simplest of all the principles of language, common also to

the animals, is imitation. The lion roars, the wolf howls in the solitude of the

forest: they are answered by similar cries heard from a distance. The bird,

too, mimics the voice of man and makes answer to him. Man tells to man thesecret place in which he is hiding himself; he remembers and repeats the

sound which he has heard. The love of imitation becomes a passion and an

instinct to him. Primitive men learnt to speak from one another, like a child

from its mother or nurse. They learnt of course a rudimentary, half-articulate

language, the cry or song or speech which was the expression of what we

now  call  human  thoughts  and  feelings.  We  may  still  remark  how  much

greater and more natural the exercise of the power is in the use of language

than in any other process or action of the human mind.


  ii. Imitation provided the first material of language: but it was 'without

form and void.' During how many years or hundreds or thousands of years

the  imitative  or  half-articulate  stage  continued  there  is  no  possibility  of

determining. But we may reasonably conjecture that there was a time when

the  vocal  utterance  of  man  was  intermediate  between  what  we  now  call

language and the cry of a bird or animal. Speech before language was a rudis

indigestaque materies, not yet distributed into words and sentences, in which

the  cry  of  fear  or  joy  mingled  with  more  definite  sounds  recognized  by

custom as the expressions of things or events. It was the principle of analogy

which  introduced  into  this  'indigesta  moles'  order  and  measure.  It  was

Anaxagoras' omou panta chremata, eita nous elthon diekosmese: the light of

reason lighted up all things and at once began to arrange them. In every

sentence,  in  every  word  and  every  termination  of  a  word,  this  power  of

forming relations to one another was contained. There was a proportion of

sound to sound, of meaning to meaning, of meaning to sound. The cases and

numbers of nouns, the persons, tenses, numbers of verbs, were generally on

the same or nearly the same pattern and had the same meaning. The sounds

by which they were expressed were rough-hewn at first; after a while they

grew more refined--the natural laws of euphony began to affect them. The

rules of syntax are likewise based upon analogy. Time has an analogy with

space,  arithmetic  with  geometry.  Not  only  in  musical  notes,  but  in  the

quantity, quality, accent, rhythm of human speech, trivial or serious, there is a

law of proportion. As in things of beauty, as in all nature, in the composition

as well as in the motion of all things, there is a similarity of relations by

which they are held together.


  It  would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  analogies  of  language  are

always uniform: there may be often a choice between several, and sometimesone and sometimes another will prevail. In Greek there are three declensions

of  nouns;  the  forms  of  cases  in  one  of  them  may  intrude  upon  another.

Similarly verbs in -omega and -mu iota interchange forms of tenses, and the

completed paradigm of the verb is often made up of both. The same nouns

may be partly declinable and partly indeclinable, and in some of their cases

may  have  fallen  out  of  use.  Here  are  rules  with  exceptions;  they  are  not

however  really  exceptions,  but  contain  in  themselves  indications  of  other

rules. Many of these interruptions or variations of analogy occur in pronouns

or  in  the  verb  of  existence  of  which  the  forms  were  too  common  and

therefore too deeply imbedded in language entirely to drop out. The same

verbs in the same meaning may sometimes take one case, sometimes another.

The participle may also have the character of an adjective, the adverb either

of an adjective or of a preposition. These exceptions are as regular as the

rules, but the causes of them are seldom known to us.


    Language,  like  the  animal  and  vegetable  worlds,  is  everywhere

intersected by the lines of analogy. Like number from which it seems to be

derived,  the  principle  of  analogy  opens  the  eyes  of  men  to  discern  the

similarities and differences of things, and their relations to one another. At

first these are such as lie on the surface only; after a time they are seen by

men to reach farther down into the nature of things. Gradually in language

they arrange themselves into a sort of imperfect system; groups of personal

and case endings are placed side by side. The fertility of language produces

many more than are wanted; and the superfluous ones are utilized by the

assignment to them of new meanings. The vacuity and the superfluity are

thus partially compensated by each other. It must be remembered that in all

the languages which have a literature, certainly in Sanskrit, Greek, Latin, we

are not at the beginning but almost at the end of the linguistic process; we

have reached a time when the verb and the noun are nearly perfected, though

in no language did they completely perfect themselves, because for some

unknown reason the motive powers of languages seem to have ceased when

they were on the eve of completion: they became fixed or crystallized in an

imperfect form either from the influence of writing and literature, or because

no  further  differentiation  of  them  was  required  for  the  intelligibility  of

language.  So  not  without  admixture  and  confusion  and  displacement  and

contamination  of  sounds  and  the  meanings  of  words,  a  lower  stage  of

language passes into a higher. Thus far we can see and no further. When weask the reason why this principle of analogy prevails in all the vast domain of

language, there is no answer to the question; or no other answer but this, that

there are innumerable ways in which, like number, analogy permeates, not

only language, but the whole world, both visible and intellectual. We know

from experience that it does not (a) arise from any conscious act of reflection

that the accusative of a Latin noun in 'us' should end in 'um;' nor (b) from any

necessity of being understood,--much less articulation would suffice for this;

nor (c) from greater convenience or expressiveness of particular sounds. Such

notions were certainly far enough away from the mind of primitive man. We

may  speak  of  a  latent  instinct,  of  a  survival  of  the  fittest,  easiest,  most

euphonic, most economical of breath, in the case of one of two competing

sounds; but these expressions do not add anything to our knowledge. We may

try to grasp the infinity of language either under the figure of a limitless plain

divided into countries and districts by natural boundaries, or of a vast river

eternally  flowing  whose  origin  is  concealed  from  us;  we  may  apprehend

partially the laws by which speech is regulated: but we do not know, and we

seem as if we should never know, any more than in the parallel case of the

origin of species, how vocal sounds received life and grew, and in the form of

languages came to be distributed over the earth.


  iii. Next in order to analogy in the formation of language or even prior to

it comes the principle of onomatopea, which is itself a kind of analogy or

similarity of sound and meaning. In by far the greater number of words it has

become  disguised  and  has  disappeared;  but  in  no  stage  of  language  is  it

entirely lost. It belongs chiefly to early language, in which words were few;

and its influence grew less and less as time went on. To the ear which had a

sense  of  harmony  it  became  a  barbarism  which  disturbed  the  flow  and

equilibrium of discourse; it was an excrescence which had to be cut out, a

survival which needed to be got rid of, because it was out of keeping with the

rest. It remained for the most part only as a formative principle, which used

words  and  letters  not  as  crude  imitations  of  other  natural  sounds,  but  as

symbols of ideas which were naturally associated with them. It received in

another way a new character; it affected not so much single words, as larger

portions of human speech. It regulated the juxtaposition of sounds and the

cadence of sentences. It was the music, not of song, but of speech, in prose as

well as verse. The old onomatopea of primitive language was refined into an

onomatopea  of  a  higher  kind,  in  which  it  is  no  longer  true  to  say  that  aparticular  sound  corresponds  to  a  motion  or  action  of  man  or  beast  or

movement of nature, but that in all the higher uses of language the sound is

the  echo  of  the  sense,  especially  in  poetry,  in  which  beauty  and

expressiveness are given to human thoughts by the harmonious composition

of the words, syllables, letters, accents, quantities, rhythms, rhymes, varieties

and contrasts of all sorts. The poet with his 'Break, break, break' or his e pasin

nekuessi kataphthimenoisin anassein or his 'longius ex altoque sinum trahit,'

can produce a far finer music than any crude imitations of things or actions in

sound, although a letter or two having this imitative power may be a lesser

element of beauty in such passages. The same subtle sensibility, which adapts

the word to the thing, adapts the sentence or cadence to the general meaning

or spirit of the passage. This is the higher onomatopea which has banished

the cruder sort as unworthy to have a place in great languages and literatures.


  We can see clearly enough that letters or collocations of letters do by

various degrees of strength or weakness, length or shortness, emphasis or

pitch, become the natural expressions of the finer parts of human feeling or

thought. And not only so, but letters themselves have a significance; as Plato

observes that the letter rho accent is expressive of motion, the letters delta

and  tau  of  binding  and  rest,  the  letter  lambda  of  smoothness,  nu  of

inwardness, the letter eta of length, the letter omicron of roundness. These

were often combined so as to form composite notions, as for example in

tromos  (trembling),  trachus  (rugged),  thrauein  (crush),  krouein  (strike),

thruptein (break), pumbein (whirl),--in all which words we notice a parallel

composition of sounds in their English equivalents. Plato also remarks, as we

remark, that the onomatopoetic principle is far from prevailing uniformly,

and further that no explanation of language consistently corresponds with any

system of philosophy, however great may be the light which language throws

upon the nature of the mind. Both in Greek and English we find groups of

words such as string, swing, sling, spring, sting, which are parallel to one

another and may be said to derive their vocal effect partly from contrast of

letters, but in which it is impossible to assign a precise amount of meaning to

each of the expressive and onomatopoetic letters. A few of them are directly

imitative, as for example the omega in oon, which represents the round form

of  the  egg  by  the  figure  of  the  mouth:  or  bronte  (thunder),  in  which  the

fulness of the sound of the word corresponds to the thing signified by it; or

bombos (buzzing), of which the first syllable, as in its English equivalent, hasthe meaning of a deep sound. We may observe also (as we see in the case of

the poor stammerer) that speech has the co-operation of the whole body and

may be often assisted or half expressed by gesticulation. A sound or word is

not the work of the vocal organs only; nearly the whole of the upper part of

the human frame, including head, chest, lungs, have a share in creating it; and

it may be accompanied by a movement of the eyes, nose, fingers, hands, feet

which contributes to the effect of it.


  The principle of onomatopea has fallen into discredit, partly because it

has been supposed to imply an actual manufacture of words out of syllables

and letters, like a piece of joiner's work,--a theory of language which is more

and more refuted by facts, and more and more going out of fashion with

philologians; and partly also because the traces of onomatopea in separate

words become almost obliterated in the course of ages. The poet of language

cannot put in and pull out letters, as a painter might insert or blot out a shade

of colour to give effect to his picture. It would be ridiculous for him to alter

any received form of a word in order to render it more expressive of the

sense. He can only select, perhaps out of some dialect, the form which is

already best adapted to his purpose. The true onomatopea is not a creative,

but a formative principle, which in the later stage of the history of language

ceases to act upon individual words; but still works through the collocation of

them in the sentence or paragraph, and the adaptation of every word, syllable,

letter to one another and to the rhythm of the whole passage.


  iv. Next, under a distinct head, although not separable from the preceding,

may be considered the differentiation of languages, i.e. the manner in which

differences of meaning and form have arisen in them. Into their first creation

we have ceased to enquire: it is their aftergrowth with which we are now

concerned.  How  did  the  roots  or  substantial  portions  of  words  become

modified or inflected? and how did they receive separate meanings? First we

remark that words are attracted by the sounds and senses of other words, so

that they form groups of nouns and verbs analogous in sound and sense to

one another, each noun or verb putting forth inflexions, generally of two or

three patterns, and with exceptions. We do not say that we know how sense

became first allied to sound; but we have no difficulty in ascertaining how the

sounds and meanings of words were in time parted off or differentiated. (1)

The chief causes which regulate the variations of sound are (a) double ordiffering analogies, which lead sometimes to one form, sometimes to another

(b) euphony, by which is meant chiefly the greater pleasure to the ear and the

greater facility to the organs of speech which is given by a new formation or

pronunciation of a word (c) the necessity of finding new expressions for new

classes or processes of things. We are told that changes of sound take place

by innumerable gradations until a whole tribe or community or society find

themselves acquiescing in a new pronunciation or use of language. Yet no

one observes the change, or is at all aware that in the course of a lifetime he

and his contemporaries have appreciably varied their intonation or use of

words. On the other hand, the necessities of language seem to require that the

intermediate sounds or meanings of words should quickly become fixed or

set and not continue in a state of transition. The process of settling down is

aided by the organs of speech and by the use of writing and printing. (2) The

meaning of words varies because ideas vary or the number of things which is

included under them or with which they are associated is increased. A single

word  is  thus  made  to  do  duty  for  many  more  things  than  were  formerly

expressed by it; and it parts into different senses when the classes of things or

ideas which are represented by it are themselves different and distinct. A

figurative use of a word may easily pass into a new sense: a new meaning

caught up by association may become more important than all the rest. The

good or neutral sense of a word, such as Jesuit, Puritan, Methodist, Heretic,

has been often converted into a bad one by the malevolence of party spirit.

Double forms suggest different meanings and are often used to express them;

and the form or accent of a word has been not unfrequently altered when

there is a difference of meaning. The difference of gender in nouns is utilized

for the same reason. New meanings of words push themselves into the vacant

spaces of language and retire when they are no longer needed. Language

equally abhors vacancy and superfluity. But the remedial measures by which

both are eliminated are not due to any conscious action of the human mind;

nor is the force exerted by them constraining or necessary.


  (7) We have shown that language, although subject to laws, is far from

being of an exact and uniform nature. We may now speak briefly of the faults

of  language.  They  may  be  compared  to  the  faults  of  Geology,  in  which

different strata cross one another or meet at an angle, or mix with one another

either by slow transitions or by violent convulsions, leaving many lacunae

which can be no longer filled up, and often becoming so complex that no trueexplanation  of  them  can  be  given.  So  in  language  there  are  the  cross

influences  of  meaning  and  sound,  of  logic  and  grammar,  of  differing

analogies,  of  words  and  the  inflexions  of  words,  which  often  come  into

conflict with each other. The grammarian, if he were to form new words,

would make them all of the same pattern according to what he conceives to

be the rule, that is, the more common usage of language. The subtlety of

nature goes far beyond art, and it is complicated by irregularity, so that often

we can hardly say that there is a right or wrong in the formation of words. For

almost any formation which is not at variance with the first principles of

language is possible and may be defended.


  The  imperfection  of  language  is  really  due  to  the  formation  and

correlation  of  words  by  accident,  that  is  to  say,  by  principles  which  are

unknown  to  us.  Hence  we  see  why  Plato,  like  ourselves  unable  to

comprehend the whole of language, was constrained to 'supplement the poor

creature imitation by another poor creature convention.' But the poor creature

convention in the end proves too much for all the rest: for we do not ask what

is the origin of words or whether they are formed according to a correct

analogy, but what is the usage of them; and we are compelled to admit with

Hermogenes  in  Plato  and  with  Horace  that  usage  is  the  ruling  principle,

'quem penes arbitrium est, et jus et norma loquendi.'


  (8) There are two ways in which a language may attain permanence or

fixity. First, it may have been embodied in poems or hymns or laws, which

may be repeated for hundreds, perhaps for thousands of years with a religious

accuracy, so that to the priests or rhapsodists of a nation the whole or the

greater part of a language is literally preserved; secondly, it may be written

down and in a written form distributed more or less widely among the whole

nation.  In  either  case  the  language  which  is  familiarly  spoken  may  have

grown up wholly or in a great measure independently of them. (1) The first of

these processes has been sometimes attended by the result that the sound of

the words has been carefully preserved and that the meaning of them has

either  perished  wholly,  or  is  only  doubtfully  recovered  by  the  efforts  of

modern philology. The verses have been repeated as a chant or part of a

ritual,  but  they  have  had  no  relation  to  ordinary  life  or  speech.  (2)  The

invention of writing again is commonly attributed to a particular epoch, and

we are apt to think that such an inestimable gift would have immediatelybeen diffused over a whole country. But it may have taken a long time to

perfect the art of writing, and another long period may have elapsed before it

came into common use. Its influence on language has been increased ten,

twenty or one hundred fold by the invention of printing.


  Before the growth of poetry or the invention of writing, languages were

only dialects. So they continued to be in parts of the country in which writing

was not used or in which there was no diffusion of literature. In most of the

counties  of  England  there  is  still  a  provincial  style,  which  has  been

sometimes made by a great poet the vehicle of his fancies. When a book sinks

into the mind of a nation, such as Luther's Bible or the Authorized English

Translation of the Bible, or again great classical works like Shakspere or

Milton, not only have new powers of expression been diffused through a

whole nation, but a great step towards uniformity has been made. The instinct

of  language  demands  regular  grammar  and  correct  spelling:  these  are

imprinted deeply on the tablets of a nation's memory by a common use of

classical and popular writers. In our own day we have attained to a point at

which nearly every printed book is spelt correctly and written grammatically.


  (9) Proceeding further to trace the influence of literature on language we

note some other causes which have affected the higher use of it: such as (1)

the necessity of clearness and connexion; (2) the fear of tautology; (3) the

influence of metre, rhythm, rhyme, and of the language of prose and verse

upon one another; (4) the power of idiom and quotation; (5) the relativeness

of words to one another.


  It has been usual to depreciate modern languages when compared with

ancient. The latter are regarded as furnishing a type of excellence to which

the former cannot attain. But the truth seems to be that modern languages, if

through the loss of inflections and genders they lack some power or beauty or

expressiveness or precision which is possessed by the ancient, are in many

other  respects  superior  to  them:  the  thought  is  generally  clearer,  the

connexion closer, the sentence and paragraph are better distributed. The best

modern languages, for example English or French, possess as great a power

of self-improvement as the Latin, if not as the Greek. Nor does there seem to

be any reason why they should ever decline or decay. It is a popular remark

that our great writers are beginning to disappear: it may also be remarked thatwhenever  a  great  writer  appears  in  the  future  he  will  find  the  English

language  as  perfect  and  as  ready  for  use  as  in  the  days  of  Shakspere  or

Milton. There is no reason to suppose that English or French will ever be

reduced to the low level of Modern Greek or of Mediaeval Latin. The wide

diffusion of great authors would make such a decline impossible. Nor will

modern languages be easily broken up by amalgamation with each other. The

distance between them is too wide to be spanned, the differences are too great

to be overcome, and the use of printing makes it impossible that one of them

should ever be lost in another.


  The structure of the English language differs greatly from that of either

Latin or Greek. In the two latter, especially in Greek, sentences are joined

together by connecting particles. They are distributed on the right hand and

on the left by men, de, alla, kaitoi, kai de and the like, or deduced from one

another  by  ara,  de,  oun,  toinun  and  the  like.  In  English  the  majority  of

sentences are independent and in apposition to one another; they are laid side

by  side  or  slightly  connected  by  the  copula.  But  within  the  sentence  the

expression of the logical relations of the clauses is closer and more exact:

there is less of apposition and participial structure. The sentences thus laid

side  by  side  are  also  constructed  into  paragraphs;  these  again  are  less

distinctly  marked  in  Greek  and  Latin  than  in  English.  Generally  French,

German, and English have an advantage over the classical languages in point

of accuracy. The three concords are more accurately observed in English than

in either Greek or Latin. On the other hand, the extension of the familiar use

of the masculine and feminine gender to objects of sense and abstract ideas as

well as to men and animals no doubt lends a nameless grace to style which

we have a difficulty in appreciating, and the possible variety in the order of

words gives more flexibility and also a kind of dignity to the period. Of the

comparative effect of accent and quantity and of the relation between them in

ancient and modern languages we are not able to judge.


  Another  quality  in  which  modern  are  superior  to  ancient  languages  is

freedom  from  tautology.  No  English  style  is  thought  tolerable  in  which,

except  for  the  sake  of  emphasis,  the  same  words  are  repeated  at  short

intervals. Of course the length of the interval must depend on the character of

the word. Striking words and expressions cannot be allowed to reappear, if at

all,  except  at  the  distance  of  a  page  or  more.  Pronouns,  prepositions,conjunctions may or rather must recur in successive lines. It seems to be a

kind of impertinence to the reader and strikes unpleasantly both on the mind

and on the ear that the same sounds should be used twice over, when another

word or turn of expression would have given a new shade of meaning to the

thought and would have added a pleasing variety to the sound. And the mind

equally rejects the repetition of the word and the use of a mere synonym for

it,--e.g. felicity and happiness. The cultivated mind desires something more,

which a skilful writer is easily able to supply out of his treasure-house.


  The fear of tautology has doubtless led to the multiplications of words

and  the  meanings  of  words,  and  generally  to  an  enlargement  of  the

vocabulary. It is a very early instinct of language; for ancient poetry is almost

as free from tautology as the best modern writings. The speech of young

children, except in so far as they are compelled to repeat themselves by the

fewness of their words, also escapes from it. When they grow up and have

ideas  which  are  beyond  their  powers  of  expression,  especially  in  writing,

tautology begins to appear. In like manner when language is 'contaminated'

by philosophy it is apt to become awkward, to stammer and repeat itself, to

lose  its  flow  and  freedom.  No  philosophical  writer  with  the  exception  of

Plato,  who  is  himself  not  free  from  tautology,  and  perhaps  Bacon,  has

attained to any high degree of literary excellence.


  To poetry the form and polish of language is chiefly to be attributed; and

the most critical period in the history of language is the transition from verse

to prose. At first mankind were contented to express their thoughts in a set

form of words having a kind of rhythm; to which regularity was given by

accent  and  quantity.  But  after  a  time  they  demanded  a  greater  degree  of

freedom, and to those who had all their life been hearing poetry the first

introduction of prose had the charm of novelty. The prose romances into

which the Homeric Poems were converted, for a while probably gave more

delight to the hearers or readers of them than the Poems themselves, and in

time the relation of the two was reversed: the poems which had once been a

necessity of the human mind became a luxury: they were now superseded by

prose, which in all succeeding ages became the natural vehicle of expression

to  all  mankind.  Henceforward  prose  and  poetry  formed  each  other.  A

comparatively slender link between them was also furnished by proverbs. We

may  trace  in  poetry  how  the  simple  succession  of  lines,  not  withoutmonotony, has passed into a complicated period, and how in prose, rhythm

and accent and the order of words and the balance of clauses, sometimes not

without  a  slight  admixture  of  rhyme,  make  up  a  new  kind  of  harmony,

swelling into strains not less majestic than those of Homer, Virgil, or Dante.


  One of the most curious and characteristic features of language, affecting

both syntax and style, is idiom. The meaning of the word 'idiom' is that which

is peculiar, that which is familiar, the word or expression which strikes us or

comes  home  to  us,  which  is  more  readily  understood  or  more  easily

remembered. It is a quality which really exists in infinite degrees, which we

turn into differences of kind by applying the term only to conspicuous and

striking  examples  of  words  or  phrases  which  have  this  quality.  It  often

supersedes the laws of language or the rules of grammar, or rather is to be

regarded as another law of language which is natural and necessary. The

word or phrase which has been repeated many times over is more intelligible

and familiar to us than one which is rare, and our familiarity with it more than

compensates  for  incorrectness  or  inaccuracy  in  the  use  of  it.  Striking

expressions also which have moved the hearts of nations or are the precious

stones and jewels of great authors partake of the nature of idioms: they are

taken out of the sphere of grammar and are exempt from the proprieties of

language. Every one knows that we often put words together in a manner

which would be intolerable if it were not idiomatic. We cannot argue either

about the meaning of words or the use of constructions that because they are

used in one connexion they will be legitimate in another, unless we allow for

this principle. We can bear to have words and sentences used in new senses

or in a new order or even a little perverted in meaning when we are quite

familiar  with  them.  Quotations  are  as  often  applied  in  a  sense  which  the

author did not intend as in that which he did. The parody of the words of

Shakspere or of the Bible, which has in it something of the nature of a lie, is

far from unpleasing to us. The better known words, even if their meaning be

perverted, are more agreeable to us and have a greater power over us. Most of

us have experienced a sort of delight and feeling of curiosity when we first

came across or when we first used for ourselves a new word or phrase or

figure of speech.


  There are associations of sound and of sense by which every word is

linked to every other. One letter harmonizes with another; every verb or nounderives its meaning, not only from itself, but from the words with which it is

associated. Some reflection of them near or distant is embodied in it. In any

new use of a word all the existing uses of it have to be considered. Upon

these depends the question whether it will bear the proposed extension of

meaning or not. According to the famous expression of Luther, 'Words are

living creatures, having hands and feet.' When they cease to retain this living

power of adaptation, when they are only put together like the parts of a piece

of furniture, language becomes unpoetical, in expressive, dead.


    Grammars would lead us to suppose that words have a fixed form and

sound. Lexicons assign to each word a definite meaning or meanings. They

both tend to obscure the fact that the sentence precedes the word and that all

language  is  relative.  (1)  It  is  relative  to  its  own  context.  Its  meaning  is

modified by what has been said before and after in the same or in some other

passage: without comparing the context we are not sure whether it is used in

the same sense even in two successive sentences. (2) It is relative to facts, to

time,  place,  and  occasion:  when  they  are  already  known  to  the  hearer  or

reader, they may be presupposed; there is no need to allude to them further.

(3) It is relative to the knowledge of the writer and reader or of the speaker

and hearer. Except for the sake of order and consecutiveness nothing ought to

be expressed which is already commonly or universally known. A word or

two may be sufficient to give an intimation to a friend; a long or elaborate

speech or composition is required to explain some new idea to a popular

audience  or  to  the  ordinary  reader  or  to  a  young  pupil.  Grammars  and

dictionaries are not to be despised; for in teaching we need clearness rather

than subtlety. But we must not therefore forget that there is also a higher ideal

of language in which all is relative--sounds to sounds, words to words, the

parts to the whole--in which besides the lesser context of the book or speech,

there is also the larger context of history and circumstances.


  The study of Comparative Philology has introduced into the world a new

science which more than any other binds up man with nature, and distant

ages and countries with one another. It may be said to have thrown a light

upon all other sciences and upon the nature of the human mind itself. The

true  conception  of  it  dispels  many  errors,  not  only  of  metaphysics  and

theology, but also of natural knowledge. Yet it is far from certain that this

newly-found science will continue to progress in the same surprising manneras heretofore; or that even if our materials are largely increased, we shall

arrive at much more definite conclusions than at present. Like some other

branches of knowledge, it may be approaching a point at which it can no

longer  be  profitably  studied.  But  at  any  rate  it  has  brought  back  the

philosophy of language from theory to fact; it has passed out of the region of

guesses and hypotheses, and has attained the dignity of an Inductive Science.

And it is not without practical and political importance. It gives a new interest

to distant and subject countries; it brings back the dawning light from one end

of the earth to the other. Nations, like individuals, are better understood by us

when  we  know  something  of  their  early  life;  and  when  they  are  better

understood  by  us,  we  feel  more  kindly  towards  them.  Lastly,  we  may

remember that all knowledge is valuable for its own sake; and we may also

hope that a deeper insight into the nature of human speech will give us a

greater command of it and enable us to make a nobler use of it. (Compare

again  W.  Humboldt,  'Ueber  die  Verschiedenheit  des  menschlichen

Sprachbaues;' M. Muller, 'Lectures on the Science of Language;' Steinthal,

'Einleitung in die Psychologie und Sprachwissenschaft:' and for the latter part

of the Essay, Delbruck, 'Study of Language;' Paul's 'Principles of the History

of Language:' to the latter work the author of this Essay is largely indebted.)Cratylus


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin Jowett