order of thought in Greek philosophy. And we might say in the same way that

we are more certain of the existence of God than we are of the immortality of

the soul, and are led by the belief in the one to a belief in the other. The

parallel, as Socrates would say, is not perfect, but agrees in as far as the mind

in  either  case  is  regarded  as  dependent  on  something  above  and  beyond

herself. The analogy may even be pressed a step further: 'We are more certain

of our ideas of truth and right than we are of the existence of God, and are led

on in the order of thought from one to the other.' Or more correctly: 'The

existence  of  right  and  truth  is  the  existence  of  God,  and  can  never  for  a

moment be separated from Him.'


  19. The main argument of the Phaedo is derived from the existence of

eternal  ideas  of  which  the  soul  is  a  partaker;  the  other  argument  of  the

alternation of opposites is replaced by this. And there have not been wanting

philosophers of the idealist school who have imagined that the doctrine of the

immortality  of  the  soul  is  a  theory  of  knowledge,  and  that  in  what  has

preceded Plato is accommodating himself to the popular belief. Such a view

can  only  be  elicited  from  the  Phaedo  by  what  may  be  termed  the

transcendental method of interpretation, and is obviously inconsistent with

the  Gorgias  and  the  Republic.  Those  who  maintain  it  are  immediately

compelled to renounce the shadow which they have grasped, as a play of

words only. But the truth is, that Plato in his argument for the immortality of

the  soul  has  collected  many  elements  of  proof  or  persuasion,  ethical  and

mythological as well as dialectical, which are not easily to be reconciled with

one another; and he is as much in earnest about his doctrine of retribution,

which  is  repeated  in  all  his  more  ethical  writings,  as  about  his  theory  of

knowledge.  And  while  we  may  fairly  translate  the  dialectical  into  the

language of Hegel, and the religious and mythological into the language of

Dante or Bunyan, the ethical speaks to us still in the same voice, and appeals

to a common feeling.


  20. Two arguments of this ethical character occur in the Phaedo. The first

may be described as the aspiration of the soul after another state of being.

Like the Oriental or Christian mystic, the philosopher is seeking to withdraw

from impurities of sense, to leave the world and the things of the world, and

to find his higher self. Plato recognizes in these aspirations the foretaste of

immortality; as Butler and Addison in modern times have argued, the onefrom the moral tendencies of mankind, the other from the progress of the soul

towards perfection. In using this argument Plato has certainly confused the

soul which has left the body, with the soul of the good and wise. (Compare

Republic.) Such a confusion was natural, and arose partly out of the antithesis

of soul and body. The soul in her own essence, and the soul 'clothed upon'

with virtues and graces, were easily interchanged with one another, because

on a subject which passes expression the distinctions of language can hardly

be maintained.


  21. The ethical proof of the immortality of the soul is derived from the

necessity of retribution. The wicked would be too well off if their evil deeds

came to an end. It is not to be supposed that an Ardiaeus, an Archelaus, an

Ismenias could ever have suffered the penalty of their crimes in this world.

The manner in which this retribution is accomplished Plato represents under

the figures of mythology. Doubtless he felt that it was easier to improve than

to invent, and that in religion especially the traditional form was required in

order to give verisimilitude to the myth. The myth too is far more probable to

that age than to ours, and may fairly be regarded as 'one guess among many'

about the nature of the earth, which he cleverly supports by the indications of

geology.  Not  that  he  insists  on  the  absolute  truth  of  his  own  particular

notions: 'no man of sense will be confident in such matters; but he will be

confident that something of the kind is true.' As in other passages (Gorg.,

Tim., compare Crito), he wins belief for his fictions by the moderation of his

statements;  he  does  not,  like  Dante  or  Swedenborg,  allow  himself  to  be

deceived by his own creations.


  The Dialogue must be read in the light of the situation. And first of all we

are struck by the calmness of the scene. Like the spectators at the time, we

cannot pity Socrates; his mien and his language are so noble and fearless. He

is the same that he ever was, but milder and gentler, and he has in no degree

lost his interest in dialectics; he will not forego the delight of an argument in

compliance with the jailer's intimation that he should not heat himself with

talking. At such a time he naturally expresses the hope of his life, that he has

been a true mystic and not a mere retainer or wand-bearer: and he refers to

passages of his personal history. To his old enemies the Comic poets, and to

the proceedings on the trial, he alludes playfully; but he vividly remembers

the disappointment which he felt in reading the books of Anaxagoras. Thereturn of Xanthippe and his children indicates that the philosopher is not

'made of oak or rock.' Some other traits of his character may be noted; for

example,  the  courteous  manner  in  which  he  inclines  his  head  to  the  last

objector, or the ironical touch, 'Me already, as the tragic poet would say, the

voice  of  fate  calls;'  or  the  depreciation  of  the  arguments  with  which  'he

comforted himself and them;' or his fear of 'misology;' or his references to

Homer; or the playful smile with which he 'talks like a book' about greater

and less; or the allusion to the possibility of finding another teacher among

barbarous  races  (compare  Polit.);  or  the  mysterious  reference  to  another

science (mathematics?) of generation and destruction for which he is vainly

feeling. There is no change in him; only now he is invested with a sort of

sacred character, as the prophet or priest of Apollo the God of the festival, in

whose honour he first of all composes a hymn, and then like the swan pours

forth his dying lay. Perhaps the extreme elevation of Socrates above his own

situation, and the ordinary interests of life (compare his jeu d'esprit about his

burial, in which for a moment he puts on the 'Silenus mask'), create in the

mind  of  the  reader  an  impression  stronger  than  could  be  derived  from

arguments that such a one has in him 'a principle which does not admit of

death.'


  The other persons of the Dialogue may be considered under two heads:

(1) private friends; (2) the respondents in the argument.


  First  there  is  Crito,  who  has  been  already  introduced  to  us  in  the

Euthydemus and the Crito; he is the equal in years of Socrates, and stands in

quite a different relation to him from his younger disciples. He is a man of

the world who is rich and prosperous (compare the jest in the Euthydemus),

the best friend of Socrates, who wants to know his commands, in whose

presence he talks to his family, and who performs the last duty of closing his

eyes. It is observable too that, as in the Euthydemus, Crito shows no aptitude

for philosophical discussions. Nor among the friends of Socrates must the

jailer be forgotten, who seems to have been introduced by Plato in order to

show the impression made by the extraordinary man on the common. The

gentle nature of the man is indicated by his weeping at the announcement of

his errand and then turning away, and also by the words of Socrates to his

disciples: 'How charming the man is! since I have been in prison he has been

always coming to me, and is as good as could be to me.' We are reminded toothat he has retained this gentle nature amid scenes of death and violence by

the contrasts which he draws between the behaviour of Socrates and of others

when about to die.


  Another person who takes no part in the philosophical discussion is the

excitable Apollodorus, the same who, in the Symposium, of which he is the

narrator,  is  called  'the  madman,'  and  who  testifies  his  grief  by  the  most

violent emotions. Phaedo is also present, the 'beloved disciple' as he may be

termed, who is described, if not 'leaning on his bosom,' as seated next to

Socrates, who is playing with his hair. He too, like Apollodorus, takes no part

in the discussion, but he loves above all things to hear and speak of Socrates

after his death. The calmness of his behaviour, veiling his face when he can

no longer restrain his tears, contrasts with the passionate outcries of the other.

At a particular point the argument is described as falling before the attack of

Simmias. A sort of despair is introduced in the minds of the company. The

effect of this is heightened by the description of Phaedo, who has been the

eye-witness of the scene, and by the sympathy of his Phliasian auditors who

are beginning to think 'that they too can never trust an argument again.' And

the intense interest of the company is communicated not only to the first

auditors,  but  to  us  who  in  a  distant  country  read  the  narrative  of  their

emotions after more than two thousand years have passed away.


  The two principal interlocutors are Simmias and Cebes, the disciples of

Philolaus the Pythagorean philosopher of Thebes. Simmias is described in the

Phaedrus as fonder of an argument than any man living; and Cebes, although

finally persuaded by Socrates, is said to be the most incredulous of human

beings.  It  is  Cebes  who  at  the  commencement  of  the  Dialogue  asks  why

'suicide  is  held  to  be  unlawful,'  and  who  first  supplies  the  doctrine  of

recollection in confirmation of the pre-existence of the soul. It is Cebes who

urges that the pre-existence does not necessarily involve the future existence

of  the  soul,  as  is  shown  by  the  illustration  of  the  weaver  and  his  coat.

Simmias, on the other hand, raises the question about harmony and the lyre,

which is naturally put into the mouth of a Pythagorean disciple. It is Simmias,

too, who first remarks on the uncertainty of human knowledge, and only at

last concedes to the argument such a qualified approval as is consistent with

the  feebleness  of  the  human  faculties.  Cebes  is  the  deeper  and  more

consecutive  thinker,  Simmias  more  superficial  and  rhetorical;  they  aredistinguished in much the same manner as Adeimantus and Glaucon in the

Republic.


  Other persons, Menexenus, Ctesippus, Lysis, are old friends; Evenus has

been already satirized in the Apology; Aeschines and Epigenes were present

at  the  trial;  Euclid  and  Terpsion  will  reappear  in  the  Introduction  to  the

Theaetetus, Hermogenes has already appeared in the Cratylus. No inference

can fairly be drawn from the absence of Aristippus, nor from the omission of

Xenophon, who at the time of Socrates' death was in Asia. The mention of

Plato's own absence seems like an expression of sorrow, and may, perhaps,

be an indication that the report of the conversation is not to be taken literally.


  The place of the Dialogue in the series is doubtful. The doctrine of ideas

is certainly carried beyond the Socratic point of view; in no other of the

writings of Plato is the theory of them so completely developed. Whether the

belief in immortality can be attributed to Socrates or not is uncertain; the

silence  of  the  Memorabilia,  and  of  the  earlier  Dialogues  of  Plato,  is  an

argument to the contrary. Yet in the Cyropaedia Xenophon has put language

into the mouth of the dying Cyrus which recalls the Phaedo, and may have

been derived from the teaching of Socrates. It may be fairly urged that the

greatest religious interest of mankind could not have been wholly ignored by

one who passed his life in fulfilling the commands of an oracle, and who

recognized a Divine plan in man and nature. (Xen. Mem.) And the language

of the Apology and of the Crito confirms this view.


  The Phaedo is not one of the Socratic Dialogues of Plato; nor, on the

other hand, can it be assigned to that later stage of the Platonic writings at

which the doctrine of ideas appears to be forgotten. It belongs rather to the

intermediate period of the Platonic philosophy, which roughly corresponds to

the  Phaedrus,  Gorgias,  Republic,  Theaetetus.  Without  pretending  to

determine  the  real  time  of  their  composition,  the  Symposium,  Meno,

Euthyphro, Apology, Phaedo may be conveniently read by us in this order as

illustrative of the life of Socrates. Another chain may be formed of the Meno,

Phaedrus, Phaedo, in which the immortality of the soul is connected with the

doctrine of ideas. In the Meno the theory of ideas is based on the ancient

belief in transmigration, which reappears again in the Phaedrus as well as in

the Republic and Timaeus, and in all of them is connected with a doctrine ofretribution. In the Phaedrus the immortality of the soul is supposed to rest on

the conception of the soul as a principle of motion, whereas in the Republic

the  argument  turns  on  the  natural  continuance  of  the  soul,  which,  if  not

destroyed by her own proper evil, can hardly be destroyed by any other. The

soul of man in the Timaeus is derived from the Supreme Creator, and either

returns after death to her kindred star, or descends into the lower life of an

animal. The Apology expresses the same view as the Phaedo, but with less

confidence; there the probability of death being a long sleep is not excluded.

The Theaetetus also describes, in a digression, the desire of the soul to fly

away and be with God--'and to fly to him is to be like him.' The Symposium

may be observed to resemble as well as to differ from the Phaedo. While the

first notion of immortality is only in the way of natural procreation or of

posthumous fame and glory, the higher revelation of beauty, like the good in

the Republic, is the vision of the eternal idea. So deeply rooted in Plato's

mind  is  the  belief  in  immortality;  so  various  are  the  forms  of  expression

which he employs.


  As in several other Dialogues, there is more of system in the Phaedo than

appears  at  first  sight.  The  succession  of  arguments  is  based  on  previous

philosophies; beginning with the mysteries and the Heracleitean alternation

of opposites, and proceeding to the Pythagorean harmony and transmigration;

making a step by the aid of Platonic reminiscence, and a further step by the

help of the nous of Anaxagoras; until at last we rest in the conviction that the

soul is inseparable from the ideas, and belongs to the world of the invisible

and unknown. Then, as in the Gorgias or Republic, the curtain falls, and the

veil  of  mythology  descends  upon  the  argument.  After  the  confession  of

Socrates that he is an interested party, and the acknowledgment that no man

of sense will think the details of his narrative true, but that something of the

kind  is  true,  we  return  from  speculation  to  practice.  He  is  himself  more

confident of immortality than he is of his own arguments; and the confidence

which  he  expresses  is  less  strong  than  that  which  his  cheerfulness  and

composure in death inspire in us.


    Difficulties of two kinds occur in the Phaedo--one kind to be explained

out of contemporary philosophy, the other not admitting of an entire solution.

(1)  The  difficulty  which  Socrates  says  that  he  experienced  in  explaining

generation and corruption; the assumption of hypotheses which proceed fromthe less general to the more general, and are tested by their consequences; the

puzzle about greater and less; the resort to the method of ideas, which to us

appear only abstract terms,--these are to be explained out of the position of

Socrates and Plato in the history of philosophy. They were living in a twilight

between  the  sensible  and  the  intellectual  world,  and  saw  no  way  of

connecting  them.  They  could  neither  explain  the  relation  of  ideas  to

phenomena, nor their correlation to one another. The very idea of relation or

comparison was embarrassing to them. Yet in this intellectual uncertainty

they had a conception of a proof from results, and of a moral truth, which

remained unshaken amid the questionings of philosophy. (2) The other is a

difficulty which is touched upon in the Republic as well as in the Phaedo, and

is common to modern and ancient philosophy. Plato is not altogether satisfied

with his safe and simple method of ideas. He wants to have proved to him by

facts that all things are for the best, and that there is one mind or design

which pervades them all. But this 'power of the best' he is unable to explain;

and therefore takes refuge in universal ideas. And are not we at this day

seeking to discover that which Socrates in a glass darkly foresaw?


  Some resemblances to the Greek drama may be noted in all the Dialogues

of Plato. The Phaedo is the tragedy of which Socrates is the protagonist and

Simmias and Cebes the secondary performers, standing to them in the same

relation as to Glaucon and Adeimantus in the Republic. No Dialogue has a

greater unity of subject and feeling. Plato has certainly fulfilled the condition

of Greek, or rather of all art, which requires that scenes of death and suffering

should  be  clothed  in  beauty.  The  gathering  of  the  friends  at  the

commencement of the Dialogue, the dismissal of Xanthippe, whose presence

would have been out of place at a philosophical discussion, but who returns

again with her children to take a final farewell, the dejection of the audience

at the temporary overthrow of the argument, the picture of Socrates playing

with the hair of Phaedo, the final scene in which Socrates alone retains his

composure--are masterpieces of art. And the chorus at the end might have

interpreted the feeling of the play: 'There can no evil happen to a good man in

life or death.'


  'The art of concealing art' is nowhere more perfect than in those writings

of Plato which describe the trial and death of Socrates. Their charm is their

simplicity,  which  gives  them  verisimilitude;  and  yet  they  touch,  as  ifincidentally, and because they were suitable to the occasion, on some of the

deepest  truths  of  philosophy.  There  is  nothing  in  any  tragedy,  ancient  or

modern, nothing in poetry or history (with one exception), like the last hours

of Socrates in Plato. The master could not be more fitly occupied at such a

time  than  in  discoursing  of  immortality;  nor  the  disciples  more  divinely

consoled. The arguments, taken in the spirit and not in the letter, are our

arguments; and Socrates by anticipation may be even thought to refute some

'eccentric notions; current in our own age. For there are philosophers among

ourselves who do not seem to understand how much stronger is the power of

intelligence, or of the best, than of Atlas, or mechanical force. How far the

words attributed to Socrates were actually uttered by him we forbear to ask;

for  no  answer  can  be  given  to  this  question.  And  it  is  better  to  resign

ourselves  to  the  feeling  of  a  great  work,  than  to  linger  among  critical

uncertainties.Phaedo


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettPERSONS  OF  THE  DIALOGUE: Phaedo,  who  is  the  narrator  of  the

dialogue  to  Echecrates  of  Phlius.  Socrates,  Apollodorus,  Simmias,  Cebes,

Crito and an Attendant of the Prison.


SCENE: The Prison of Socrates.


PLACE OF THE NARRATION: Phlius.


ECHECRATES: Were you yourself, Phaedo, in the prison with Socrates on

the day when he drank the poison?


PHAEDO: Yes, Echecrates, I was.


ECHECRATES: I should so like to hear about his death. What did he say in

his last hours? We were informed that he died by taking poison, but no one

knew anything more; for no Phliasian ever goes to Athens now, and it is a

long time since any stranger from Athens has found his way hither; so that

we had no clear account.


PHAEDO: Did you not hear of the proceedings at the trial?


ECHECRATES: Yes; some one told us about the trial, and we could not

understand why, having been condemned, he should have been put to death,

not at the time, but long afterwards. What was the reason of this?


PHAEDO: An accident, Echecrates: the stern of the ship which the Athenians

send to Delos happened to have been crowned on the day before he was tried.


ECHECRATES: What is this ship?


PHAEDO: It is the ship in which, according to Athenian tradition, Theseus

went  to  Crete  when  he  took  with  him  the  fourteen  youths,  and  was  the

saviour of them and of himself. And they were said to have vowed to Apollo

at the time, that if they were saved they would send a yearly mission to

Delos. Now this custom still continues, and the whole period of the voyage to

and from Delos, beginning when the priest of Apollo crowns the stern of the

ship, is a holy season, during which the city is not allowed to be polluted bypublic executions; and when the vessel is detained by contrary winds, the

time spent in going and returning is very considerable. As I was saying, the

ship was crowned on the day before the trial, and this was the reason why

Socrates  lay  in  prison  and  was  not  put  to  death  until  long  after  he  was

condemned.


ECHECRATES: What was the manner of his death, Phaedo? What was said

or done? And which of his friends were with him? Or did the authorities

forbid them to be present--so that he had no friends near him when he died?


PHAEDO: No; there were several of them with him.


ECHECRATES: If you have nothing to do, I wish that you would tell me

what passed, as exactly as you can.


PHAEDO: I have nothing at all to do, and will try to gratify your wish. To be

reminded of Socrates is always the greatest delight to me, whether I speak

myself or hear another speak of him.


ECHECRATES: You will have listeners who are of the same mind with you,

and I hope that you will be as exact as you can.


PHAEDO:  I  had  a  singular  feeling  at  being  in  his  company.  For  I  could

hardly believe that I was present at the death of a friend, and therefore I did

not pity him, Echecrates; he died so fearlessly, and his words and bearing

were so noble and gracious, that to me he appeared blessed. I thought that in

going to the other world he could not be without a divine call, and that he

would be happy, if any man ever was, when he arrived there, and therefore I

did not pity him as might have seemed natural at such an hour. But I had not

the pleasure which I usually feel in philosophical discourse (for philosophy

was the theme of which we spoke). I was pleased, but in the pleasure there

was also a strange admixture of pain; for I reflected that he was soon to die,

and this double feeling was shared by us all; we were laughing and weeping

by turns, especially the excitable Apollodorus--you know the sort of man?


ECHECRATES: Yes.PHAEDO: He was quite beside himself; and I and all of us were greatly

moved.


ECHECRATES: Who were present?


PHAEDO: Of native Athenians there were, besides Apollodorus, Critobulus

and his father Crito, Hermogenes, Epigenes, Aeschines, Antisthenes; likewise

Ctesippus of the deme of Paeania, Menexenus, and some others; Plato, if I

am not mistaken, was ill.


ECHECRATES: Were there any strangers?


PHAEDO:  Yes,  there  were;  Simmias  the  Theban,  and  Cebes,  and

Phaedondes; Euclid and Terpison, who came from Megara.


ECHECRATES: And was Aristippus there, and Cleombrotus?


PHAEDO: No, they were said to be in Aegina.


ECHECRATES: Any one else?


PHAEDO: I think that these were nearly all.


ECHECRATES: Well, and what did you talk about?


PHAEDO: I will begin at the beginning, and endeavour to repeat the entire

conversation. On the previous days we had been in the habit of assembling

early in the morning at the court in which the trial took place, and which is

not far from the prison. There we used to wait talking with one another until

the opening of the doors (for they were not opened very early); then we went

in  and  generally  passed  the  day  with  Socrates.  On  the  last  morning  we

assembled sooner than usual, having heard on the day before when we quitted

the prison in the evening that the sacred ship had come from Delos, and so

we arranged to meet very early at the accustomed place. On our arrival the

jailer who answered the door, instead of admitting us, came out and told us to

stay until he called us. 'For the Eleven,' he said, 'are now with Socrates; they

are taking off his chains, and giving orders that he is to die to-day.' He soon

returned and said that we might come in. On entering we found Socrates justreleased from chains, and Xanthippe, whom you know, sitting by him, and

holding his child in her arms. When she saw us she uttered a cry and said, as

women will: 'O Socrates, this is the last time that either you will converse

with your friends, or they with you.' Socrates turned to Crito and said: 'Crito,

let some one take  her home.' Some of Crito's people accordingly led her

away,  crying  out  and  beating  herself.  And  when  she  was  gone,  Socrates,

sitting up on the couch, bent and rubbed his leg, saying, as he was rubbing:

How singular is the thing called pleasure, and how curiously related to pain,

which might be thought to be the opposite of it; for they are never present to

a  man  at  the  same  instant,  and  yet  he  who  pursues  either  is  generally

compelled to take the other; their bodies are two, but they are joined by a

single head. And I cannot help thinking that if Aesop had remembered them,

he would have made a fable about God trying to reconcile their strife, and

how, when he could not, he fastened their heads together; and this is the

reason  why  when  one  comes  the  other  follows,  as  I  know  by  my  own

experience now, when after the pain in my leg which was caused by the chain

pleasure appears to succeed.


Upon this Cebes said: I am glad, Socrates, that you have mentioned the name

of Aesop. For it reminds me of a question which has been asked by many,

and was asked of me only the day before yesterday by Evenus the poet --he

will be sure to ask it again, and therefore if you would like me to have an

answer ready for him, you may as well tell me what I should say to him:--he

wanted to know why you, who never before wrote a line of poetry, now that

you are in prison are turning Aesop's fables into verse, and also composing

that hymn in honour of Apollo.


Tell him, Cebes, he replied, what is the truth--that I had no idea of rivalling

him or his poems; to do so, as I knew, would be no easy task. But I wanted to

see whether I could purge away a scruple which I felt about the meaning of

certain  dreams.  In  the  course  of  my  life  I  have  often  had  intimations  in

dreams  'that  I  should  compose  music.'  The  same  dream  came  to  me

sometimes in one form, and sometimes in another, but always saying the

same or nearly the same words: 'Cultivate and make music,' said the dream.

And  hitherto  I  had  imagined  that  this  was  only  intended  to  exhort  and

encourage me in the study of philosophy, which has been the pursuit of my

life, and is the noblest and best of music. The dream was bidding me do whatI was already doing, in the same way that the competitor in a race is bidden

by the spectators to run when he is already running. But I was not certain of

this, for the dream might have meant music in the popular sense of the word,

and being under sentence of death, and the festival giving me a respite, I

thought that it would be safer for me to satisfy the scruple, and, in obedience

to the dream, to compose a few verses before I departed. And first I made a

hymn in honour of the god of the festival, and then considering that a poet, if

he is really to be a poet, should not only put together words, but should invent

stories, and that I have no invention, I took some fables of Aesop, which I

had ready at hand and which I knew--they were the first I came upon--and

turned them into verse. Tell this to Evenus, Cebes, and bid him be of good

cheer; say that I would have him come after me if he be a wise man, and not

tarry; and that to-day I am likely to be going, for the Athenians say that I

must.


Simmias  said:  What  a  message  for  such  a  man!  having  been  a  frequent

companion of his I should say that, as far as I know him, he will never take

your advice unless he is obliged.


Why, said Socrates,--is not Evenus a philosopher?


I think that he is, said Simmias.


Then he, or any man who has the spirit of philosophy, will be willing to die,

but he will not take his own life, for that is held to be unlawful.


Here he changed his position, and put his legs off the couch on to the ground,

and during the rest of the conversation he remained sitting.


Why do you say, enquired Cebes, that a man ought not to take his own life,

but that the philosopher will be ready to follow the dying?


Socrates replied: And have you, Cebes and Simmias, who are the disciples of

Philolaus, never heard him speak of this?


Yes, but his language was obscure, Socrates.My words, too, are only an echo; but there is no reason why I should not

repeat what I have heard: and indeed, as I am going to another place, it is

very meet for me to be thinking and talking of the nature of the pilgrimage

which I am about to make. What can I do better in the interval between this

and the setting of the sun?


Then tell me, Socrates, why is suicide held to be unlawful? as I have certainly

heard Philolaus, about whom you were just now asking, affirm when he was

staying with us at Thebes: and there are others who say the same, although I

have never understood what was meant by any of them.


Do not lose heart, replied Socrates, and the day may come when you will

understand. I suppose that you wonder why, when other things which are evil

may be good at certain times and to certain persons, death is to be the only

exception, and why, when a man is better dead, he is not permitted to be his

own benefactor, but must wait for the hand of another.


Very true, said Cebes, laughing gently and speaking in his native Boeotian.


I admit the appearance of inconsistency in what I am saying; but there may

not be any real inconsistency after all. There is a doctrine whispered in secret

that man is a prisoner who has no right to open the door and run away; this is

a great mystery which I do not quite understand. Yet I too believe that the

gods are our guardians, and that we are a possession of theirs. Do you not

agree?


Yes, I quite agree, said Cebes.


And if one of your own possessions, an ox or an ass, for example, took the

liberty of putting himself out of the way when you had given no intimation of

your wish that he should die, would you not be angry with him, and would

you not punish him if you could?


Certainly, replied Cebes.


Then, if we look at the matter thus, there may be reason in saying that a man

should wait, and not take his own life until God summons him, as he is nowsummoning me.


Yes, Socrates, said Cebes, there seems to be truth in what you say. And yet

how can you reconcile this seemingly true belief that God is our guardian and

we  his  possessions,  with  the  willingness  to  die  which  we  were  just  now

attributing to the philosopher? That the wisest of men should be willing to

leave a service in which they are ruled by the gods who are the best of rulers,

is not reasonable; for surely no wise man thinks that when set at liberty he

can take better care of himself than the gods take of him. A fool may perhaps

think so--he may argue that he had better run away from his master, not

considering that his duty is to remain to the end, and not to run away from the

good, and that there would be no sense in his running away. The wise man

will want to be ever with him who is better than himself. Now this, Socrates,

is the reverse of what was just now said; for upon this view the wise man

should sorrow and the fool rejoice at passing out of life.


The earnestness of Cebes seemed to please Socrates. Here, said he, turning to

us, is a man who is always inquiring, and is not so easily convinced by the

first thing which he hears.


And certainly, added Simmias, the objection which he is now making does

appear to me to have some force. For what can be the meaning of a truly wise

man  wanting  to  fly  away  and  lightly  leave  a  master  who  is  better  than

himself? And I rather imagine that Cebes is referring to you; he thinks that

you are too ready to leave us, and too ready to leave the gods whom you

acknowledge to be our good masters.


Yes, replied Socrates; there is reason in what you say. And so you think that I

ought to answer your indictment as if I were in a court?


We should like you to do so, said Simmias.


Then I must try to make a more successful defence before you than I did

when before the judges. For I am quite ready to admit, Simmias and Cebes,

that I ought to be grieved at death, if I were not persuaded in the first place

that I am going to other gods who are wise and good (of which I am as

certain as I can be of any such matters), and secondly (though I am not sosure of this last) to men departed, better than those whom I leave behind; and

therefore I do not grieve as I might have done, for I have good hope that there

is yet something remaining for the dead, and as has been said of old, some far

better thing for the good than for the evil.


But  do  you  mean  to  take  away  your  thoughts  with  you,  Socrates?  said

Simmias. Will you not impart them to us?--for they are a benefit in which we

too are entitled to share. Moreover, if you succeed in convincing us, that will

be an answer to the charge against yourself.


I will do my best, replied Socrates. But you must first let me hear what Crito

wants; he has long been wishing to say something to me.


Only  this,  Socrates,  replied  Crito:--the  attendant  who  is  to  give  you  the

poison has been telling me, and he wants me to tell you, that you are not to

talk much, talking, he says, increases heat, and this is apt to interfere with the

action of the poison; persons who excite themselves are sometimes obliged to

take a second or even a third dose.


Then, said Socrates, let him mind his business and be prepared to give the

poison twice or even thrice if necessary; that is all.


I knew quite well what you would say, replied Crito; but I was obliged to

satisfy him.


Never mind him, he said.


And now, O my judges, I desire to prove to you that the real philosopher has

reason to be of good cheer when he is about to die, and that after death he

may hope to obtain the greatest good in the other world. And how this may

be, Simmias and Cebes, I will endeavour to explain. For I deem that the true

votary of philosophy is likely to be misunderstood by other men; they do not

perceive that he is always pursuing death and dying; and if this be so, and he

has had the desire of death all his life long, why when his time comes should

he repine at that which he has been always pursuing and desiring?


Simmias said laughingly: Though not in a laughing humour, you have mademe laugh, Socrates; for I cannot help thinking that the many when they hear

your  words  will  say  how  truly  you  have  described  philosophers,  and  our

people at home will likewise say that the life which philosophers desire is in

reality death, and that they have found them out to be deserving of the death

which they desire.


And they are right, Simmias, in thinking so, with the exception of the words

'they have found them out'; for they have not found out either what is the

nature of that death which the true philosopher deserves, or how he deserves

or  desires  death.  But  enough  of  them:--let  us  discuss  the  matter  among

ourselves: Do we believe that there is such a thing as death?


To be sure, replied Simmias.


Is it not the separation of soul and body? And to be dead is the completion of

this; when the soul exists in herself, and is released from the body and the

body is released from the soul, what is this but death?


Just so, he replied.


There is another question, which will probably throw light on our present

inquiry if you and I can agree about it:--Ought the philosopher to care about

the pleasures--if they are to be called pleasures--of eating and drinking?


Certainly not, answered Simmias.


And what about the pleasures of love--should he care for them?


By no means.


And will he think much of the other ways of indulging the body, for example,

the  acquisition  of  costly  raiment,  or  sandals,  or  other  adornments  of  the

body? Instead of caring about them, does he not rather despise anything more

than nature needs? What do you say?


I should say that the true philosopher would despise them.


Would you not say that he is entirely concerned with the soul and not withthe body? He would like, as far as he can, to get away from the body and to

turn to the soul.


Quite true.


In matters of this sort philosophers, above all other men, may be observed in

every sort of way to dissever the soul from the communion of the body.


Very true.


Whereas, Simmias, the rest of the world are of opinion that to him who has

no sense of pleasure and no part in bodily pleasure, life is not worth having;

and that he who is indifferent about them is as good as dead.


That is also true.


What again shall we say of the actual acquirement of knowledge?--is the

body, if invited to share in the enquiry, a hinderer or a helper? I mean to say,

have sight and hearing any truth in them? Are they not, as the poets are

always telling us, inaccurate witnesses? and yet, if even they are inaccurate

and indistinct, what is to be said of the other senses?--for you will allow that

they are the best of them?


Certainly, he replied.


Then when does the soul attain truth?--for in attempting to consider anything

in company with the body she is obviously deceived.


True.


Then must not true existence be revealed to her in thought, if at all?


Yes.


And thought is best when the mind is gathered into herself and none of these

things trouble her--neither sounds nor sights nor pain nor any pleasure,--when

she takes leave of the body, and has as little as possible to do with it, when

she has no bodily sense or desire, but is aspiring after true being?Certainly.


And in this the philosopher dishonours the body; his soul runs away from his

body and desires to be alone and by herself?


That is true.


Well, but there is another thing, Simmias: Is there or is there not an absolute

justice?


Assuredly there is.


And an absolute beauty and absolute good?


Of course.


But did you ever behold any of them with your eyes?


Certainly not.


Or did you ever reach them with any other bodily sense?--and I speak not of

these alone, but of absolute greatness, and health, and strength, and of the

essence  or  true  nature  of  everything.  Has  the  reality  of  them  ever  been

perceived by you through the bodily organs? or rather, is not the nearest

approach to the knowledge of their several natures made by him who so

orders his intellectual vision as to have the most exact conception of the

essence of each thing which he considers?


Certainly.


And he attains to the purest knowledge of them who goes to each with the

mind alone, not introducing or intruding in the act of thought sight or any

other sense together with reason, but with the very light of the mind in her

own clearness searches into the very truth of each; he who has got rid, as far

as he can, of eyes and ears and, so to speak, of the whole body, these being in

his opinion distracting elements which when they infect the soul hinder her

from acquiring truth and knowledge--who, if not he, is likely to attain the

knowledge of true being?What you say has a wonderful truth in it, Socrates, replied Simmias.


And when real philosophers consider all these things, will they not be led to

make  a  reflection  which  they  will  express  in  words  something  like  the

following? 'Have we not found,' they will say, 'a path of thought which seems

to bring us and our argument to the conclusion, that while we are in the body,

and while the soul is infected with the evils of the body, our desire will not be

satisfied? and our desire is of the truth. For the body is a source of endless

trouble to us by reason of the mere requirement of food; and is liable also to

diseases which overtake and impede us in the search after true being: it fills

us full of loves, and lusts, and fears, and fancies of all kinds, and endless

foolery, and in fact, as men say, takes away from us the power of thinking at

all. Whence come wars, and fightings, and factions? whence but from the

body and the lusts of the body? wars are occasioned by the love of money,

and money has to be acquired for the sake and in the service of the body; and

by reason of all these impediments we have no time to give to philosophy;

and, last and worst of all, even if we are at leisure and betake ourselves to

some speculation, the body is always breaking in upon us, causing turmoil

and confusion in our enquiries, and so amazing us that we are prevented from

seeing the truth. It has been proved to us by experience that if we would have

pure knowledge of anything we must be quit of the body--the soul in herself

must behold things in themselves: and then we shall attain the wisdom which

we desire, and of which we say that we are lovers, not while we live, but after

death; for if while in company with the body, the soul cannot have pure

knowledge, one of two things follows--either knowledge is not to be attained

at all, or, if at all, after death. For then, and not till then, the soul will be

parted from the body and exist in herself alone. In this present life, I reckon

that we make the nearest approach to knowledge when we have the least

possible intercourse or communion with the body, and are not surfeited with

the bodily nature, but keep ourselves pure until the hour when God himself is

pleased to release us. And thus having got rid of the foolishness of the body

we shall be pure and hold converse with the pure, and know of ourselves the

clear light everywhere, which is no other than the light of truth.' For the

impure are not permitted to approach the pure. These are the sort of words,

Simmias,  which  the  true  lovers  of  knowledge  cannot  help  saying  to  one

another, and thinking. You would agree; would you not?Undoubtedly, Socrates.


But, O my friend, if this is true, there is great reason to hope that, going

whither I go, when I have come to the end of my journey, I shall attain that

which  has  been  the  pursuit  of  my  life.  And  therefore  I  go  on  my  way

rejoicing, and not I only, but every other man who believes that his mind has

been made ready and that he is in a manner purified.


Certainly, replied Simmias.


And what is purification but the separation of the soul from the body, as I

was saying before; the habit of the soul gathering and collecting herself into

herself from all sides out of the body; the dwelling in her own place alone, as

in another life, so also in this, as far as she can;--the release of the soul from

the chains of the body?


Very true, he said.


And this separation and release of the soul from the body is termed death?


To be sure, he said.


And the true philosophers, and they only, are ever seeking to release the soul.

Is not the separation and release of the soul from the body their especial

study?


That is true.


And, as I was saying at first, there would be a ridiculous contradiction in men

studying to live as nearly as they can in a state of death, and yet repining

when it comes upon them.


Clearly.


And the true philosophers, Simmias, are always occupied in the practice of

dying, wherefore also to them least of all men is death terrible. Look at the

matter thus:--if they have been in every way the enemies of the body, and are

wanting to be alone with the soul, when this desire of theirs is granted, howinconsistent would they be if they trembled and repined, instead of rejoicing

at their departure to that place where, when they arrive, they hope to gain that

which in life they desired--and this was wisdom--and at the same time to be

rid of the company of their enemy. Many a man has been willing to go to the

world below animated by the hope of seeing there an earthly love, or wife, or

son, and conversing with them. And will he who is a true lover of wisdom,

and is strongly persuaded in like manner that only in the world below he can

worthily enjoy her, still repine at death? Will he not depart with joy? Surely

he will, O my friend, if he be a true philosopher. For he will have a firm

conviction that there and there only, he can find wisdom in her purity. And if

this be true, he would be very absurd, as I was saying, if he were afraid of

death.


He would, indeed, replied Simmias.


And when you see a man who is repining at the approach of death, is not his

reluctance a sufficient proof that he is not a lover of wisdom, but a lover of

the body, and probably at the same time a lover of either money or power, or

both?


Quite so, he replied.


And is not courage, Simmias, a quality which is specially characteristic of the

philosopher?


Certainly.


There is temperance again, which even by the vulgar is supposed to consist in

the control and regulation of the passions, and in the sense of superiority to

them--is not temperance a virtue belonging to those only who despise the

body, and who pass their lives in philosophy?


Most assuredly.


For the courage and temperance of other men, if you will consider them, are

really a contradiction.How so?


Well, he said, you are aware that death is regarded by men in general as a

great evil.


Very true, he said.


And do not courageous men face death because they are afraid of yet greater

evils?


That is quite true.


Then all but the philosophers are courageous only from fear, and because

they  are  afraid;  and  yet  that  a  man  should  be  courageous  from  fear,  and

because he is a coward, is surely a strange thing.


Very true.


And  are  not  the  temperate  exactly  in  the  same  case?  They  are  temperate

because they are intemperate--which might seem to be a contradiction, but is

nevertheless the sort of thing which happens with this foolish temperance.

For there are pleasures which they are afraid of losing; and in their desire to

keep them, they abstain from some pleasures, because they are overcome by

others;  and  although  to  be  conquered  by  pleasure  is  called  by  men

intemperance, to them the conquest of pleasure consists in being conquered

by pleasure. And that is what I mean by saying that, in a sense, they are made

temperate through intemperance.


Such appears to be the case.


Yet the exchange of one fear or pleasure or pain for another fear or pleasure

or  pain,  and  of  the  greater  for  the  less,  as  if  they  were  coins,  is  not  the

exchange of virtue. O my blessed Simmias, is there not one true coin for

which all things ought to be exchanged?--and that is wisdom; and only in

exchange for this, and in company with this, is anything truly bought or sold,

whether  courage  or  temperance  or  justice.  And  is  not  all  true  virtue  the

companion of wisdom, no matter what fears or pleasures or other similargoods or evils may or may not attend her? But the virtue which is made up of

these goods, when they are severed from wisdom and exchanged with one

another, is a shadow of virtue only, nor is there any freedom or health or truth

in her; but in the true exchange there is a purging away of all these things,

and  temperance,  and  justice,  and  courage,  and  wisdom  herself  are  the

purgation of them. The founders of the mysteries would appear to have had a

real meaning, and were not talking nonsense when they intimated in a figure

long ago that he who passes unsanctified and uninitiated into the world below

will  lie  in  a  slough,  but  that  he  who  arrives  there  after  initiation  and

purification will dwell with the gods. For 'many,' as they say in the mysteries,

'are the thyrsus- bearers, but few are the mystics,'--meaning, as I interpret the

words, 'the true philosophers.' In the number of whom, during my whole life,

I have been seeking, according to my ability, to find a place;--whether I have

sought in a right way or not, and whether I have succeeded or not, I shall

truly know in a little while, if God will, when I myself arrive in the other

world--such is my belief. And therefore I maintain that I am right, Simmias

and Cebes, in not grieving or repining at parting from you and my masters in

this world, for I believe that I shall equally find good masters and friends in

another world. But most men do not believe this saying; if then I succeed in

convincing you by my defence better than I did the Athenian judges, it will

be well.


Cebes answered: I agree, Socrates, in the greater part of what you say. But in

what concerns the soul, men are apt to be incredulous; they fear that when

she has left the body her place may be nowhere, and that on the very day of

death she may perish and come to an end--immediately on her release from

the body, issuing forth dispersed like smoke or air and in her flight vanishing

away into nothingness. If she could only be collected into herself after she

has obtained release from the evils of which you are speaking, there would be

good reason to hope, Socrates, that what you say is true. But surely it requires

a great deal of argument and many proofs to show that when the man is dead

his soul yet exists, and has any force or intelligence.


True, Cebes, said Socrates; and shall I suggest that we converse a little of the

probabilities of these things?


I am sure, said Cebes, that I should greatly like to know your opinion aboutthem.


I reckon, said Socrates, that no one who heard me now, not even if he were

one of my old enemies, the Comic poets, could accuse me of idle talking

about  matters  in  which  I  have  no  concern:--If  you  please,  then,  we  will

proceed with the inquiry.


Suppose we consider the question whether the souls of men after death are or

are not in the world below. There comes into my mind an ancient doctrine

which affirms that they go from hence into the other world, and returning

hither, are born again from the dead. Now if it be true that the living come

from the dead, then our souls must exist in the other world, for if not, how

could they have been born again? And this would be conclusive, if there were

any real evidence that the living are only born from the dead; but if this is not

so, then other arguments will have to be adduced.


Very true, replied Cebes.


Then let us consider the whole question, not in relation to man only, but in

relation to animals generally, and to plants, and to everything of which there

is generation, and the proof will be easier. Are not all things which have

opposites generated out of their opposites? I mean such things as good and

evil, just and unjust--and there are innumerable other opposites which are

generated out of opposites. And I want to show that in all opposites there is

of necessity a similar alternation; I mean to say, for example, that anything

which becomes greater must become greater after being less.


True.


And that which becomes less must have been once greater and then have

become less.


Yes.


And  the  weaker  is  generated  from  the  stronger,  and  the  swifter  from  the

slower.Very true.


And the worse is from the better, and the more just is from the more unjust.


Of course.


And is this true of all opposites? and are we convinced that all of them are

generated out of opposites?


Yes.


And  in  this  universal  opposition  of  all  things,  are  there  not  also  two

intermediate  processes  which  are  ever  going  on,  from  one  to  the  other

opposite, and back again; where there is a greater and a less there is also an

intermediate process of increase and diminution, and that which grows is said

to wax, and that which decays to wane?


Yes, he said.


And  there  are  many  other  processes,  such  as  division  and  composition,

cooling and heating, which equally involve a passage into and out of one

another. And this necessarily holds of all opposites, even though not always

expressed in words--they are really generated out of one another, and there is

a passing or process from one to the other of them?


Very true, he replied.


Well, and is there not an opposite of life, as sleep is the opposite of waking?


True, he said.


And what is it?


Death, he answered.


And these, if they are opposites, are generated the one from the other, and

have there their two intermediate processes also?Of course.


Now, said Socrates, I will analyze one of the two pairs of opposites which I

have mentioned to you, and also its intermediate processes, and you shall

analyze the other to me. One of them I term sleep, the other waking. The state

of sleep is opposed to the state of waking, and out of sleeping waking is

generated, and out of waking, sleeping; and the process of generation is in the

one case falling asleep, and in the other waking up. Do you agree?


I entirely agree.


Then, suppose that you analyze life and death to me in the same manner. Is

not death opposed to life?


Yes.


And they are generated one from the other?


Yes.


What is generated from the living?


The dead.


And what from the dead?


I can only say in answer--the living.


Then the living, whether things or persons, Cebes, are generated from the

dead?


That is clear, he replied.


Then the inference is that our souls exist in the world below?


That is true.


And one of the two processes or generations is visible--for surely the act ofdying is visible?


Surely, he said.


What then is to be the result? Shall we exclude the opposite process? And

shall we suppose nature to walk on one leg only? Must we not rather assign

to death some corresponding process of generation?


Certainly, he replied.


And what is that process?


Return to life.


And return to life, if there be such a thing, is the birth of the dead into the

world of the living?


Quite true.


Then here is a new way by which we arrive at the conclusion that the living

come from the dead, just as the dead come from the living; and this, if true,

affords a most certain proof that the souls of the dead exist in some place out

of which they come again.


Yes, Socrates, he said; the conclusion seems to flow necessarily out of our

previous admissions.


And that these admissions were not unfair, Cebes, he said, may be shown, I

think, as follows: If generation were in a straight line only, and there were no

compensation  or  circle  in  nature,  no  turn  or  return  of  elements  into  their

opposites, then you know that all things would at last have the same form and

pass into the same state, and there would be no more generation of them.


What do you mean? he said.


A simple thing enough, which I will illustrate by the case of sleep, he replied.

You know that if there were no alternation of sleeping and waking, the tale of

the sleeping Endymion would in the end have no meaning, because all otherthings would be asleep, too, and he would not be distinguishable from the

rest. Or if there were composition only, and no division of substances, then

the chaos of Anaxagoras would come again. And in like manner, my dear

Cebes, if all things which partook of life were to die, and after they were dead

remained in the form of death, and did not come to life again, all would at

last die, and nothing would be alive--what other result could there be? For if

the living spring from any other things, and they too die, must not all things

at last be swallowed up in death? (But compare Republic.)


There is no escape, Socrates, said Cebes; and to me your argument seems to

be absolutely true.


Yes, he said, Cebes, it is and must be so, in my opinion; and we have not

been deluded in making these admissions; but I am confident that there truly

is such a thing as living again, and that the living spring from the dead, and

that the souls of the dead are in existence, and that the good souls have a

better portion than the evil.


Cebes  added:  Your  favorite  doctrine,  Socrates,  that  knowledge  is  simply

recollection, if true, also necessarily implies a previous time in which we

have  learned  that  which  we  now  recollect.  But  this  would  be  impossible

unless our soul had been in some place before existing in the form of man;

here then is another proof of the soul's immortality.


But tell me, Cebes, said Simmias, interposing, what arguments are urged in

favour of this doctrine of recollection. I am not very sure at the moment that I

remember them.


One  excellent  proof,  said  Cebes,  is  afforded  by  questions.  If  you  put  a

question to a person in a right way, he will give a true answer of himself, but

how could he do this unless there were knowledge and right reason already in

him? And this is most clearly shown when he is taken to a diagram or to

anything of that sort. (Compare Meno.)


But if, said Socrates, you are still incredulous, Simmias, I would ask you

whether you may not agree with me when you look at the matter in another

way;--I  mean,  if  you  are  still  incredulous  as  to  whether  knowledge  isrecollection.


Incredulous,  I  am  not,  said  Simmias;  but  I  want  to  have  this  doctrine  of

recollection brought to my own recollection, and, from what Cebes has said, I

am beginning to recollect and be convinced; but I should still like to hear

what you were going to say.


This is what I would say, he replied:--We should agree, if I am not mistaken,

that what a man recollects he must have known at some previous time.


Very true.


And what is the nature of this knowledge or recollection? I mean to ask,

Whether  a  person  who,  having  seen  or  heard  or  in  any  way  perceived

anything, knows not only that, but has a conception of something else which

is the subject, not of the same but of some other kind of knowledge, may not

be fairly said to recollect that of which he has the conception?


What do you mean?


I mean what I may illustrate by the following instance:--The knowledge of a

lyre is not the same as the knowledge of a man?


True.


And  yet  what  is  the  feeling  of  lovers  when  they  recognize  a  lyre,  or  a

garment, or anything else which the beloved has been in the habit of using?

Do not they, from knowing the lyre, form in the mind's eye an image of the

youth to whom the lyre belongs? And this is recollection. In like manner any

one who sees Simmias may remember Cebes; and there are endless examples

of the same thing.


Endless, indeed, replied Simmias.


And recollection is most commonly a process of recovering that which has

been already forgotten through time and inattention.


Very true, he said.Well; and may you not also from seeing the picture of a horse or a lyre

remember  a  man?  and  from  the  picture  of  Simmias,  you  may  be  led  to

remember Cebes?


True.


Or you may also be led to the recollection of Simmias himself?


Quite so.


And in all these cases, the recollection may be derived from things either like

or unlike?


It may be.


And  when  the  recollection  is  derived  from  like  things,  then  another

consideration is sure to arise, which is--whether the likeness in any degree

falls short or not of that which is recollected?


Very true, he said.


And shall we proceed a step further, and affirm that there is such a thing as

equality, not of one piece of wood or stone with another, but that, over and

above this, there is absolute equality? Shall we say so?


Say so, yes, replied Simmias, and swear to it, with all the confidence in life.


And do we know the nature of this absolute essence?


To be sure, he said.


And whence did we obtain our knowledge? Did we not see equalities of

material things, such as pieces of wood and stones, and gather from them the

idea of an equality which is different from them? For you will acknowledge

that there is a difference. Or look at the matter in another way:--Do not the

same pieces of wood or stone appear at one time equal, and at another time

unequal?That is certain.


But are real equals ever unequal? or is the idea of equality the same as of

inequality?


Impossible, Socrates.


Then these (so-called) equals are not the same with the idea of equality?


I should say, clearly not, Socrates.


And yet from these equals, although differing from the idea of equality, you

conceived and attained that idea?


Very true, he said.


Which might be like, or might be unlike them?


Yes.


But that makes no difference; whenever from seeing one thing you conceived

another,  whether  like  or  unlike,  there  must  surely  have  been  an  act  of

recollection?


Very true.


But  what  would  you  say  of  equal  portions  of  wood  and  stone,  or  other

material equals? and what is the impression produced by them? Are they

equals in the same sense in which absolute equality is equal? or do they fall

short of this perfect equality in a measure?


Yes, he said, in a very great measure too.


And  must  we  not  allow,  that  when  I  or  any  one,  looking  at  any  object,

observes that the thing which he sees aims at being some other thing, but falls

short of, and cannot be, that other thing, but is inferior, he who makes this

observation must have had a previous knowledge of that to which the other,

although similar, was inferior?Certainly.


And has not this been our own case in the matter of equals and of absolute

equality?


Precisely.


Then we must have known equality previously to the time when we first saw

the material equals, and reflected that all these apparent equals strive to attain

absolute equality, but fall short of it?


Very true.


And we recognize also that this absolute equality has only been known, and

can only be known, through the medium of sight or touch, or of some other of

the senses, which are all alike in this respect?


Yes, Socrates, as far as the argument is concerned, one of them is the same as

the other.


From the senses then is derived the knowledge that all sensible things aim at

an absolute equality of which they fall short?


Yes.


Then before we began to see or hear or perceive in any way, we must have

had a knowledge of absolute equality, or we could not have referred to that

standard the equals which are derived from the senses?--for to that they all

aspire, and of that they fall short.


No other inference can be drawn from the previous statements.


And did we not see and hear and have the use of our other senses as soon as

we were born?


Certainly.


Then we must have acquired the knowledge of equality at some previoustime?


Yes.


That is to say, before we were born, I suppose?


True.


And  if  we  acquired  this  knowledge  before  we  were  born,  and  were  born

having the use of it, then we also knew before we were born and at the instant

of birth not only the equal or the greater or the less, but all other ideas; for we

are not speaking only of equality, but of beauty, goodness, justice, holiness,

and of all which we stamp with the name of essence in the dialectical process,

both  when  we  ask  and  when  we  answer  questions.  Of  all  this  we  may

certainly affirm that we acquired the knowledge before birth?


We may.


But if, after having acquired, we have not forgotten what in each case we

acquired, then we must always have come into life having knowledge, and

shall  always  continue  to  know  as  long  as  life  lasts--for  knowing  is  the

acquiring  and  retaining  knowledge  and  not  forgetting.  Is  not  forgetting,

Simmias, just the losing of knowledge?


Quite true, Socrates.


But if the knowledge which we acquired before birth was lost by us at birth,

and if afterwards by the use of the senses we recovered what we previously

knew, will not the process which we call learning be a recovering of the

knowledge  which  is  natural  to  us,  and  may  not  this  be  rightly  termed

recollection?


Very true.


So much is clear--that when we perceive something, either by the help of

sight, or hearing, or some other sense, from that perception we are able to

obtain a notion of some other thing like or unlike which is associated with it

but has been forgotten. Whence, as I was saying, one of two alternativesfollows:--either  we  had  this  knowledge  at  birth,  and  continued  to  know

through life; or, after birth, those who are said to learn only remember, and

learning is simply recollection.


Yes, that is quite true, Socrates.


And which alternative, Simmias, do you prefer? Had we the knowledge at

our birth, or did we recollect the things which we knew previously to our

birth?


I cannot decide at the moment.


At any rate you can decide whether he who has knowledge will or will not be

able to render an account of his knowledge? What do you say?


Certainly, he will.


But do you think that every man is able to give an account of these very

matters about which we are speaking?


Would that they could, Socrates, but I rather fear that to-morrow, at this time,

there will no longer be any one alive who is able to give an account of them

such as ought to be given.


Then you are not of opinion, Simmias, that all men know these things?


Certainly not.


They are in process of recollecting that which they learned before?


Certainly.


But when did our souls acquire this knowledge?--not since we were born as

men?


Certainly not.


And therefore, previously?Yes.


Then, Simmias, our souls must also have existed without bodies before they

were in the form of man, and must have had intelligence.


Unless indeed you suppose, Socrates, that these notions are given us at the

very moment of birth; for this is the only time which remains.


Yes, my friend, but if so, when do we lose them? for they are not in us when

we are born--that is admitted. Do we lose them at the moment of receiving

them, or if not at what other time?


No, Socrates, I perceive that I was unconsciously talking nonsense.


Then may we not say, Simmias, that if, as we are always repeating, there is

an absolute beauty, and goodness, and an absolute essence of all things; and

if to this, which is now discovered to have existed in our former state, we

refer all our sensations, and with this compare them, finding these ideas to be

pre-existent and our inborn possession--then our souls must have had a prior

existence, but if not, there would be no force in the argument? There is the

same proof that these ideas must have existed before we were born, as that

our souls existed before we were born; and if not the ideas, then not the souls.


Yes, Socrates; I am convinced that there is precisely the same necessity for

the one as for the other; and the argument retreats successfully to the position

that  the  existence  of  the  soul  before  birth  cannot  be  separated  from  the

existence of the essence of which you speak. For there is nothing which to

my mind is so patent as that beauty, goodness, and the other notions of which

you were just now speaking, have a most real and absolute existence; and I

am satisfied with the proof.


Well, but is Cebes equally satisfied? for I must convince him too.


I  think,  said  Simmias,  that  Cebes  is  satisfied:  although  he  is  the  most

incredulous of mortals, yet I believe that he is sufficiently convinced of the

existence of the soul before birth. But that after death the soul will continue

to exist is not yet proven even to my own satisfaction. I cannot get rid of thefeeling of the many to which Cebes was referring--the feeling that when the

man dies the soul will be dispersed, and that this may be the extinction of her.

For admitting that she may have been born elsewhere, and framed out of

other elements, and was in existence before entering the human body, why

after having entered in and gone out again may she not herself be destroyed

and come to an end?


Very true, Simmias, said Cebes; about half of what was required has been

proven; to wit, that our souls existed before we were born:--that the soul will

exist after death as well as before birth is the other half of which the proof is

still wanting, and has to be supplied; when that is given the demonstration

will be complete.


But that proof, Simmias and Cebes, has been already given, said Socrates, if

you put the two arguments together--I mean this and the former one, in which

we admitted that everything living is born of the dead. For if the soul exists

before birth, and in coming to life and being born can be born only from

death and dying, must she not after death continue to exist, since she has to

be  born  again?--Surely  the  proof  which  you  desire  has  been  already

furnished. Still I suspect that you and Simmias would be glad to probe the

argument further. Like children, you are haunted with a fear that when the

soul leaves the body, the wind may really blow her away and scatter her;

especially if a man should happen to die in a great storm and not when the

sky is calm.


Cebes answered with a smile: Then, Socrates, you must argue us out of our

fears--and yet, strictly speaking, they are not our fears, but there is a child

within us to whom death is a sort of hobgoblin; him too we must persuade not

to be afraid when he is alone in the dark.


Socrates said: Let the voice of the charmer be applied daily until you have

charmed away the fear.


And where shall we find a good charmer of our fears, Socrates, when you are

gone?


Hellas, he replied, is a large place, Cebes, and has many good men, and thereare barbarous races not a few: seek for him among them all, far and wide,

sparing neither pains nor money; for there is no better way of spending your

money.  And  you  must  seek  among  yourselves  too;  for  you  will  not  find

others better able to make the search.


The search, replied Cebes, shall certainly be made. And now, if you please,

let us return to the point of the argument at which we digressed.


By all means, replied Socrates; what else should I please?


Very good.


Must we not, said Socrates, ask ourselves what that is which, as we imagine,

is liable to be scattered, and about which we fear? and what again is that

about which we have no fear? And then we may proceed further to enquire

whether that which suffers dispersion is or is not of the nature of soul--our

hopes and fears as to our own souls will turn upon the answers to these

questions.


Very true, he said.


Now the compound or composite may be supposed to be naturally capable, as

of  being  compounded,  so  also  of  being  dissolved;  but  that  which  is

uncompounded, and that only, must be, if anything is, indissoluble.


Yes; I should imagine so, said Cebes.


And the uncompounded may be assumed to be the same and unchanging,

whereas the compound is always changing and never the same.


I agree, he said.


Then now let us return to the previous discussion. Is that idea or essence,

which  in  the  dialectical  process  we  define  as  essence  or  true  existence--

whether essence of equality, beauty, or anything else--are these essences, I

say,  liable  at  times  to  some  degree  of  change?  or  are  they  each  of  them

always what they are, having the same simple self-existent and unchanging

forms, not admitting of variation at all, or in any way, or at any time?They must be always the same, Socrates, replied Cebes.


And what would you say of the many beautiful--whether men or horses or

garments or any other things which are named by the same names and may

be called equal or beautiful,--are they all unchanging and the same always, or

quite  the  reverse?  May  they  not  rather  be  described  as  almost  always

changing  and  hardly  ever  the  same,  either  with  themselves  or  with  one

another?


The latter, replied Cebes; they are always in a state of change.


And  these  you  can  touch  and  see  and  perceive  with  the  senses,  but  the

unchanging things you can only perceive with the mind--they are invisible

and are not seen?


That is very true, he said.


Well,  then,  added  Socrates,  let  us  suppose  that  there  are  two  sorts  of

existences--one seen, the other unseen.


Let us suppose them.


The seen is the changing, and the unseen is the unchanging?


That may be also supposed.


And, further, is not one part of us body, another part soul?


To be sure.


And to which class is the body more alike and akin?


Clearly to the seen--no one can doubt that.


And is the soul seen or not seen?


Not by man, Socrates.And what we mean by 'seen' and 'not seen' is that which is or is not visible to

the eye of man?


Yes, to the eye of man.


And is the soul seen or not seen?


Not seen.


Unseen then?


Yes.


Then the soul is more like to the unseen, and the body to the seen?


That follows necessarily, Socrates.


And were we not saying long ago that the soul when using the body as an

instrument of perception, that is to say, when using the sense of sight or

hearing or some other sense (for the meaning of perceiving through the body

is perceiving through the senses)--were we not saying that the soul too is then

dragged by the body into the region of the changeable, and wanders and is

confused; the world spins round her, and she is like a drunkard, when she

touches change?


Very true.


But when returning into herself she reflects, then she passes into the other

world,  the  region  of  purity,  and  eternity,  and  immortality,  and

unchangeableness, which are her kindred, and with them she ever lives, when

she is by herself and is not let or hindered; then she ceases from her erring

ways, and being in communion with the unchanging is unchanging. And this

state of the soul is called wisdom?


That is well and truly said, Socrates, he replied.


And to which class is the soul more nearly alike and akin, as far as may be

inferred from this argument, as well as from the preceding one?I think, Socrates, that, in the opinion of every one who follows the argument,

the soul will be infinitely more like the unchangeable--even the most stupid

person will not deny that.


And the body is more like the changing?


Yes.


Yet once more consider the matter in another light: When the soul and the

body are united, then nature orders the soul to rule and govern, and the body

to obey and serve. Now which of these two functions is akin to the divine?

and which to the mortal? Does not the divine appear to you to be that which

naturally orders and rules, and the mortal to be that which is subject and

servant?


True.


And which does the soul resemble?


The  soul  resembles  the  divine,  and  the  body  the  mortal--there  can  be  no

doubt of that, Socrates.


Then reflect, Cebes: of all which has been said is not this the conclusion?--

that  the  soul  is  in  the  very  likeness  of  the  divine,  and  immortal,  and

intellectual, and uniform, and indissoluble, and unchangeable; and that the

body is in the very likeness of the human, and mortal, and unintellectual, and

multiform,  and  dissoluble,  and  changeable.  Can  this,  my  dear  Cebes,  be

denied?


It cannot.


But if it be true, then is not the body liable to speedy dissolution? and is not

the soul almost or altogether indissoluble?


Certainly.


And do you further observe, that after a man is dead, the body, or visible part

of him, which is lying in the visible world, and is called a corpse, and wouldnaturally be dissolved and decomposed and dissipated, is not dissolved or

decomposed at once, but may remain for a for some time, nay even for a long

time, if the constitution be sound at the time of death, and the season of the

year favourable? For the body when shrunk and embalmed, as the manner is

in Egypt, may remain almost entire through infinite ages; and even in decay,

there are still some portions, such as the bones and ligaments, which are

practically indestructible:--Do you agree?


Yes.


And is it likely that the soul, which is invisible, in passing to the place of the

true Hades, which like her is invisible, and pure, and noble, and on her way to

the good and wise God, whither, if God will, my soul is also soon to go,--that

the soul, I repeat, if this be her nature and origin, will be blown away and

destroyed immediately on quitting the body, as the many say? That can never

be, my dear Simmias and Cebes. The truth rather is, that the soul which is

pure at departing and draws after her no bodily taint, having never voluntarily

during life had connection with the body, which she is ever avoiding, herself

gathered  into  herself;--and  making  such  abstraction  her  perpetual  study--

which means that she has been a true disciple of philosophy; and therefore

has  in  fact  been  always  engaged  in  the  practice  of  dying?  For  is  not

philosophy the practice of death?--


Certainly--


That soul, I say, herself invisible, departs to the invisible world--to the divine

and  immortal  and  rational:  thither  arriving,  she  is  secure  of  bliss  and  is

released from the error and folly of men, their fears and wild passions and all

other human ills, and for ever dwells, as they say of the initiated, in company

with the gods (compare Apol.). Is not this true, Cebes?


Yes, said Cebes, beyond a doubt.


But  the  soul  which  has  been  polluted,  and  is  impure  at  the  time  of  her

departure, and is the companion and servant of the body always, and is in

love with and fascinated by the body and by the desires and pleasures of the

body, until she is led to believe that the truth only exists in a bodily form,which a man may touch and see and taste, and use for the purposes of his

lusts,--the soul, I mean, accustomed to hate and fear and avoid the intellectual

principle, which to the bodily eye is dark and invisible, and can be attained

only by philosophy;--do you suppose that such a soul will depart pure and

unalloyed?


Impossible, he replied.


She is held fast by the corporeal, which the continual association and constant

care of the body have wrought into her nature.


Very true.


And this corporeal element, my friend, is heavy and weighty and earthy, and

is that element of sight by which a soul is depressed and dragged down again

into the visible world, because she is afraid of the invisible and of the world

below--prowling about tombs and sepulchres, near which, as they tell us, are

seen certain ghostly apparitions of souls which have not departed pure, but

are cloyed with sight and therefore visible.


(Compare Milton, Comus:--


'But when lust, By unchaste looks, loose gestures, and foul talk, But most by

lewd and lavish act of sin, Lets in defilement to the inward parts, The soul

grows clotted by contagion, Imbodies, and imbrutes, till she quite lose, The

divine property of her first being. Such are those thick and gloomy shadows

damp Oft seen in charnel vaults and sepulchres, Lingering, and sitting by a

new made grave, As loath to leave the body that it lov'd, And linked itself by

carnal sensuality To a degenerate and degraded state.')


That is very likely, Socrates.


Yes, that is very likely, Cebes; and these must be the souls, not of the good,

but of the evil, which are compelled to wander about such places in payment

of the penalty of their former evil way of life; and they continue to wander

until through the craving after the corporeal which never leaves them, they

are imprisoned finally in another body. And they may be supposed to findtheir prisons in the same natures which they have had in their former lives.


What natures do you mean, Socrates?


What I mean is that men who have followed after gluttony, and wantonness,

and drunkenness, and have had no thought of avoiding them, would pass into

asses and animals of that sort. What do you think?


I think such an opinion to be exceedingly probable.


And  those  who  have  chosen  the  portion  of  injustice,  and  tyranny,  and

violence, will pass into wolves, or into hawks and kites;--whither else can we

suppose them to go?


Yes, said Cebes; with such natures, beyond question.


And  there  is  no  difficulty,  he  said,  in  assigning  to  all  of  them  places

answering to their several natures and propensities?


There is not, he said.


Some are happier than others; and the happiest both in themselves and in the

place to which they go are those who have practised the civil and social

virtues which are called temperance and justice, and are acquired by habit

and attention without philosophy and mind. (Compare Republic.)


Why are they the happiest?


Because they may be expected to pass into some gentle and social kind which

is like their own, such as bees or wasps or ants, or back again into the form of

man, and just and moderate men may be supposed to spring from them.


Very likely.


No one who has not studied philosophy and who is not entirely pure at the

time of his departure is allowed to enter the company of the Gods, but the

lover of knowledge only. And this is the reason, Simmias and Cebes, why the

true votaries of philosophy abstain from all fleshly lusts, and hold out againstthem  and  refuse  to  give  themselves  up  to  them,--not  because  they  fear

poverty or the ruin of their families, like the lovers of money, and the world

in general; nor like the lovers of power and honour, because they dread the

dishonour or disgrace of evil deeds.


No, Socrates, that would not become them, said Cebes.


No indeed, he replied; and therefore they who have any care of their own

souls, and do not merely live moulding and fashioning the body, say farewell

to all this; they will not walk in the ways of the blind: and when philosophy

offers them purification and release from evil, they feel that they ought not to

resist her influence, and whither she leads they turn and follow.


What do you mean, Socrates?


I will tell you, he said. The lovers of knowledge are conscious that the soul

was simply fastened and glued to the body--until philosophy received her,

she could only view real existence through the bars of a prison, not in and

through herself; she was wallowing in the mire of every sort of ignorance;

and  by  reason  of  lust  had  become  the  principal  accomplice  in  her  own

captivity. This was her original state; and then, as I was saying, and as the

lovers of knowledge are well aware, philosophy, seeing how terrible was her

confinement,  of  which  she  was  to  herself  the  cause,  received  and  gently

comforted her and sought to release her, pointing out that the eye and the ear

and the other senses are full of deception, and persuading her to retire from

them, and abstain from all but the necessary use of them, and be gathered up

and  collected  into  herself,  bidding  her  trust  in  herself  and  her  own  pure

apprehension  of  pure  existence,  and  to  mistrust  whatever  comes  to  her

through other channels and is subject to variation; for such things are visible

and tangible, but what she sees in her own nature is intelligible and invisible.

And the soul of the true philosopher thinks that she ought not to resist this

deliverance, and therefore abstains from pleasures and desires and pains and

fears,  as  far  as  she  is  able;  reflecting  that  when  a  man  has  great  joys  or

sorrows or fears or desires, he suffers from them, not merely the sort of evil

which might be anticipated--as for example, the loss of his health or property

which  he  has  sacrificed  to  his  lusts--but  an  evil  greater  far,  which  is  the

greatest and worst of all evils, and one of which he never thinks.What is it, Socrates? said Cebes.


The evil is that when the feeling of pleasure or pain is most intense, every

soul of man imagines the objects of this intense feeling to be then plainest

and truest: but this is not so, they are really the things of sight.


Very true.


And is not this the state in which the soul is most enthralled by the body?


How so?


Why, because each pleasure and pain is a sort of nail which nails and rivets

the soul to the body, until she becomes like the body, and believes that to be

true which the body affirms to be true; and from agreeing with the body and

having the same delights she is obliged to have the same habits and haunts,

and is not likely ever to be pure at her departure to the world below, but is

always infected by the body; and so she sinks into another body and there

germinates and grows, and has therefore no part in the communion of the

divine and pure and simple.


Most true, Socrates, answered Cebes.


And this, Cebes, is the reason why the true lovers of knowledge are temperate

and brave; and not for the reason which the world gives.


Certainly not.


Certainly not! The soul of a philosopher will reason in quite another way; she

will not ask philosophy to release her in order that when released she may

deliver herself up again to the thraldom of pleasures and pains, doing a work

only to be undone again, weaving instead of unweaving her Penelope's web.

But she will calm passion, and follow reason, and dwell in the contemplation

of her, beholding the true and divine (which is not matter of opinion), and

thence deriving nourishment. Thus she seeks to live while she lives, and after

death she hopes to go to her own kindred and to that which is like her, and to

be freed from human ills. Never fear, Simmias and Cebes, that a soul whichhas been thus nurtured and has had these pursuits, will at her departure from

the body be scattered and blown away by the winds and be nowhere and

nothing.


When Socrates had done speaking, for a considerable time there was silence;

he himself appeared to be meditating, as most of us were, on what had been

said;  only  Cebes  and  Simmias  spoke  a  few  words  to  one  another.  And

Socrates  observing  them  asked  what  they  thought  of  the  argument,  and

whether there was anything wanting? For, said he, there are many points still

open to suspicion and attack, if any one were disposed to sift the matter

thoroughly. Should you be considering some other matter I say no more, but

if you are still in doubt do not hesitate to say exactly what you think, and let

us have anything better which you can suggest; and if you think that I can be

of any use, allow me to help you.


Simmias said: I must confess, Socrates, that doubts did arise in our minds,

and each of us was urging and inciting the other to put the question which we

wanted to have answered and which neither of us liked to ask, fearing that

our importunity might be troublesome under present at such a time.


Socrates replied with a smile: O Simmias, what are you saying? I am not very

likely to persuade other men that I do not regard my present situation as a

misfortune, if I cannot even persuade you that I am no worse off now than at

any other time in my life. Will you not allow that I have as much of the spirit

of prophecy in me as the swans? For they, when they perceive that they must

die,  having  sung  all  their  life  long,  do  then  sing  more  lustily  than  ever,

rejoicing in the thought that they are about to go away to the god whose

ministers they are. But men, because they are themselves afraid of death,

slanderously  affirm  of  the  swans  that  they  sing  a  lament  at  the  last,  not

considering that no bird sings when cold, or hungry, or in pain, not even the

nightingale, nor the swallow, nor yet the hoopoe; which are said indeed to

tune a lay of sorrow, although I do not believe this to be true of them any

more than of the swans. But because they are sacred to Apollo, they have the

gift of prophecy, and anticipate the good things of another world, wherefore

they sing and rejoice in that day more than they ever did before. And I too,

believing  myself  to  be  the  consecrated  servant  of  the  same  God,  and  the

fellow-servant  of  the  swans,  and  thinking  that  I  have  received  from  mymaster gifts of prophecy which are not inferior to theirs, would not go out of

life  less  merrily  than  the  swans.  Never  mind  then,  if  this  be  your  only

objection,  but  speak  and  ask  anything  which  you  like,  while  the  eleven

magistrates of Athens allow.


Very good, Socrates, said Simmias; then I will tell you my difficulty, and

Cebes will tell you his. I feel myself, (and I daresay that you have the same

feeling), how hard or rather impossible is the attainment of any certainty

about questions such as these in the present life. And yet I should deem him a

coward who did not prove what is said about them to the uttermost, or whose

heart failed him before he had examined them on every side. For he should

persevere until he has achieved one of two things: either he should discover,

or be taught the truth about them; or, if this be impossible, I would have him

take the best and most irrefragable of human theories, and let this be the raft

upon which he sails through life-- not without risk, as I admit, if he cannot

find some word of God which will more surely and safely carry him. And

now, as you bid me, I will venture to question you, and then I shall not have

to reproach myself hereafter with not having said at the time what I think. For

when I consider the matter, either alone or with Cebes, the argument does

certainly appear to me, Socrates, to be not sufficient.


Socrates answered: I dare say, my friend, that you may be right, but I should

like to know in what respect the argument is insufficient.


In this respect, replied Simmias:--Suppose a person to use the same argument

about  harmony  and  the  lyre--might  he  not  say  that  harmony  is  a  thing

invisible,  incorporeal,  perfect,  divine,  existing  in  the  lyre  which  is

harmonized,  but  that  the  lyre  and  the  strings  are  matter  and  material,

composite, earthy, and akin to mortality? And when some one breaks the

lyre, or cuts and rends the strings, then he who takes this view would argue as

you do, and on the same analogy, that the harmony survives and has not

perished--you cannot imagine, he would say, that the lyre without the strings,

and the broken strings themselves which are mortal remain, and yet that the

harmony,  which  is  of  heavenly  and  immortal  nature  and  kindred,  has

perished--perished before the mortal. The harmony must still be somewhere,

and the wood and strings will decay before anything can happen to that. The

thought, Socrates, must have occurred to your own mind that such is ourconception of the soul; and that when the body is in a manner strung and held

together by the elements of hot and cold, wet and dry, then the soul is the

harmony or due proportionate admixture of them. But if so, whenever the

strings of the body are unduly loosened or overstrained through disease or

other injury, then the soul, though most divine, like other harmonies of music

or of works of art, of course perishes at once, although the material remains

of the body may last for a considerable time, until they are either decayed or

burnt.  And  if  any  one  maintains  that  the  soul,  being  the  harmony  of  the

elements of the body, is first to perish in that which is called death, how shall

we answer him?


Socrates  looked  fixedly  at  us  as  his  manner  was,  and  said  with  a  smile:

Simmias has reason on his side; and why does not some one of you who is

better able than myself answer him? for there is force in his attack upon me.

But perhaps, before we answer him, we had better also hear what Cebes has

to say that we may gain time for reflection, and when they have both spoken,

we may either assent to them, if there is truth in what they say, or if not, we

will maintain our position. Please to tell me then, Cebes, he said, what was

the difficulty which troubled you?


Cebes said: I will tell you. My feeling is that the argument is where it was,

and open to the same objections which were urged before; for I am ready to

admit that the existence of the soul before entering into the bodily form has

been very ingeniously, and, if I may say so, quite sufficiently proven; but the

existence of the soul after death is still, in my judgment, unproven. Now my

objection is not the same as that of Simmias; for I am not disposed to deny

that the soul is stronger and more lasting than the body, being of opinion that

in all such respects the soul very far excels the body. Well, then, says the

argument to me, why do you remain unconvinced?--When you see that the

weaker continues in existence after the man is dead, will you not admit that

the more lasting must also survive during the same period of time? Now I

will ask you to consider whether the objection, which, like Simmias, I will

express in a figure, is of any weight. The analogy which I will adduce is that

of an old weaver, who dies, and after his death somebody says:--He is not

dead, he must be alive;--see, there is the coat which he himself wove and

wore, and which remains whole and undecayed. And then he proceeds to ask

of some one who is incredulous, whether a man lasts longer, or the coatwhich is in use and wear; and when he is answered that a man lasts far

longer, thinks that he has thus certainly demonstrated the survival of the man,

who is the more lasting, because the less lasting remains. But that, Simmias,

as I would beg you to remark, is a mistake; any one can see that he who talks

thus is talking nonsense. For the truth is, that the weaver aforesaid, having

woven and worn many such coats, outlived several of them, and was outlived

by the last; but a man is not therefore proved to be slighter and weaker than a

coat. Now the relation of the body to the soul may be expressed in a similar

figure; and any one may very fairly say in like manner that the soul is lasting,

and  the  body  weak  and  shortlived  in  comparison.  He  may  argue  in  like

manner that every soul wears out many bodies, especially if a man live many

years. While he is alive the body deliquesces and decays, and the soul always

weaves another garment and repairs the waste. But of course, whenever the

soul perishes, she must have on her last garment, and this will survive her;

and  then  at  length,  when  the  soul  is  dead,  the  body  will  show  its  native

weakness, and quickly decompose and pass away. I would therefore rather

not  rely  on  the  argument  from  superior  strength  to  prove  the  continued

existence of the soul after death. For granting even more than you affirm to

be possible, and acknowledging not only that the soul existed before birth,

but also that the souls of some exist, and will continue to exist after death,

and will be born and die again and again, and that there is a natural strength

in the soul which will hold out and be born many times--nevertheless, we

may be still inclined to think that she will weary in the labours of successive

births, and may at last succumb in one of her deaths and utterly perish; and

this death and dissolution of the body which brings destruction to the soul

may be unknown to any of us, for no one of us can have had any experience

of it: and if so, then I maintain that he who is confident about death has but a

foolish  confidence,  unless  he  is  able  to  prove  that  the  soul  is  altogether

immortal and imperishable. But if he cannot prove the soul's immortality, he

who is about to die will always have reason to fear that when the body is

disunited, the soul also may utterly perish.


All  of  us,  as  we  afterwards  remarked  to  one  another,  had  an  unpleasant

feeling at hearing what they said. When we had been so firmly convinced

before, now to have our faith shaken seemed to introduce a confusion and

uncertainty, not only into the previous argument, but into any future one;

either we were incapable of forming a judgment, or there were no grounds ofbelief.


ECHECRATES: There I feel with you--by heaven I do, Phaedo, and when

you were speaking, I was beginning to ask myself the same question: What

argument can I ever trust again? For what could be more convincing than the

argument of Socrates, which has now fallen into discredit? That the soul is a

harmony is a doctrine which has always had a wonderful attraction for me,

and,  when  mentioned,  came  back  to  me  at  once,  as  my  own  original

conviction. And now I must begin again and find another argument which

will assure me that when the man is dead the soul survives. Tell me, I implore

you, how did Socrates proceed? Did he appear to share the unpleasant feeling

which you mention? or did he calmly meet the attack? And did he answer

forcibly or feebly? Narrate what passed as exactly as you can.


PHAEDO: Often, Echecrates, I have wondered at Socrates, but never more

than on that occasion. That he should be able to answer was nothing, but

what astonished me was, first, the gentle and pleasant and approving manner

in which he received the words of the young men, and then his quick sense of

the wound which had been inflicted by the argument, and the readiness with

which he healed it. He might be compared to a general rallying his defeated

and broken army, urging them to accompany him and return to the field of

argument.


ECHECRATES: What followed?


PHAEDO: You shall hear, for I was close to him on his right hand, seated on

a sort of stool, and he on a couch which was a good deal higher. He stroked

my head, and pressed the hair upon my neck--he had a way of playing with

my hair; and then he said: To-morrow, Phaedo, I suppose that these fair locks

of yours will be severed.


Yes, Socrates, I suppose that they will, I replied.


Not so, if you will take my advice.


What shall I do with them? I said.To-day, he replied, and not to-morrow, if this argument dies and we cannot

bring it to life again, you and I will both shave our locks; and if I were you,

and the argument got away from me, and I could not hold my ground against

Simmias and Cebes, I would myself take an oath, like the Argives, not to

wear hair any more until I had renewed the conflict and defeated them.


Yes, I said, but Heracles himself is said not to be a match for two.


Summon me then, he said, and I will be your Iolaus until the sun goes down.


I summon you rather, I rejoined, not as Heracles summoning Iolaus, but as

Iolaus might summon Heracles.


That will do as well, he said. But first let us take care that we avoid a danger.


Of what nature? I said.


Lest we become misologists, he replied, no worse thing can happen to a man

than this. For as there are misanthropists or haters of men, there are also

misologists or haters of ideas, and both spring from the same cause, which is

ignorance of the world. Misanthropy arises out of the too great confidence of

inexperience;--you trust a man and think him altogether true and sound and

faithful, and then in a little while he turns out to be false and knavish; and

then another and another, and when this has happened several times to a man,

especially when it happens among those whom he deems to be his own most

trusted and familiar friends, and he has often quarreled with them, he at last

hates all men, and believes that no one has any good in him at all. You must

have observed this trait of character?


I have.


And is not the feeling discreditable? Is it not obvious that such an one having

to deal with other men, was clearly without any experience of human nature;

for experience would have taught him the true state of the case, that few are

the good and few the evil, and that the great majority are in the interval

between them.What do you mean? I said.


I mean, he replied, as you might say of the very large and very small, that

nothing is more uncommon than a very large or very small man; and this

applies generally to all extremes, whether of great and small, or swift and

slow, or fair and foul, or black and white: and whether the instances you

select be men or dogs or anything else, few are the extremes, but many are in

the mean between them. Did you never observe this?


Yes, I said, I have.


And do you not imagine, he said, that if there were a competition in evil, the

worst would be found to be very few?


Yes, that is very likely, I said.


Yes, that is very likely, he replied; although in this respect arguments are

unlike men--there I was led on by you to say more than I had intended; but

the point of comparison was, that when a simple man who has no skill in

dialectics believes an argument to be true which he afterwards imagines to be

false, whether really false or not, and then another and another, he has no

longer any faith left, and great disputers, as you know, come to think at last

that they have grown to be the wisest of mankind; for they alone perceive the

utter unsoundness and instability of all arguments, or indeed, of all things,

which, like the currents in the Euripus, are going up and down in never-

ceasing ebb and flow.


That is quite true, I said.


Yes, Phaedo, he replied, and how melancholy, if there be such a thing as truth

or certainty or possibility of knowledge--that a man should have lighted upon

some argument or other which at first seemed true and then turned out to be

false, and instead of blaming himself and his own want of wit, because he is

annoyed, should at last be too glad to transfer the blame from himself to

arguments in general: and for ever afterwards should hate and revile them,

and lose truth and the knowledge of realities.Yes, indeed, I said; that is very melancholy.


Let us then, in the first place, he said, be careful of allowing or of admitting

into our souls the notion that there is no health or soundness in any arguments

at all. Rather say that we have not yet attained to soundness in ourselves, and

that we must struggle manfully and do our best to gain health of mind--you

and all other men having regard to the whole of your future life, and I myself

in the prospect of death. For at this moment I am sensible that I have not the

temper  of  a  philosopher;  like  the  vulgar,  I  am  only  a  partisan.  Now  the

partisan, when he is engaged in a dispute, cares nothing about the rights of

the  question,  but  is  anxious  only  to  convince  his  hearers  of  his  own

assertions. And the difference between him and me at the present moment is

merely this--that whereas he seeks to convince his hearers that what he says

is true, I am rather seeking to convince myself; to convince my hearers is a

secondary matter with me. And do but see how much I gain by the argument.

For if what I say is true, then I do well to be persuaded of the truth, but if

there be nothing after death, still, during the short time that remains, I shall

not distress my friends with lamentations, and my ignorance will not last, but

will die with me, and therefore no harm will be done. This is the state of

mind, Simmias and Cebes, in which I approach the argument. And I would

ask you to be thinking of the truth and not of Socrates: agree with me, if I

seem to you to be speaking the truth; or if not, withstand me might and main,

that I may not deceive you as well as myself in my enthusiasm, and like the

bee, leave my sting in you before I die.


And now let us proceed, he said. And first of all let me be sure that I have in

my mind what you were saying. Simmias, if I remember rightly, has fears

and misgivings whether the soul, although a fairer and diviner thing than the

body, being as she is in the form of harmony, may not perish first. On the

other hand, Cebes appeared to grant that the soul was more lasting than the

body, but he said that no one could know whether the soul, after having worn

out many bodies, might not perish herself and leave her last body behind her;

and that this is death, which is the destruction not of the body but of the soul,

for  in  the  body  the  work  of  destruction  is  ever  going  on.  Are  not  these,

Simmias and Cebes, the points which we have to consider?


They both agreed to this statement of them.He proceeded: And did you deny the force of the whole preceding argument,

or of a part only?


Of a part only, they replied.


And what did you think, he said, of that part of the argument in which we

said that knowledge was recollection, and hence inferred that the soul must

have previously existed somewhere else before she was enclosed in the body?


Cebes  said  that  he  had  been  wonderfully  impressed  by  that  part  of  the

argument, and that his conviction remained absolutely unshaken. Simmias

agreed, and added that he himself could hardly imagine the possibility of his

ever thinking differently.


But, rejoined Socrates, you will have to think differently, my Theban friend,

if  you  still  maintain  that  harmony  is  a  compound,  and  that  the  soul  is  a

harmony which is made out of strings set in the frame of the body; for you

will surely never allow yourself to say that a harmony is prior to the elements

which compose it.


Never, Socrates.


But do you not see that this is what you imply when you say that the soul

existed before she took the form and body of man, and was made up of

elements which as yet had no existence? For harmony is not like the soul, as

you suppose; but first the lyre, and the strings, and the sounds exist in a state

of discord, and then harmony is made last of all, and perishes first. And how

can such a notion of the soul as this agree with the other?


Not at all, replied Simmias.


And yet, he said, there surely ought to be harmony in a discourse of which

harmony is the theme.


There ought, replied Simmias.


But there is no harmony, he said, in the two propositions that knowledge is

recollection, and that the soul is a harmony. Which of them will you retain?I think, he replied, that I have a much stronger faith, Socrates, in the first of

the two, which has been fully demonstrated to me, than in the latter, which

has not been demonstrated at all, but rests only on probable and plausible

grounds; and is therefore believed by the many. I know too well that these

arguments  from  probabilities  are  impostors,  and  unless  great  caution  is

observed in the use of them, they are apt to be deceptive --in geometry, and in

other things too. But the doctrine of knowledge and recollection has been

proven to me on trustworthy grounds; and the proof was that the soul must

have  existed  before  she  came  into  the  body,  because  to  her  belongs  the

essence  of  which  the  very  name  implies  existence.  Having,  as  I  am

convinced,  rightly  accepted  this  conclusion,  and  on  sufficient  grounds,  I

must, as I suppose, cease to argue or allow others to argue that the soul is a

harmony.


Let me put the matter, Simmias, he said, in another point of view: Do you

imagine that a harmony or any other composition can be in a state other than

that of the elements, out of which it is compounded?


Certainly not.


Or do or suffer anything other than they do or suffer?


He agreed.


Then  a  harmony  does  not,  properly  speaking,  lead  the  parts  or  elements

which make up the harmony, but only follows them.


He assented.


For harmony cannot possibly have any motion, or sound, or other quality

which is opposed to its parts.


That would be impossible, he replied.


And does not the nature of every harmony depend upon the manner in which

the elements are harmonized?I do not understand you, he said.


I mean to say that a harmony admits of degrees, and is more of a harmony,

and more completely a harmony, when more truly and fully harmonized, to

any extent which is possible; and less of a harmony, and less completely a

harmony, when less truly and fully harmonized.


True.


But does the soul admit of degrees? or is one soul in the very least degree

more or less, or more or less completely, a soul than another?


Not in the least.


Yet surely of two souls, one is said to have intelligence and virtue, and to be

good, and the other to have folly and vice, and to be an evil soul: and this is

said truly?


Yes, truly.


But  what  will  those  who  maintain  the  soul  to  be  a  harmony  say  of  this

presence of virtue and vice in the soul?--will they say that here is another

harmony, and another discord, and that the virtuous soul is harmonized, and

herself being a harmony has another harmony within her, and that the vicious

soul is inharmonical and has no harmony within her?


I cannot tell, replied Simmias; but I suppose that something of the sort would

be asserted by those who say that the soul is a harmony.


And we have already admitted that no soul is more a soul than another; which

is equivalent to admitting that harmony is not more or less harmony, or more

or less completely a harmony?


Quite true.


And  that  which  is  not  more  or  less  a  harmony  is  not  more  or  less

harmonized?True.


And that which is not more or less harmonized cannot have more or less of

harmony, but only an equal harmony?


Yes, an equal harmony.


Then one soul not being more or less absolutely a soul than another, is not

more or less harmonized?


Exactly.


And therefore has neither more nor less of discord, nor yet of harmony?


She has not.


And having neither more nor less of harmony or of discord, one soul has no

more vice or virtue than another, if vice be discord and virtue harmony?


Not at all more.


Or speaking more correctly, Simmias, the soul, if she is a harmony, will

never have any vice; because a harmony, being absolutely a harmony, has no

part in the inharmonical.


No.


And therefore a soul which is absolutely a soul has no vice?


How can she have, if the previous argument holds?


Then, if all souls are equally by their nature souls, all souls of all living

creatures will be equally good?


I agree with you, Socrates, he said.


And can all this be true, think you? he said; for these are the consequences

which seem to follow from the assumption that the soul is a harmony?It cannot be true.


Once more, he said, what ruler is there of the elements of human nature other

than the soul, and especially the wise soul? Do you know of any?


Indeed, I do not.


And is the soul in agreement with the affections of the body? or is she at

variance with them? For example, when the body is hot and thirsty, does not

the soul incline us against drinking? and when the body is hungry, against

eating? And this is only one instance out of ten thousand of the opposition of

the soul to the things of the body.


Very true.


But we have already acknowledged that the soul, being a harmony, can never

utter a note at variance with the tensions and relaxations and vibrations and

other affections of the strings out of which she is composed; she can only

follow, she cannot lead them?


It must be so, he replied.


And yet do we not now discover the soul to be doing the exact opposite--

leading the elements of which she is believed to be composed; almost always

opposing and coercing them in all sorts of ways throughout life, sometimes

more violently with the pains of medicine and gymnastic; then again more

gently; now threatening, now admonishing the desires, passions, fears, as if

talking to a thing which is not herself, as Homer in the Odyssee represents

Odysseus doing in the words--


'He  beat  his  breast,  and  thus  reproached  his  heart:  Endure,  my  heart;  far

worse hast thou endured!'


Do you think that Homer wrote this under the idea that the soul is a harmony

capable of being led by the affections of the body, and not rather of a nature

which  should  lead  and  master  them--herself  a  far  diviner  thing  than  any

harmony?Yes, Socrates, I quite think so.


Then, my friend, we can never be right in saying that the soul is a harmony,

for we should contradict the divine Homer, and contradict ourselves.


True, he said.


Thus  much,  said  Socrates,  of  Harmonia,  your  Theban  goddess,  who  has

graciously yielded to us; but what shall I say, Cebes, to her husband Cadmus,

and how shall I make peace with him?


I think that you will discover a way of propitiating him, said Cebes; I am sure

that you have put the argument with Harmonia in a manner that I could never

have  expected.  For  when  Simmias  was  mentioning  his  difficulty,  I  quite

imagined that no answer could be given to him, and therefore I was surprised

at finding that his argument could not sustain the first onset of yours, and not

impossibly the other, whom you call Cadmus, may share a similar fate.


Nay, my good friend, said Socrates, let us not boast, lest some evil eye should

put to flight the word which I am about to speak. That, however, may be left

in the hands of those above, while I draw near in Homeric fashion, and try the

mettle of your words. Here lies the point:--You want to have it proven to you

that  the  soul  is  imperishable  and  immortal,  and  the  philosopher  who  is

confident in death appears to you to have but a vain and foolish confidence, if

he believes that he will fare better in the world below than one who has led

another  sort  of  life,  unless  he  can  prove  this;  and  you  say  that  the

demonstration of the strength and divinity of the soul, and of her existence

prior  to  our  becoming  men,  does  not  necessarily  imply  her  immortality.

Admitting the soul to be longlived, and to have known and done much in a

former state, still she is not on that account immortal; and her entrance into

the  human  form  may  be  a  sort  of  disease  which  is  the  beginning  of

dissolution, and may at last, after the toils of life are over, end in that which is

called death. And whether the soul enters into the body once only or many

times, does not, as you say, make any difference in the fears of individuals.

For any man, who is not devoid of sense, must fear, if he has no knowledge

and can give no account of the soul's immortality. This, or something like

this, I suspect to be your notion, Cebes; and I designedly recur to it in orderthat nothing may escape us, and that you may, if you wish, add or subtract

anything.


But, said Cebes, as far as I see at present, I have nothing to add or subtract: I

mean what you say that I mean.


Socrates paused awhile, and seemed to be absorbed in reflection. At length he

said:  You  are  raising  a  tremendous  question,  Cebes,  involving  the  whole

nature of generation and corruption, about which, if you like, I will give you

my own experience; and if anything which I say is likely to avail towards the

solution of your difficulty you may make use of it.


I should very much like, said Cebes, to hear what you have to say.


Then  I  will  tell  you,  said  Socrates.  When  I  was  young,  Cebes,  I  had  a

prodigious desire to know that department of philosophy which is called the

investigation of nature; to know the causes of things, and why a thing is and

is created or destroyed appeared to me to be a lofty profession; and I was

always agitating myself with the consideration of questions such as these:--Is

the  growth  of  animals  the  result  of  some  decay  which  the  hot  and  cold

principle contracts, as some have said? Is the blood the element with which

we think, or the air, or the fire? or perhaps nothing of the kind-- but the brain

may be the originating power of the perceptions of hearing and sight and

smell, and memory and opinion may come from them, and science may be

based on memory and opinion when they have attained fixity. And then I

went on to examine the corruption of them, and then to the things of heaven

and  earth,  and  at  last  I  concluded  myself  to  be  utterly  and  absolutely

incapable of these enquiries, as I will satisfactorily prove to you. For I was

fascinated by them to such a degree that my eyes grew blind to things which I

had seemed to myself, and also to others, to know quite well; I forgot what I

had before thought self-evident truths; e.g. such a fact as that the growth of

man is the result of eating and drinking; for when by the digestion of food

flesh  is  added  to  flesh  and  bone  to  bone,  and  whenever  there  is  an

aggregation of congenial elements, the lesser bulk becomes larger and the

small man great. Was not that a reasonable notion?


Yes, said Cebes, I think so.Well; but let me tell you something more. There was a time when I thought

that I understood the meaning of greater and less pretty well; and when I saw

a great man standing by a little one, I fancied that one was taller than the

other by a head; or one horse would appear to be greater than another horse:

and still more clearly did I seem to perceive that ten is two more than eight,

and that two cubits are more than one, because two is the double of one.


And what is now your notion of such matters? said Cebes.


I should be far enough from imagining, he replied, that I knew the cause of

any of them, by heaven I should; for I cannot satisfy myself that, when one is

added to one, the one to which the addition is made becomes two, or that the

two  units  added  together  make  two  by  reason  of  the  addition.  I  cannot

understand how, when separated from the other, each of them was one and

not two, and now, when they are brought together, the mere juxtaposition or

meeting of them should be the cause of their becoming two: neither can I

understand  how  the  division  of  one  is  the  way  to  make  two;  for  then  a

different cause would produce the same effect,--as in the former instance the

addition and juxtaposition of one to one was the cause of two, in this the

separation and subtraction of one from the other would be the cause. Nor am

I any longer satisfied that I understand the reason why one or anything else is

either  generated  or  destroyed  or  is  at  all,  but  I  have  in  my  mind  some

confused notion of a new method, and can never admit the other.


Then I heard some one reading, as he said, from a book of Anaxagoras, that

mind was the disposer and cause of all, and I was delighted at this notion,

which appeared quite admirable, and I said to myself: If mind is the disposer,

mind will dispose all for the best, and put each particular in the best place;

and I argued that if any one desired to find out the cause of the generation or

destruction or existence of anything, he must find out what state of being or

doing or suffering was best for that thing, and therefore a man had only to

consider the best for himself and others, and then he would also know the

worse, since the same science comprehended both. And I rejoiced to think

that I had found in Anaxagoras a teacher of the causes of existence such as I

desired, and I imagined that he would tell me first whether the earth is flat or

round; and whichever was true, he would proceed to explain the cause and

the necessity of this being so, and then he would teach me the nature of thebest and show that this was best; and if he said that the earth was in the

centre, he would further explain that this position was the best, and I should

be satisfied with the explanation given, and not want any other sort of cause.

And I thought that I would then go on and ask him about the sun and moon

and stars, and that he would explain to me their comparative swiftness, and

their returnings and various states, active and passive, and how all of them

were for the best. For I could not imagine that when he spoke of mind as the

disposer of them, he would give any other account of their being as they are,

except that this was best; and I thought that when he had explained to me in

detail the cause of each and the cause of all, he would go on to explain to me

what was best for each and what was good for all. These hopes I would not

have sold for a large sum of money, and I seized the books and read them as

fast as I could in my eagerness to know the better and the worse.


What expectations I had formed, and how grievously was I disappointed! As

I proceeded, I found my philosopher altogether forsaking mind or any other

principle of order, but having recourse to air, and ether, and water, and other

eccentricities. I might compare him to a person who began by maintaining

generally that mind is the cause of the actions of Socrates, but who, when he

endeavoured to explain the causes of my several actions in detail, went on to

show that I sit here because my body is made up of bones and muscles; and

the bones, as he would say, are hard and have joints which divide them, and

the muscles are elastic, and they cover the bones, which have also a covering

or environment of flesh and skin which contains them; and as the bones are

lifted at their joints by the contraction or relaxation of the muscles, I am able

to bend my limbs, and this is why I am sitting here in a curved posture--that

is what he would say, and he would have a similar explanation of my talking

to you, which he would attribute to sound, and air, and hearing, and he would

assign ten thousand other causes of the same sort, forgetting to mention the

true cause, which is, that the Athenians have thought fit to condemn me, and

accordingly  I  have  thought  it  better  and  more  right  to  remain  here  and

undergo my sentence; for I am inclined to think that these muscles and bones

of mine would have gone off long ago to Megara or Boeotia--by the dog they

would, if they had been moved only by their own idea of what was best, and

if I had not chosen the better and nobler part, instead of playing truant and

running away, of enduring any punishment which the state inflicts. There is

surely a strange confusion of causes and conditions in all this. It may be said,indeed, that without bones and muscles and the other parts of the body I

cannot execute my purposes. But to say that I do as I do because of them, and

that this is the way in which mind acts, and not from the choice of the best, is

a  very  careless  and  idle  mode  of  speaking.  I  wonder  that  they  cannot

distinguish the cause from the condition, which the many, feeling about in the

dark,  are  always  mistaking  and  misnaming.  And  thus  one  man  makes  a

vortex all round and steadies the earth by the heaven; another gives the air as

a support to the earth, which is a sort of broad trough. Any power which in

arranging them as they are arranges them for the best never enters into their

minds; and instead of finding any superior strength in it, they rather expect to

discover another Atlas of the world who is stronger and more everlasting and

more containing than the good;--of the obligatory and containing power of

the good they think nothing; and yet this is the principle which I would fain

learn  if  any  one  would  teach  me.  But  as  I  have  failed  either  to  discover

myself, or to learn of any one else, the nature of the best, I will exhibit to you,

if you like, what I have found to be the second best mode of enquiring into

the cause.


I should very much like to hear, he replied.


Socrates proceeded:--I thought that as I had failed in the contemplation of

true existence, I ought to be careful that I did not lose the eye of my soul; as

people may injure their bodily eye by observing and gazing on the sun during

an  eclipse,  unless  they  take  the  precaution  of  only  looking  at  the  image

reflected in the water, or in some similar medium. So in my own case, I was

afraid that my soul might be blinded altogether if I looked at things with my

eyes or tried to apprehend them by the help of the senses. And I thought that I

had better have recourse to the world of mind and seek there the truth of

existence. I dare say that the simile is not perfect-- for I am very far from

admitting  that  he  who  contemplates  existences  through  the  medium  of

thought,  sees  them  only  'through  a  glass  darkly,'  any  more  than  he  who

considers them in action and operation. However, this was the method which

I adopted: I first assumed some principle which I judged to be the strongest,

and  then  I  affirmed  as  true  whatever  seemed  to  agree  with  this,  whether

relating to the cause or to anything else; and that which disagreed I regarded

as untrue. But I should like to explain my meaning more clearly, as I do not

think that you as yet understand me.No indeed, replied Cebes, not very well.


There is nothing new, he said, in what I am about to tell you; but only what I

have been always and everywhere repeating in the previous discussion and on

other  occasions:  I  want  to  show  you  the  nature  of  that  cause  which  has

occupied my thoughts. I shall have to go back to those familiar words which

are in the mouth of every one, and first of all assume that there is an absolute

beauty and goodness and greatness, and the like; grant me this, and I hope to

be able to show you the nature of the cause, and to prove the immortality of

the soul.


Cebes said: You may proceed at once with the proof, for I grant you this.


Well, he said, then I should like to know whether you agree with me in the

next step; for I cannot help thinking, if there be anything beautiful other than

absolute beauty should there be such, that it can be beautiful only in as far as

it partakes of absolute beauty--and I should say the same of everything. Do

you agree in this notion of the cause?


Yes, he said, I agree.


He proceeded: I know nothing and can understand nothing of any other of

those wise causes which are alleged; and if a person says to me that the

bloom of colour, or form, or any such thing is a source of beauty, I leave all

that,  which  is  only  confusing  to  me,  and  simply  and  singly,  and  perhaps

foolishly, hold and am assured in my own mind that nothing makes a thing

beautiful but the presence and participation of beauty in whatever way or

manner obtained; for as to the manner I am uncertain, but I stoutly contend

that by beauty all beautiful things become beautiful. This appears to me to be

the safest answer which I can give, either to myself or to another, and to this I

cling, in the persuasion that this principle will never be overthrown, and that

to myself or to any one who asks the question, I may safely reply, That by

beauty beautiful things become beautiful. Do you not agree with me?


I do.


And that by greatness only great things become great and greater greater, andby smallness the less become less?


True.


Then if a person were to remark that A is taller by a head than B, and B less

by a head than A, you would refuse to admit his statement, and would stoutly

contend that what you mean is only that the greater is greater by, and by

reason of, greatness, and the less is less only by, and by reason of, smallness;

and thus you would avoid the danger of saying that the greater is greater and

the less less by the measure of the head, which is the same in both, and would

also  avoid  the  monstrous  absurdity  of  supposing  that  the  greater  man  is

greater by reason of the head, which is small. You would be afraid to draw

such an inference, would you not?


Indeed, I should, said Cebes, laughing.


In like manner you would be afraid to say that ten exceeded eight by, and by

reason of, two; but would say by, and by reason of, number; or you would

say that two cubits exceed one cubit not by a half, but by magnitude?-for

there is the same liability to error in all these cases.


Very true, he said.


Again, would you not be cautious of affirming that the addition of one to one,

or the division of one, is the cause of two? And you would loudly asseverate

that you know of no way in which anything comes into existence except by

participation in its own proper essence, and consequently, as far as you know,

the only cause of two is the participation in duality--this is the way to make

two, and the participation in one is the way to make one. You would say: I

will let alone puzzles of division and addition--wiser heads than mine may

answer them; inexperienced as I am, and ready to start, as the proverb says, at

my own shadow, I cannot afford to give up the sure ground of a principle.

And if any one assails you there, you would not mind him, or answer him,

until you had seen whether the consequences which follow agree with one

another or not, and when you are further required to give an explanation of

this principle, you would go on to assume a higher principle, and a higher,

until you found a resting-place in the best of the higher; but you would notconfuse  the  principle  and  the  consequences  in  your  reasoning,  like  the

Eristics--at  least  if  you  wanted  to  discover  real  existence.  Not  that  this

confusion signifies to them, who never care or think about the matter at all,

for they have the wit to be well pleased with themselves however great may

be the turmoil of their ideas. But you, if you are a philosopher, will certainly

do as I say.


What you say is most true, said Simmias and Cebes, both speaking at once.


ECHECRATES: Yes, Phaedo; and I do not wonder at their assenting. Any

one who has the least sense will acknowledge the wonderful clearness of

Socrates' reasoning.


PHAEDO:  Certainly,  Echecrates;  and  such  was  the  feeling  of  the  whole

company at the time.


ECHECRATES:  Yes,  and  equally  of  ourselves,  who  were  not  of  the

company, and are now listening to your recital. But what followed?


PHAEDO: After all this had been admitted, and they had that ideas exist, and

that  other  things  participate  in  them  and  derive  their  names  from  them,

Socrates, if I remember rightly, said:--


This is your way of speaking; and yet when you say that Simmias is greater

than Socrates and less than Phaedo, do you not predicate of Simmias both

greatness and smallness?


Yes, I do.


But  still  you  allow  that  Simmias  does  not  really  exceed  Socrates,  as  the

words may seem to imply, because he is Simmias, but by reason of the size

which  he  has;  just  as  Simmias  does  not  exceed  Socrates  because  he  is

Simmias, any more than because Socrates is Socrates, but because he has

smallness when compared with the greatness of Simmias?


True.


And if Phaedo exceeds him in size, this is not because Phaedo is Phaedo, butbecause Phaedo has greatness relatively to Simmias, who is comparatively

smaller?


That is true.


And  therefore  Simmias  is  said  to  be  great,  and  is  also  said  to  be  small,

because he is in a mean between them, exceeding the smallness of the one by

his greatness, and allowing the greatness of the other to exceed his smallness.

He added, laughing, I am speaking like a book, but I believe that what I am

saying is true.


Simmias assented.


I speak as I do because I want you to agree with me in thinking, not only that

absolute greatness will never be great and also small, but that greatness in us

or in the concrete will never admit the small or admit of being exceeded:

instead of this, one of two things will happen, either the greater will fly or

retire before the opposite, which is the less, or at the approach of the less has

already ceased to exist; but will not, if allowing or admitting of smallness, be

changed by that; even as I, having received and admitted smallness when

compared with Simmias, remain just as I was, and am the same small person.

And as the idea of greatness cannot condescend ever to be or become small,

in like manner the smallness in us cannot be or become great; nor can any

other opposite which remains the same ever be or become its own opposite,

but either passes away or perishes in the change.


That, replied Cebes, is quite my notion.


Hereupon one of the company, though I do not exactly remember which of

them, said: In heaven's name, is not this the direct contrary of what was

admitted before--that out of the greater came the less and out of the less the

greater, and that opposites were simply generated from opposites; but now

this principle seems to be utterly denied.


Socrates inclined his head to the speaker and listened. I like your courage, he

said, in reminding us of this. But you do not observe that there is a difference

in the two cases. For then we were speaking of opposites in the concrete, andnow of the essential opposite which, as is affirmed, neither in us nor in nature

can ever be at variance with itself: then, my friend, we were speaking of

things in which opposites are inherent and which are called after them, but

now about the opposites which are inherent in them and which give their

name to them; and these essential opposites will never, as we maintain, admit

of generation into or out of one another. At the same time, turning to Cebes,

he said: Are you at all disconcerted, Cebes, at our friend's objection?


No,  I  do  not  feel  so,  said  Cebes;  and  yet  I  cannot  deny  that  I  am  often

disturbed by objections.


Then we are agreed after all, said Socrates, that the opposite will never in any

case be opposed to itself?


To that we are quite agreed, he replied.


Yet once more let me ask you to consider the question from another point of

view, and see whether you agree with me:--There is a thing which you term

heat, and another thing which you term cold?


Certainly.


But are they the same as fire and snow?


Most assuredly not.


Heat is a thing different from fire, and cold is not the same with snow?


Yes.


And yet you will surely admit, that when snow, as was before said, is under

the influence of heat, they will not remain snow and heat; but at the advance

of the heat, the snow will either retire or perish?


Very true, he replied.


And the fire too at the advance of the cold will either retire or perish; and

when  the  fire  is  under  the  influence  of  the  cold,  they  will  not  remain  asbefore, fire and cold.


That is true, he said.


And in some cases the name of the idea is not only attached to the idea in an

eternal connection, but anything else which, not being the idea, exists only in

the form of the idea, may also lay claim to it. I will try to make this clearer by

an example:--The odd number is always called by the name of odd?


Very true.


But is this the only thing which is called odd? Are there not other things

which have their own name, and yet are called odd, because, although not the

same as oddness, they are never without oddness?--that is what I mean to

ask--whether numbers such as the number three are not of the class of odd.

And there are many other examples: would you not say, for example, that

three may be called by its proper name, and also be called odd, which is not

the same with three? and this may be said not only of three but also of five,

and of every alternate number--each of them without being oddness is odd,

and in the same way two and four, and the other series of alternate numbers,

has every number even, without being evenness. Do you agree?


Of course.


Then  now  mark  the  point  at  which  I  am  aiming:--not  only  do  essential

opposites exclude one another, but also concrete things, which, although not

in themselves opposed, contain opposites; these, I say, likewise reject the

idea  which  is  opposed  to  that  which  is  contained  in  them,  and  when  it

approaches them they either perish or withdraw. For example; Will not the

number three endure annihilation or anything sooner than be converted into

an even number, while remaining three?


Very true, said Cebes.


And yet, he said, the number two is certainly not opposed to the number

three?It is not.


Then not only do opposite ideas repel the advance of one another, but also

there are other natures which repel the approach of opposites.


Very true, he said.


Suppose, he said, that we endeavour, if possible, to determine what these are.


By all means.


Are  they  not,  Cebes,  such  as  compel  the  things  of  which  they  have

possession,  not  only  to  take  their  own  form,  but  also  the  form  of  some

opposite?


What do you mean?


I mean, as I was just now saying, and as I am sure that you know, that those

things which are possessed by the number three must not only be three in

number, but must also be odd.


Quite true.


And on this oddness, of which the number three has the impress, the opposite

idea will never intrude?


No.


And this impress was given by the odd principle?


Yes.


And to the odd is opposed the even?


True.


Then the idea of the even number will never arrive at three?No.


Then three has no part in the even?


None.


Then the triad or number three is uneven?


Very true.


To return then to my distinction of natures which are not opposed, and yet do

not admit opposites--as, in the instance given, three, although not opposed to

the even, does not any the more admit of the even, but always brings the

opposite into play on the other side; or as two does not receive the odd, or fire

the cold--from these examples (and there are many more of them) perhaps

you may be able to arrive at the general conclusion, that not only opposites

will not receive opposites, but also that nothing which brings the opposite

will admit the opposite of that which it brings, in that to which it is brought.

And here let me recapitulate--for there is no harm in repetition. The number

five will not admit the nature of the even, any more than ten, which is the

double of five, will admit the nature of the odd. The double has another

opposite, and is not strictly opposed to the odd, but nevertheless rejects the

odd altogether. Nor again will parts in the ratio 3:2, nor any fraction in which

there is a half, nor again in which there is a third, admit the notion of the

whole, although they are not opposed to the whole: You will agree?


Yes, he said, I entirely agree and go along with you in that.


And now, he said, let us begin again; and do not you answer my question in

the words in which I ask it: let me have not the old safe answer of which I

spoke at first, but another equally safe, of which the truth will be inferred by

you from what has been just said. I mean that if any one asks you 'what that

is, of which the inherence makes the body hot,' you will reply not heat (this is

what I call the safe and stupid answer), but fire, a far superior answer, which

we are now in a condition to give. Or if any one asks you 'why a body is

diseased,' you will not say from disease, but from fever; and instead of saying

that oddness is the cause of odd numbers, you will say that the monad is thecause  of  them:  and  so  of  things  in  general,  as  I  dare  say  that  you  will

understand sufficiently without my adducing any further examples.


Yes, he said, I quite understand you.


Tell me, then, what is that of which the inherence will render the body alive?


The soul, he replied.


And is this always the case?


Yes, he said, of course.


Then whatever the soul possesses, to that she comes bearing life?


Yes, certainly.


And is there any opposite to life?


There is, he said.


And what is that?


Death.


Then the soul, as has been acknowledged, will never receive the opposite of

what she brings.


Impossible, replied Cebes.


And now, he said, what did we just now call that principle which repels the

even?


The odd.


And that principle which repels the musical, or the just?


The unmusical, he said, and the unjust.And what do we call the principle which does not admit of death?


The immortal, he said.


And does the soul admit of death?


No.


Then the soul is immortal?


Yes, he said.


And may we say that this has been proven?


Yes, abundantly proven, Socrates, he replied.


Supposing that the odd were imperishable, must not three be imperishable?


Of course.


And if that which is cold were imperishable, when the warm principle came

attacking the snow, must not the snow have retired whole and unmelted--for

it could never have perished, nor could it have remained and admitted the

heat?


True, he said.


Again, if the uncooling or warm principle were imperishable, the fire when

assailed  by  cold  would  not  have  perished  or  have  been  extinguished,  but

would have gone away unaffected?


Certainly, he said.


And  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  immortal:  if  the  immortal  is  also

imperishable,  the  soul  when  attacked  by  death  cannot  perish;  for  the

preceding argument shows that the soul will not admit of death, or ever be

dead, any more than three or the odd number will admit of the even, or fire or

the heat in the fire, of the cold. Yet a person may say: 'But although the oddwill not become even at the approach of the even, why may not the odd

perish and the even take the place of the odd?' Now to him who makes this

objection, we cannot answer that the odd principle is imperishable; for this

has not been acknowledged, but if this had been acknowledged, there would

have been no difficulty in contending that at the approach of the even the odd

principle and the number three took their departure; and the same argument

would have held good of fire and heat and any other thing.


Very true.


And  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  immortal:  if  the  immortal  is  also

imperishable, then the soul will be imperishable as well as immortal; but if

not, some other proof of her imperishableness will have to be given.


No other proof is needed, he said; for if the immortal, being eternal, is liable

to perish, then nothing is imperishable.


Yes, replied Socrates, and yet all men will agree that God, and the essential

form of life, and the immortal in general, will never perish.


Yes,  all  men,  he  said--that  is  true;  and  what  is  more,  gods,  if  I  am  not

mistaken, as well as men.


Seeing then that the immortal is indestructible, must not the soul, if she is

immortal, be also imperishable?


Most certainly.


Then when death attacks a man, the mortal portion of him may be supposed

to die, but the immortal retires at the approach of death and is preserved safe

and sound?


True.


Then, Cebes, beyond question, the soul is immortal and imperishable, and our

souls will truly exist in another world!


I am convinced, Socrates, said Cebes, and have nothing more to object; but ifmy friend Simmias, or any one else, has any further objection to make, he

had better speak out, and not keep silence, since I do not know to what other

season he can defer the discussion, if there is anything which he wants to say

or to have said.


But I have nothing more to say, replied Simmias; nor can I see any reason for

doubt  after  what  has  been  said.  But  I  still  feel  and  cannot  help  feeling

uncertain in my own mind, when I think of the greatness of the subject and

the feebleness of man.


Yes, Simmias, replied Socrates, that is well said: and I may add that first

principles, even if they appear certain, should be carefully considered; and

when  they  are  satisfactorily  ascertained,  then,  with  a  sort  of  hesitating

confidence  in  human  reason,  you  may,  I  think,  follow  the  course  of  the

argument; and if that be plain and clear, there will be no need for any further

enquiry.


Very true.


But then, O my friends, he said, if the soul is really immortal, what care

should be taken of her, not only in respect of the portion of time which is

called life, but of eternity! And the danger of neglecting her from this point of

view does indeed appear to be awful. If death had only been the end of all,

the wicked would have had a good bargain in dying, for they would have

been happily quit not only of their body, but of their own evil together with

their souls. But now, inasmuch as the soul is manifestly immortal, there is no

release or salvation from evil except the attainment of the highest virtue and

wisdom. For the soul when on her progress to the world below takes nothing

with her but nurture and education; and these are said greatly to benefit or

greatly to injure the departed, at the very beginning of his journey thither.


For  after  death,  as  they  say,  the  genius  of  each  individual,  to  whom  he

belonged in life, leads him to a certain place in which the dead are gathered

together,  whence  after  judgment  has  been  given  they  pass  into  the  world

below,  following  the  guide,  who  is  appointed  to  conduct  them  from  this

world to the other: and when they have there received their due and remained

their time, another guide brings them back again after many revolutions ofages.  Now  this  way  to  the  other  world  is  not,  as  Aeschylus  says  in  the

Telephus,  a  single  and  straight  path--if  that  were  so  no  guide  would  be

needed, for no one could miss it; but there are many partings of the road, and

windings, as I infer from the rites and sacrifices which are offered to the gods

below in places where three ways meet on earth. The wise and orderly soul

follows in the straight path and is conscious of her surroundings; but the soul

which desires the body, and which, as I was relating before, has long been

fluttering  about  the  lifeless  frame  and  the  world  of  sight,  is  after  many

struggles and many sufferings hardly and with violence carried away by her

attendant genius, and when she arrives at the place where the other souls are

gathered, if she be impure and have done impure deeds, whether foul murders

or other crimes which are the brothers of these, and the works of brothers in

crime--from that soul every one flees and turns away; no one will be her

companion, no one her guide, but alone she wanders in extremity of evil until

certain times are fulfilled, and when they are fulfilled, she is borne irresistibly

to her own fitting habitation; as every pure and just soul which has passed

through life in the company and under the guidance of the gods has also her

own proper home.


Now  the  earth  has  divers  wonderful  regions,  and  is  indeed  in  nature  and

extent very unlike the notions of geographers, as I believe on the authority of

one who shall be nameless.


What  do  you  mean,  Socrates?  said  Simmias.  I  have  myself  heard  many

descriptions of the earth, but I do not know, and I should very much like to

know, in which of these you put faith.


And I, Simmias, replied Socrates, if I had the art of Glaucus would tell you;

although I know not that the art of Glaucus could prove the truth of my tale,

which I myself should never be able to prove, and even if I could, I fear,

Simmias,  that  my  life  would  come  to  an  end  before  the  argument  was

completed. I may describe to you, however, the form and regions of the earth

according to my conception of them.


That, said Simmias, will be enough.


Well, then, he said, my conviction is, that the earth is a round body in thecentre of the heavens, and therefore has no need of air or any similar force to

be a support, but is kept there and hindered from falling or inclining any way

by the equability of the surrounding heaven and by her own equipoise. For

that  which,  being  in  equipoise,  is  in  the  centre  of  that  which  is  equably

diffused, will not incline any way in any degree, but will always remain in

the same state and not deviate. And this is my first notion.


Which is surely a correct one, said Simmias.


Also I believe that the earth is very vast, and that we who dwell in the region

extending from the river Phasis to the Pillars of Heracles inhabit a small

portion only about the sea, like ants or frogs about a marsh, and that there are

other inhabitants of many other like places; for everywhere on the face of the

earth there are hollows of various forms and sizes, into which the water and

the mist and the lower air collect. But the true earth is pure and situated in the

pure heaven--there are the stars also; and it is the heaven which is commonly

spoken of by us as the ether, and of which our own earth is the sediment

gathering  in  the  hollows  beneath.  But  we  who  live  in  these  hollows  are

deceived into the notion that we are dwelling above on the surface of the

earth; which is just as if a creature who was at the bottom of the sea were to

fancy that he was on the surface of the water, and that the sea was the heaven

through which he saw the sun and the other stars, he having never come to

the surface by reason of his feebleness and sluggishness, and having never

lifted up his head and seen, nor ever heard from one who had seen, how much

purer and fairer the world above is than his own. And such is exactly our

case: for we are dwelling in a hollow of the earth, and fancy that we are on

the surface; and the air we call the heaven, in which we imagine that the stars

move. But the fact is, that owing to our feebleness and sluggishness we are

prevented from reaching the surface of the air: for if any man could arrive at

the exterior limit, or take the wings of a bird and come to the top, then like a

fish who puts his head out of the water and sees this world, he would see a

world beyond; and, if the nature of man could sustain the sight, he would

acknowledge that this other world was the place of the true heaven and the

true light and the true earth. For our earth, and the stones, and the entire

region which surrounds us, are spoilt and corroded, as in the sea all things are

corroded  by  the  brine,  neither  is  there  any  noble  or  perfect  growth,  but

caverns only, and sand, and an endless slough of mud: and even the shore isnot to be compared to the fairer sights of this world. And still less is this our

world to be compared with the other. Of that upper earth which is under the

heaven, I can tell you a charming tale, Simmias, which is well worth hearing.


And we, Socrates, replied Simmias, shall be charmed to listen to you.


The tale, my friend, he said, is as follows:--In the first place, the earth, when

looked at from above, is in appearance streaked like one of those balls which

have leather coverings in twelve pieces, and is decked with various colours,

of which the colours used by painters on earth are in a manner samples. But

there the whole earth is made up of them, and they are brighter far and clearer

than ours; there is a purple of wonderful lustre, also the radiance of gold, and

the white which is in the earth is whiter than any chalk or snow. Of these and

other colours the earth is made up, and they are more in number and fairer

than  the  eye  of  man  has  ever  seen;  the  very  hollows  (of  which  I  was

speaking) filled with air and water have a colour of their own, and are seen

like light gleaming amid the diversity of the other colours, so that the whole

presents a single and continuous appearance of variety in unity. And in this

fair region everything that grows--trees, and flowers, and fruits--are in a like

degree fairer than any here; and there are hills, having stones in them in a like

degree smoother, and more transparent, and fairer in colour than our highly-

valued emeralds and sardonyxes and jaspers, and other gems, which are but

minute  fragments  of  them:  for  there  all  the  stones  are  like  our  precious

stones, and fairer still (compare Republic). The reason is, that they are pure,

and not, like our precious stones, infected or corroded by the corrupt briny

elements which coagulate among us, and which breed foulness and disease

both in earth and stones, as well as in animals and plants. They are the jewels

of the upper earth, which also shines with gold and silver and the like, and

they are set in the light of day and are large and abundant and in all places,

making the earth a sight to gladden the beholder's eye. And there are animals

and men, some in a middle region, others dwelling about the air as we dwell

about the sea; others in islands which the air flows round, near the continent:

and in a word, the air is used by them as the water and the sea are by us, and

the ether is to them what the air is to us. Moreover, the temperament of their

seasons is such that they have no disease, and live much longer than we do,

and have sight and hearing and smell, and all the other senses, in far greater

perfection, in the same proportion that air is purer than water or the ether thanair. Also they have temples and sacred places in which the gods really dwell,

and they hear their voices and receive their answers, and are conscious of

them and hold converse with them, and they see the sun, moon, and stars as

they truly are, and their other blessedness is of a piece with this.


Such is the nature of the whole earth, and of the things which are around the

earth; and there are divers regions in the hollows on the face of the globe

everywhere, some of them deeper and more extended than that which we

inhabit, others deeper but with a narrower opening than ours, and some are

shallower  and  also  wider.  All  have  numerous  perforations,  and  there  are

passages broad and narrow in the interior of the earth, connecting them with

one another; and there flows out of and into them, as into basins, a vast tide

of water, and huge subterranean streams of perennial rivers, and springs hot

and cold, and a great fire, and great rivers of fire, and streams of liquid mud,

thin or thick (like the rivers of mud in Sicily, and the lava streams which

follow them), and the regions about which they happen to flow are filled up

with them. And there is a swinging or see-saw in the interior of the earth

which moves all this up and down, and is due to the following cause:--There

is a chasm which is the vastest of them all, and pierces right through the

whole earth; this is that chasm which Homer describes in the words,--


'Far off, where is the inmost depth beneath the earth;'


and which he in other places, and many other poets, have called Tartarus.

And the see-saw is caused by the streams flowing into and out of this chasm,

and they each have the nature of the soil through which they flow. And the

reason why the streams are always flowing in and out, is that the watery

element has no bed or bottom, but is swinging and surging up and down, and

the surrounding wind and air do the same; they follow the water up and

down, hither and thither, over the earth--just as in the act of respiration the air

is always in process of inhalation and exhalation;--and the wind swinging

with the water in and out produces fearful and irresistible blasts: when the

waters retire with a rush into the lower parts of the earth, as they are called,

they flow through the earth in those regions, and fill them up like water raised

by a pump, and then when they leave those regions and rush back hither, they

again  fill  the  hollows  here,  and  when  these  are  filled,  flow  through

subterranean  channels  and  find  their  way  to  their  several  places,  formingseas, and lakes, and rivers, and springs. Thence they again enter the earth,

some of them making a long circuit into many lands, others going to a few

places and not so distant; and again fall into Tartarus, some at a point a good

deal lower than that at which they rose, and others not much lower, but all in

some degree lower than the point from which they came. And some burst

forth again on the opposite side, and some on the same side, and some wind

round  the  earth  with  one  or  many  folds  like  the  coils  of  a  serpent,  and

descend as far as they can, but always return and fall into the chasm. The

rivers  flowing  in  either  direction  can  descend  only  to  the  centre  and  no

further, for opposite to the rivers is a precipice.


Now  these  rivers  are  many,  and  mighty,  and  diverse,  and  there  are  four

principal ones, of which the greatest and outermost is that called Oceanus,

which flows round the earth in a circle; and in the opposite direction flows

Acheron,  which  passes  under  the  earth  through  desert  places  into  the

Acherusian lake: this is the lake to the shores of which the souls of the many

go when they are dead, and after waiting an appointed time, which is to some

a longer and to some a shorter time, they are sent back to be born again as

animals. The third river passes out between the two, and near the place of

outlet  pours  into  a  vast  region  of  fire,  and  forms  a  lake  larger  than  the

Mediterranean Sea, boiling with water and mud; and proceeding muddy and

turbid,  and  winding  about  the  earth,  comes,  among  other  places,  to  the

extremities of the Acherusian Lake, but mingles not with the waters of the

lake, and after making many coils about the earth plunges into Tartarus at a

deeper  level.  This  is  that  Pyriphlegethon,  as  the  stream  is  called,  which

throws up jets of fire in different parts of the earth. The fourth river goes out

on the opposite side, and falls first of all into a wild and savage region, which

is all of a dark-blue colour, like lapis lazuli; and this is that river which is

called the Stygian river, and falls into and forms the Lake Styx, and after

falling into the lake and receiving strange powers in the waters, passes under

the  earth,  winding  round  in  the  opposite  direction,  and  comes  near  the

Acherusian lake from the opposite side to Pyriphlegethon. And the water of

this river too mingles with no other, but flows round in a circle and falls into

Tartarus over against Pyriphlegethon; and the name of the river, as the poets

say, is Cocytus.


Such is the nature of the other world; and when the dead arrive at the place towhich  the  genius  of  each  severally  guides  them,  first  of  all,  they  have

sentence passed upon them, as they have lived well and piously or not. And

those who appear to have lived neither well nor ill, go to the river Acheron,

and embarking in any vessels which they may find, are carried in them to the

lake, and there they dwell and are purified of their evil deeds, and having

suffered the penalty of the wrongs which they have done to others, they are

absolved,  and  receive  the  rewards  of  their  good  deeds,  each  of  them

according to his deserts. But those who appear to be incurable by reason of

the greatness of their crimes--who have committed many and terrible deeds

of  sacrilege,  murders  foul  and  violent,  or  the  like--such  are  hurled  into

Tartarus  which  is  their  suitable  destiny,  and  they  never  come  out.  Those

again  who  have  committed  crimes,  which,  although  great,  are  not

irremediable--who in a moment of anger, for example, have done violence to

a father or a mother, and have repented for the remainder of their lives, or,

who have taken the life of another under the like extenuating circumstances--

these are plunged into Tartarus, the pains of which they are compelled to

undergo for a year, but at the end of the year the wave casts them forth--mere

homicides by way of Cocytus, parricides and matricides by Pyriphlegethon--

and they are borne to the Acherusian lake, and there they lift up their voices

and call upon the victims whom they have slain or wronged, to have pity on

them, and to be kind to them, and let them come out into the lake. And if they

prevail, then they come forth and cease from their troubles; but if not, they

are  carried  back  again  into  Tartarus  and  from  thence  into  the  rivers

unceasingly, until they obtain mercy from those whom they have wronged:

for that is the sentence inflicted upon them by their judges. Those too who

have  been  pre-eminent  for  holiness  of  life  are  released  from  this  earthly

prison, and go to their pure home which is above, and dwell in the purer

earth; and of these, such as have duly purified themselves with philosophy

live henceforth altogether without the body, in mansions fairer still which

may not be described, and of which the time would fail me to tell.


Wherefore, Simmias, seeing all these things, what ought not we to do that we

may obtain virtue and wisdom in this life? Fair is the prize, and the hope

great!


A  man  of  sense  ought  not  to  say,  nor  will  I  be  very  confident,  that  the

description which I have given of the soul and her mansions is exactly true.But I do say that, inasmuch as the soul is shown to be immortal, he may

venture to think, not improperly or unworthily, that something of the kind is

true. The venture is a glorious one, and he ought to comfort himself with

words like these, which is the reason why I lengthen out the tale. Wherefore,

I say, let a man be of good cheer about his soul, who having cast away the

pleasures and ornaments of the body as alien to him and working harm rather

than good, has sought after the pleasures of knowledge; and has arrayed the

soul, not in some foreign attire, but in her own proper jewels, temperance,

and  justice,  and  courage,  and  nobility,  and  truth--in  these  adorned  she  is

ready to go on her journey to the world below, when her hour comes. You,

Simmias and Cebes, and all other men, will depart at some time or other. Me

already, as the tragic poet would say, the voice of fate calls. Soon I must

drink the poison; and I think that I had better repair to the bath first, in order

that the women may not have the trouble of washing my body after I am

dead.


When he had done speaking, Crito said: And have you any commands for us,

Socrates--anything to say about your children, or any other matter in which

we can serve you?


Nothing particular, Crito, he replied: only, as I have always told you, take

care of yourselves; that is a service which you may be ever rendering to me

and mine and to all of us, whether you promise to do so or not. But if you

have no thought for yourselves, and care not to walk according to the rule

which I have prescribed for you, not now for the first time, however much

you may profess or promise at the moment, it will be of no avail.


We will do our best, said Crito: And in what way shall we bury you?


In any way that you like; but you must get hold of me, and take care that I do

not run away from you. Then he turned to us, and added with a smile:--I

cannot make Crito believe that I am the same Socrates who have been talking

and conducting the argument; he fancies that I am the other Socrates whom

he will soon see, a dead body--and he asks, How shall he bury me? And

though I have spoken many words in the endeavour to show that when I have

drunk the poison I shall leave you and go to the joys of the blessed,-- these

words of mine, with which I was comforting you and myself, have had, as Iperceive, no effect upon Crito. And therefore I want you to be surety for me

to him now, as at the trial he was surety to the judges for me: but let the

promise be of another sort; for he was surety for me to the judges that I

would remain, and you must be my surety to him that I shall not remain, but

go away and depart; and then he will suffer less at my death, and not be

grieved when he sees my body being burned or buried. I would not have him

sorrow at my hard lot, or say at the burial, Thus we lay out Socrates, or, Thus

we follow him to the grave or bury him; for false words are not only evil in

themselves, but they infect the soul with evil. Be of good cheer, then, my

dear Crito, and say that you are burying my body only, and do with that

whatever is usual, and what you think best.


When he had spoken these words, he arose and went into a chamber to bathe;

Crito followed him and told us to wait. So we remained behind, talking and

thinking of the subject of discourse, and also of the greatness of our sorrow;

he was like a father of whom we were being bereaved, and we were about to

pass the rest of our lives as orphans. When he had taken the bath his children

were brought to him--(he had two young sons and an elder one); and the

women of his family also came, and he talked to them and gave them a few

directions in the presence of Crito; then he dismissed them and returned to us.


Now the hour of sunset was near, for a good deal of time had passed while he

was within. When he came out, he sat down with us again after his bath, but

not  much  was  said.  Soon  the  jailer,  who  was  the  servant  of  the  Eleven,

entered and stood by him, saying:--To you, Socrates, whom I know to be the

noblest and gentlest and best of all who ever came to this place, I will not

impute the angry feelings of other men, who rage and swear at me, when, in

obedience to the authorities, I bid them drink the poison--indeed, I am sure

that you will not be angry with me; for others, as you are aware, and not I, are

to blame. And so fare you well, and try to bear lightly what must needs be--

you know my errand. Then bursting into tears he turned away and went out.


Socrates looked at him and said: I return your good wishes, and will do as

you bid. Then turning to us, he said, How charming the man is: since I have

been in prison he has always been coming to see me, and at times he would

talk to me, and was as good to me as could be, and now see how generously

he sorrows on my account. We must do as he says, Crito; and therefore let thecup be brought, if the poison is prepared: if not, let the attendant prepare

some.


Yet, said Crito, the sun is still upon the hill-tops, and I know that many a one

has taken the draught late, and after the announcement has been made to him,

he has eaten and drunk, and enjoyed the society of his beloved; do not hurry--

there is time enough.


Socrates said: Yes, Crito, and they of whom you speak are right in so acting,

for they think that they will be gainers by the delay; but I am right in not

following their example, for I do not think that I should gain anything by

drinking the poison a little later; I should only be ridiculous in my own eyes

for sparing and saving a life which is already forfeit. Please then to do as I

say, and not to refuse me.


Crito made a sign to the servant, who was standing by; and he went out, and

having been absent for some time, returned with the jailer carrying the cup of

poison. Socrates said: You, my good friend, who are experienced in these

matters, shall give me directions how I am to proceed. The man answered:

You have only to walk about until your legs are heavy, and then to lie down,

and the poison will act. At the same time he handed the cup to Socrates, who

in the easiest and gentlest manner, without the least fear or change of colour

or feature, looking at the man with all his eyes, Echecrates, as his manner

was, took the cup and said: What do you say about making a libation out of

this cup to any god? May I, or not? The man answered: We only prepare,

Socrates, just so much as we deem enough. I understand, he said: but I may

and must ask the gods to prosper my journey from this to the other world--

even so--and so be it according to my prayer. Then raising the cup to his lips,

quite readily and cheerfully he drank off the poison. And hitherto most of us

had been able to control our sorrow; but now when we saw him drinking, and

saw too that he had finished the draught, we could no longer forbear, and in

spite of myself my own tears were flowing fast; so that I covered my face and

wept, not for him, but at the thought of my own calamity in having to part

from such a friend. Nor was I the first; for Crito, when he found himself

unable to restrain his tears, had got up, and I followed; and at that moment,

Apollodorus, who had been weeping all the time, broke out in a loud and

passionate cry which made cowards of us all. Socrates alone retained hiscalmness: What is this strange outcry? he said. I sent away the women mainly

in order that they might not misbehave in this way, for I have been told that a

man should die in peace. Be quiet, then, and have patience. When we heard

his words we were ashamed, and refrained our tears; and he walked about

until, as he said, his legs began to fail, and then he lay on his back, according

to the directions, and the man who gave him the poison now and then looked

at his feet and legs; and after a while he pressed his foot hard, and asked him

if  he  could  feel;  and  he  said,  No;  and  then  his  leg,  and  so  upwards  and

upwards, and showed us that he was cold and stiff. And he felt them himself,

and said: When the poison reaches the heart, that will be the end. He was

beginning to grow cold about the groin, when he uncovered his face, for he

had covered himself up, and said--they were his last words--he said: Crito, I

owe a cock to Asclepius; will you remember to pay the debt? The debt shall

be  paid,  said  Crito;  is  there  anything  else?  There  was  no  answer  to  this

question; but in a minute or two a movement was heard, and the attendants

uncovered him; his eyes were set, and Crito closed his eyes and mouth.


Such was the end, Echecrates, of our friend; concerning whom I may truly

say, that of all the men of his time whom I have known, he was the wisest

and justest and best.


THE END                        Phaedrus Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    Beginning of PhaedrusIntroduction to Plato's Phaedrus.


  The  Phaedrus  is  closely  connected  with  the  Symposium,  and  may  be

regarded either as introducing or following it. The two Dialogues together

contain the whole philosophy of Plato on the nature of love, which in the

Republic and in the later writings of Plato is only introduced playfully or as a

figure of speech. But in the Phaedrus and Symposium love and philosophy

join hands, and one is an aspect of the other. The spiritual and emotional part

is elevated into the ideal, to which in the Symposium mankind are described

as looking forward, and which in the Phaedrus, as well as in the Phaedo, they

are seeking to recover from a former state of existence. Whether the subject

of the Dialogue is love or rhetoric, or the union of the two, or the relation of

philosophy  to  love  and  to  art  in  general,  and  to  the  human  soul,  will  be

hereafter considered. And perhaps we may arrive at some conclusion such as

the following--that the dialogue is not strictly confined to a single subject, but

passes from one to another with the natural freedom of conversation.


  Phaedrus  has  been  spending  the  morning  with  Lysias,  the  celebrated

rhetorician, and is going to refresh himself by taking a walk outside the wall,

when he is met by Socrates, who professes that he will not leave him until he

has delivered up the speech with which Lysias has regaled him, and which he

is carrying about in his mind, or more probably in a book hidden under his

cloak, and is intending to study as he walks. The imputation is not denied,

and the two agree to direct their steps out of the public way along the stream

of the Ilissus towards a plane-tree which is seen in the distance. There, lying

down amidst pleasant sounds and scents, they will read the speech of Lysias.

The country is a novelty to Socrates, who never goes out of the town; and

hence he is full of admiration for the beauties of nature, which he seems to be

drinking in for the first time.


  As  they  are  on  their  way,  Phaedrus  asks  the  opinion  of  Socrates

respecting  the  local  tradition  of  Boreas  and  Oreithyia.  Socrates,  after  a

satirical allusion to the 'rationalizers' of his day, replies that he has no time for

these 'nice' interpretations of mythology, and he pities anyone who has. When

you once begin there is no end of them, and they spring from an uncriticalphilosophy after all. 'The proper study of mankind is man;' and he is a far

more complex and wonderful being than the serpent Typho. Socrates as yet

does not know himself; and why should he care to know about unearthly

monsters? Engaged in such conversation, they arrive at the plane-tree; when

they have found a convenient resting-place, Phaedrus pulls out the speech

and reads:--


  The speech consists of a foolish paradox which is to the effect that the

non-lover ought to be accepted rather than the lover--because he is more

rational, more agreeable, more enduring, less suspicious, less hurtful, less

boastful, less engrossing, and because there are more of them, and for a great

many  other  reasons  which  are  equally  unmeaning.  Phaedrus  is  captivated

with the beauty of the periods, and wants to make Socrates say that nothing

was or ever could be written better. Socrates does not think much of the

matter, but then he has only attended to the form, and in that he has detected

several repetitions and other marks of haste. He cannot agree with Phaedrus

in the extreme value which he sets upon this  performance, because he is

afraid of doing injustice to Anacreon and Sappho and other great writers, and

is almost inclined to think that he himself, or rather some power residing

within  him,  could  make  a  speech  better  than  that  of  Lysias  on  the  same

theme, and also different from his, if he may be allowed the use of a few

commonplaces which all speakers must equally employ.


  Phaedrus  is  delighted  at  the  prospect  of  having  another  speech,  and

promises that he will set up a golden statue of Socrates at Delphi, if he keeps

his word. Some raillery ensues, and at length Socrates, conquered by the

threat that he shall never again hear a speech of Lysias unless he fulfils his

promise, veils his face and begins.


  First, invoking the Muses and assuming ironically the person of the non-

lover (who is a lover all the same), he will enquire into the nature and power

of love. For this is a necessary preliminary to the other question-- How is the

non-lover  to  be  distinguished  from  the  lover?  In  all  of  us  there  are  two

principles--a better and a worse--reason and desire, which are generally at

war with one another; and the victory of the rational is called temperance, and

the victory of the irrational intemperance or excess. The latter takes many

forms and has many bad names--gluttony, drunkenness, and the like. But ofall the irrational desires or excesses the greatest is that which is led away by

desires of a kindred nature to the enjoyment of personal beauty. And this is

the master power of love.


  Here  Socrates  fancies  that  he  detects  in  himself  an  unusual  flow  of

eloquence--this newly-found gift he can only attribute to the inspiration of the

place, which appears to be dedicated to the nymphs. Starting again from the

philosophical  basis  which  has  been  laid  down,  he  proceeds  to  show  how

many  advantages  the  non-lover  has  over  the  lover.  The  one  encourages

softness and effeminacy and exclusiveness; he cannot endure any superiority

in his beloved; he will train him in luxury, he will keep him out of society, he

will deprive him of parents, friends, money, knowledge, and of every other

good, that he may have him all to himself. Then again his ways are not ways

of pleasantness; he is mighty disagreeable; 'crabbed age and youth cannot live

together.' At every hour of the night and day he is intruding upon him; there

is the same old withered face and the remainder to match--and he is always

repeating, in season or out of season, the praises or dispraises of his beloved,

which are bad enough when he is sober, and published all over the world

when he is drunk. At length his love ceases; he is converted into an enemy,

and the spectacle may be seen of the lover running away from the beloved,

who pursues him with vain reproaches, and demands his reward which the

other  refuses  to  pay.  Too  late  the  beloved  learns,  after  all  his  pains  and

disagreeables,  that  'As  wolves  love  lambs  so  lovers  love  their  loves.'

(Compare Char.) Here is the end; the 'other' or 'non-lover' part of the speech

had  better  be  understood,  for  if  in  the  censure  of  the  lover  Socrates  has

broken out in verse, what will he not do in his praise of the non-lover? He has

said his say and is preparing to go away.


  Phaedrus  begs  him  to  remain,  at  any  rate  until  the  heat  of  noon  has

passed;  he  would  like  to  have  a  little  more  conversation  before  they  go.

Socrates, who has risen, recognizes the oracular sign which forbids him to

depart until he has done penance. His conscious has been awakened, and like

Stesichorus when he had reviled the lovely Helen he will sing a palinode for

having blasphemed the majesty of love. His palinode takes the form of a

myth.


  Socrates begins his tale with a glorification of madness, which he dividesinto four kinds: first, there is the art of divination or prophecy--this, in a vein

similar to that pervading the Cratylus and Io, he connects with madness by an

etymological explanation (mantike, manike--compare oionoistike, oionistike,

''tis all one reckoning, save the phrase is a little variations'); secondly, there is

the art of purification by mysteries; thirdly, poetry or the inspiration of the

Muses (compare Ion), without which no man can enter their temple. All this

shows that madness is one of heaven's blessings, and may sometimes be a

great deal better than sense. There is also a fourth kind of madness--that of

love--which  cannot  be  explained  without  enquiring  into  the  nature  of  the

soul.


  All soul is immortal, for she is the source of all motion both in herself and

in others. Her form may be described in a figure as a composite nature made

up of a charioteer and a pair of winged steeds. The steeds of the gods are

immortal, but ours are one mortal and the other immortal. The immortal soul

soars upwards into the heavens, but the mortal drops her plumes and settles

upon the earth.


  Now the use of the wing is to rise and carry the downward element into

the upper world--there to behold beauty, wisdom, goodness, and the other

things of God by which the soul is nourished. On a certain day Zeus the lord

of heaven goes forth in a winged chariot; and an array of gods and demi-gods

and of human souls in their train, follows him. There are glorious and blessed

sights in the interior of heaven, and he who will may freely behold them. The

great vision of all is seen at the feast of the gods, when they ascend the

heights of the empyrean--all but Hestia, who is left at home to keep house.

The chariots of the gods glide readily upwards and stand upon the outside;

the revolution of the spheres carries them round, and they have a vision of the

world beyond. But the others labour in vain; for the mortal steed, if he has not

been properly trained, keeps them down and sinks them towards the earth. Of

the world which is beyond the heavens, who can tell? There is an essence

formless, colourless, intangible, perceived by the mind only, dwelling in the

region of true knowledge. The divine mind in her revolution enjoys this fair

prospect, and beholds justice, temperance, and knowledge in their everlasting

essence. When fulfilled with the sight of them she returns home, and the

charioteer puts up the horses in their stable, and gives them ambrosia to eat

and nectar to drink. This is the life of the gods; the human soul tries to reachthe  same  heights,  but  hardly  succeeds;  and  sometimes  the  head  of  the

charioteer rises above, and sometimes sinks below, the fair vision, and he is

at last obliged, after much contention, to turn away and leave the plain of

truth. But if the soul has followed in the train of her god and once beheld

truth she is preserved from harm, and is carried round in the next revolution

of the spheres; and if always following, and always seeing the truth, is then

for ever unharmed. If, however, she drops her wings and falls to the earth,

then she takes the form of man, and the soul which has seen most of the truth

passes into a philosopher or lover; that which has seen truth in the second

degree, into a king or warrior; the third, into a householder or money-maker;

the fourth, into a gymnast; the fifth, into a prophet or mystic; the sixth, into a

poet or imitator; the seventh, into a husbandman or craftsman; the eighth, into

a  sophist  or  demagogue;  the  ninth,  into  a  tyrant.  All  these  are  states  of

probation, wherein he who lives righteously is improved, and he who lives

unrighteously deteriorates. After death comes the judgment; the bad depart to

houses of correction under the earth, the good to places of joy in heaven.

When a thousand years have elapsed the souls meet together and choose the

lives which they will lead for another period of existence. The soul which

three times in succession has chosen the life of a philosopher or of a lover

who is not without philosophy receives her wings at the close of the third

millennium; the remainder have to complete a cycle of ten thousand years

before their wings are restored to them. Each time there is full liberty of

choice. The soul of a man may descend into a beast, and return again into the

form of man. But the form of man will only be taken by the soul which has

once seen truth and acquired some conception of the universal:--this is the

recollection of the knowledge which she attained when in the company of the

Gods. And men in general recall only with difficulty the things of another

world, but the mind of the philosopher has a better remembrance of them. For

when he beholds the visible beauty of earth his enraptured soul passes in

thought to those glorious sights of justice and wisdom and temperance and

truth  which  she  once  gazed  upon  in  heaven.  Then  she  celebrated  holy

mysteries and beheld blessed apparitions shining in pure light, herself pure,

and not as yet entombed in the body. And still, like a bird eager to quit its

cage, she flutters and looks upwards, and is therefore deemed mad. Such a

recollection of past days she receives through sight, the keenest of our senses,

because beauty, alone of the ideas, has any representation on earth: wisdom is

invisible to mortal eyes. But the corrupted nature, blindly excited by thisvision of beauty, rushes on to enjoy, and would fain wallow like a brute beast

in sensual pleasures. Whereas the true mystic, who has seen the many sights

of bliss, when he beholds a god-like form or face is amazed with delight, and

if he were not afraid of being thought mad he would fall down and worship.

Then the stiffened wing begins to relax and grow again; desire which has

been  imprisoned  pours  over  the  soul  of  the  lover;  the  germ  of  the  wing

unfolds,  and  stings,  and  pangs  of  birth,  like  the  cutting  of  teeth,  are

everywhere felt. (Compare Symp.) Father and mother, and goods and laws

and proprieties are nothing to him; his beloved is his physician, who can

alone cure his pain. An apocryphal sacred writer says that the power which

thus works in him is by mortals called love, but the immortals call him dove,

or the winged one, in order to represent the force of his wings--such at any

rate is his nature. Now the characters of lovers depend upon the god whom

they followed in the other world; and they choose their loves in this world

accordingly. The followers of Ares are fierce and violent; those of Zeus seek

out some philosophical and imperial nature; the attendants of Here find a

royal love; and in like manner the followers of every god seek a love who is

like their god; and to him they communicate the nature which they have

received  from  their  god.  The  manner  in  which  they  take  their  love  is  as

follows:--


  I told you about the charioteer and his two steeds, the one a noble animal

who is guided by word and admonition only, the other an ill-looking villain

who will hardly yield to blow or spur. Together all three, who are a figure of

the soul, approach the vision of love. And now a fierce conflict begins. The

ill-conditioned steed rushes on to enjoy, but the charioteer, who beholds the

beloved with awe, falls back in adoration, and forces both the steeds on their

haunches; again the evil steed rushes forwards and pulls shamelessly. The

conflict grows more and more severe; and at last the charioteer, throwing

himself backwards, forces the bit out of the clenched teeth of the brute, and

pulling harder than ever at the reins, covers his tongue and jaws with blood,

and forces him to rest his legs and haunches with pain upon the ground.

When this has happened several times, the villain is tamed and humbled, and

from that time forward the soul of the lover follows the beloved in modesty

and holy fear. And now their bliss is consummated; the same image of love

dwells in the breast of either, and if they have self-control, they pass their

lives  in  the  greatest  happiness  which  is  attainable  by  man--they  continuemasters of themselves, and conquer in one of the three heavenly victories.

But if they choose the lower life of ambition they may still have a happy

destiny, though inferior, because they have not the approval of the whole

soul. At last they leave the body and proceed on their pilgrim's progress, and

those who have once begun can never go back. When the time comes they

receive their wings and fly away, and the lovers have the same wings.


  Socrates concludes:--


  These are the blessings of love, and thus have I made my recantation in

finer language than before: I did so in order to please Phaedrus. If I said what

was wrong at first, please to attribute my error to Lysias, who ought to study

philosophy  instead  of  rhetoric,  and  then  he  will  not  mislead  his  disciple

Phaedrus.


  Phaedrus is afraid that he will lose conceit of Lysias, and that Lysias will

be  out  of  conceit  with  himself,  and  leave  off  making  speeches,  for  the

politicians have been deriding him. Socrates is of opinion that there is small

danger of this; the politicians are themselves the great rhetoricians of the age,

who desire to attain immortality by the authorship of laws. And therefore

there is nothing with which they can reproach Lysias in being a writer; but

there may be disgrace in being a bad one.


  And what is good or bad writing or speaking? While the sun is hot in the

sky above us, let us ask that question: since by rational conversation man

lives, and not by the indulgence of bodily pleasures. And the grasshoppers

who are chirruping around may carry our words to the Muses, who are their

patronesses; for the grasshoppers were human beings themselves in a world

before the Muses, and when the Muses came they died of hunger for the love

of song. And they carry to them in heaven the report of those who honour

them on earth.


  The  first  rule  of  good  speaking  is  to  know  and  speak  the  truth;  as  a

Spartan  proverb  says,  'true  art  is  truth';  whereas  rhetoric  is  an  art  of

enchantment, which makes things appear good and evil, like and unlike, as

the speaker pleases. Its use is not confined, as people commonly suppose, to

arguments in the law courts and speeches in the assembly; it is rather a part ofthe art of disputation, under which are included both the rules of Gorgias and

the eristic of Zeno. But it is not wholly devoid of truth. Superior knowledge

enables us to deceive another by the help of resemblances, and to escape

from such a deception when employed against ourselves. We see therefore

that even in rhetoric an element of truth is required. For if we do not know

the truth, we can neither make the gradual departures from truth by which

men are most easily deceived, nor guard ourselves against deception.


  Socrates then proposes that they shall use the two speeches as illustrations

of  the  art  of  rhetoric;  first  distinguishing  between  the  debatable  and

undisputed  class  of  subjects.  In  the  debatable  class  there  ought  to  be  a

definition of all disputed matters. But there was no such definition in the

speech of Lysias; nor is there any order or connection in his words any more

than in a nursery rhyme. With this he compares the regular divisions of the

other speech, which was his own (and yet not his own, for the local deities

must have inspired him). Although only a playful composition, it will be

found to embody two principles: first, that of synthesis or the comprehension

of parts in a whole; secondly, analysis, or the resolution of the whole into

parts. These are the processes of division and generalization which are so

dear to the dialectician, that king of men. They are effected by dialectic, and

not  by  rhetoric,  of  which  the  remains  are  but  scanty  after  order  and

arrangement have been subtracted. There is nothing left but a heap of 'ologies'

and  other  technical  terms  invented  by  Polus,  Theodorus,  Evenus,  Tisias,

Gorgias, and others, who have rules for everything, and who teach how to be

short or long at pleasure. Prodicus showed his good sense when he said that

there was a better thing than either to be short or long, which was to be of

convenient length.


  Still,  notwithstanding  the  absurdities  of  Polus  and  others,  rhetoric  has

great power in public assemblies. This power, however, is not given by any

technical rules, but is the gift of genius. The real art is always being confused

by rhetoricians with the preliminaries of the art. The perfection of oratory is

like the perfection of anything else; natural power must be aided by art. But

the art is not that which is taught in the schools of rhetoric; it is nearer akin to

philosophy.  Pericles,  for  instance,  who  was  the  most  accomplished  of  all

speakers, derived his eloquence not from rhetoric but from the philosophy of

nature which he learnt of Anaxagoras. True rhetoric is like medicine, and therhetorician  has  to  consider  the  natures  of  men's  souls  as  the  physician

considers the natures of their bodies. Such and such persons are to be affected

in this way, such and such others in that; and he must know the times and the

seasons for saying this or that. This is not an easy task, and this, if there be

such an art, is the art of rhetoric.


  I know that there are some professors of the art who maintain probability

to be stronger than truth. But we maintain that probability is engendered by

likeness of the truth which can only be attained by the knowledge of it, and

that the aim of the good man should not be to please or persuade his fellow-

servants, but to please his good masters who are the gods. Rhetoric has a fair

beginning in this.


  Enough of the art of speaking; let us now proceed to consider the true use

of writing. There is an old Egyptian tale of Theuth, the inventor of writing,

showing his invention to the god Thamus, who told him that he would only

spoil men's memories and take away their understandings. From this tale, of

which young Athens will probably make fun, may be gathered the lesson that

writing is inferior to speech. For it is like a picture, which can give no answer

to a question, and has only a deceitful likeness of a living creature. It has no

power of adaptation, but uses the same words for all. It is not a legitimate son

of knowledge, but a bastard, and when an attack is made upon this bastard

neither parent nor anyone else is there to defend it. The husbandman will not

seriously incline to sow his seed in such a hot-bed or garden of Adonis; he

will rather sow in the natural soil of the human soul which has depth of earth;

and he will anticipate the inner growth of the mind, by writing only, if at all,

as a remedy against old age. The natural process will be far nobler, and will

bring forth fruit in the minds of others as well as in his own.


  The conclusion of the whole matter is just this,--that until a man knows

the truth, and the manner of adapting the truth to the natures of other men, he

cannot be a good orator; also, that the living is better than the written word,

and that the principles of justice and truth when delivered by word of mouth

are  the  legitimate  offspring  of  a  man's  own  bosom,  and  their  lawful

descendants take up their abode in others. Such an orator as he is who is

possessed of them, you and I would fain become. And to all composers in the

world,  poets,  orators,  legislators,  we  hereby  announce  that  if  theircompositions are based upon these principles, then they are not only poets,

orators, legislators, but philosophers. All others are mere flatterers and putters

together of words. This is the message which Phaedrus undertakes to carry to

Lysias  from  the  local  deities,  and  Socrates  himself  will  carry  a  similar

message  to  his  favourite  Isocrates,  whose  future  distinction  as  a  great

rhetorician he prophesies. The heat of the day has passed, and after offering

up a prayer to Pan and the nymphs, Socrates and Phaedrus depart.


  There are two principal controversies which have been raised about the

Phaedrus;  the  first  relates  to  the  subject,  the  second  to  the  date  of  the

Dialogue.


  There seems to be a notion that the work of a great artist like Plato cannot

fail in unity, and that the unity of a dialogue requires a single subject. But the

conception  of  unity  really  applies  in  very  different  degrees  and  ways  to

different kinds of art; to a statue, for example, far more than to any kind of

literary composition, and to some species of literature far more than to others.

Nor  does  the  dialogue  appear  to  be  a  style  of  composition  in  which  the

requirement of unity is most stringent; nor should the idea of unity derived

from one sort of art be hastily transferred to another. The double titles of

several of the Platonic Dialogues are a further proof that the severer rule was

not  observed  by  Plato.  The  Republic  is  divided  between  the  search  after

justice and the construction of the ideal state; the Parmenides between the

criticism of the Platonic ideas and of the Eleatic one or being; the Gorgias

between the art of speaking and the nature of the good; the Sophist between

the detection of the Sophist and the correlation of ideas. The Theaetetus, the

Politicus,  and  the  Philebus  have  also  digressions  which  are  but  remotely

connected with the main subject.


  Thus the comparison of Plato's other writings, as well as the reason of the

thing, lead us to the conclusion that we must not expect to find one idea

pervading a whole work, but one, two, or more, as the invention of the writer

may suggest, or his fancy wander. If each dialogue were confined to the

development of a single idea, this would appear on the face of the dialogue,

nor could any controversy be raised as to whether the Phaedrus treated of

love or rhetoric. But the truth is that Plato subjects himself to no rule of this

sort.  Like  every  great  artist  he  gives  unity  of  form  to  the  different  andapparently distracting topics which he brings together. He works freely and is

not to be supposed to have arranged every part of the dialogue before he

begins to write. He fastens or weaves together the frame of his discourse

loosely and imperfectly, and which is the warp and which is the woof cannot

always be determined.


  The subjects of the Phaedrus (exclusive of the short introductory passage

about mythology which is suggested by the local tradition) are first the false

or conventional art of rhetoric; secondly, love or the inspiration of beauty and

knowledge, which is described as madness; thirdly, dialectic or the art of

composition and division; fourthly, the true rhetoric, which is based upon

dialectic,  and  is  neither  the  art  of  persuasion  nor  knowledge  of  the  truth

alone,  but  the  art  of  persuasion  founded  on  knowledge  of  truth  and

knowledge of character; fifthly, the superiority of the spoken over the written

word.  The  continuous  thread  which  appears  and  reappears  throughout  is

rhetoric; this is the ground into which the rest of the Dialogue is worked, in

parts embroidered with fine words which are not in Socrates' manner, as he

says, 'in order to please Phaedrus.' The speech of Lysias which has thrown

Phaedrus into an ecstacy is adduced as an example of the false rhetoric; the

first  speech  of  Socrates,  though  an  improvement,  partakes  of  the  same

character; his second speech, which is full of that higher element said to have

been learned of Anaxagoras by Pericles, and which in the midst of poetry

does not forget order, is an illustration of the higher or true rhetoric. This

higher rhetoric is based upon dialectic, and dialectic is a sort of inspiration

akin  to  love  (compare  Symp.);  in  these  two  aspects  of  philosophy  the

technicalities of rhetoric are absorbed. And so the example becomes also the

deeper theme of discourse. The true knowledge of things in heaven and earth

is  based  upon  enthusiasm  or  love  of  the  ideas  going  before  us  and  ever

present to us in this world and in another; and the true order of speech or

writing  proceeds  accordingly.  Love,  again,  has  three  degrees:  first,  of

interested love corresponding to the conventionalities of rhetoric; secondly,

of  disinterested  or  mad  love,  fixed  on  objects  of  sense,  and  answering,

perhaps, to poetry; thirdly, of disinterested love directed towards the unseen,

answering to dialectic or the science of the ideas. Lastly, the art of rhetoric in

the lower sense is found to rest on a knowledge of the natures and characters

of men, which Socrates at the commencement of the Dialogue has described

as his own peculiar study.  Thus amid discord a harmony begins to appear; there are many links of

connection which are not visible at first sight. At the same time the Phaedrus,

although one of the most beautiful of the Platonic Dialogues, is also more

irregular than any other. For insight into the world, for sustained irony, for

depth  of  thought,  there  is  no  Dialogue  superior,  or  perhaps  equal  to  it.

Nevertheless the form of the work has tended to obscure some of Plato's

higher aims.


  The first speech is composed 'in that balanced style in which the wise

love  to  talk'  (Symp.).  The  characteristics  of  rhetoric  are  insipidity,

mannerism, and monotonous parallelism of clauses. There is more rhythm

than reason; the creative power of imagination is wanting.


  ''Tis Greece, but living Greece no more.'


  Plato  has  seized  by  anticipation  the  spirit  which  hung  over  Greek

literature for a thousand years afterwards. Yet doubtless there were some

who, like Phaedrus, felt a delight in the harmonious cadence and the pedantic

reasoning of the rhetoricians newly imported from Sicily, which had ceased

to be awakened in them by really great works, such as the odes of Anacreon

or Sappho or the orations of Pericles. That the first speech was really written

by Lysias is improbable. Like the poem of Solon, or the story of Thamus and

Theuth, or the funeral oration of Aspasia (if genuine), or the pretence of

Socrates  in  the  Cratylus  that  his  knowledge  of  philology  is  derived  from

Euthyphro, the invention is really due to the imagination of Plato, and may be

compared  to  the  parodies  of  the  Sophists  in  the  Protagoras.  Numerous

fictions  of  this  sort  occur  in  the  Dialogues,  and  the  gravity  of  Plato  has

sometimes  imposed  upon  his  commentators.  The  introduction  of  a

considerable writing of another would seem not to be in keeping with a great

work of art, and has no parallel elsewhere.


  In the second speech Socrates is exhibited as beating the rhetoricians at

their own weapons; he 'an unpractised man and they masters of the art.' True

to his character, he must, however, profess that the speech which he makes is

not his own, for he knows nothing of himself. (Compare Symp.) Regarded as

a rhetorical exercise, the superiority of his speech seems to consist chiefly in

a better arrangement of the topics; he begins with a definition of love, and hegives weight to his words by going back to general maxims; a lesser merit is

the greater liveliness of Socrates, which hurries him into verse and relieves

the monotony of the style.


  But Plato had doubtless a higher purpose than to exhibit Socrates as the

rival or superior of the Athenian rhetoricians. Even in the speech of Lysias

there is a germ of truth, and this is further developed in the parallel oration of

Socrates. First, passionate love is overthrown by the sophistical or interested,

and then both yield to that higher view of love which is afterwards revealed

to us. The extreme of commonplace is contrasted with the most ideal and

imaginative of speculations. Socrates, half in jest and to satisfy his own wild

humour, takes the disguise of Lysias, but he is also in profound earnest and in

a deeper vein of irony than usual. Having improvised his own speech, which

is based upon the model of the preceding, he condemns them both. Yet the

condemnation  is  not  to  be  taken  seriously,  for  he  is  evidently  trying  to

express an aspect of the truth. To understand him, we must make abstraction

of morality and of the Greek manner of regarding the relation of the sexes. In

this, as in his other discussions about love, what Plato says of the loves of

men must be transferred to the loves of women before we can attach any

serious meaning to his words. Had he lived in our times he would have made

the  transposition  himself.  But  seeing  in  his  own  age  the  impossibility  of

woman being the intellectual helpmate or friend of man (except in the rare

instances of a Diotima or an Aspasia), seeing that, even as to personal beauty,

her place was taken by young mankind instead of womankind, he tries to

work out the problem of love without regard to the distinctions of nature.

And full of the evils which he recognized as flowing from the spurious form

of love, he proceeds with a deep meaning, though partly in joke, to show that

the 'non-lover's' love is better than the 'lover's.'


  We may raise the same question in another form: Is marriage preferable

with or without love? 'Among ourselves,' as we may say, a little parodying

the words of Pausanias in the Symposium, 'there would be one answer to this

question: the practice and feeling of some foreign countries appears to be

more  doubtful.'  Suppose  a  modern  Socrates,  in  defiance  of  the  received

notions of society and the sentimental literature of the day, alone against all

the  writers  and  readers  of  novels,  to  suggest  this  enquiry,  would  not  the

younger 'part of the world be ready to take off its coat and run at him mightand main?' (Republic.) Yet, if like Peisthetaerus in Aristophanes, he could

persuade the 'birds' to hear him, retiring a little behind a rampart, not of pots

and dishes, but of unreadable books, he might have something to say for

himself.  Might  he  not  argue,  'that  a  rational  being  should  not  follow  the

dictates of passion in the most important act of his or her life'? Who would

willingly enter into a contract at first sight, almost without thought, against

the advice and opinion of his friends, at a time when he acknowledges that he

is not in his right mind? And yet they are praised by the authors of romances,

who reject the warnings of their friends or parents, rather than those who

listen to them in such matters. Two inexperienced persons, ignorant of the

world and of one another, how can they be said to choose?--they draw lots,

whence also the saying, 'marriage is a lottery.' Then he would describe their

way of life after marriage; how they monopolize one another's affections to

the exclusion of friends and relations: how they pass their days in unmeaning

fondness or trivial conversation; how the inferior of the two drags the other

down to his or her level; how the cares of a family 'breed meanness in their

souls.' In the fulfilment of military or public duties, they are not helpers but

hinderers of one another: they cannot undertake any noble enterprise, such as

makes the names of men and women famous, from domestic considerations.

Too late their eyes are opened; they were taken unawares and desire to part

company. Better, he would say, a 'little love at the beginning,' for heaven

might have increased it; but now their foolish fondness has changed into

mutual dislike. In the days of their honeymoon they never understood that

they must provide against offences, that they must have interests, that they

must learn the art of living as well as loving. Our misogamist will not appeal

to Anacreon or Sappho for a confirmation of his view, but to the universal

experience  of  mankind.  How  much  nobler,  in  conclusion,  he  will  say,  is

friendship,  which  does  not  receive  unmeaning  praises  from  novelists  and

poets, is not exacting or exclusive, is not impaired by familiarity, is much less

expensive,  is  not  so  likely  to  take  offence,  seldom  changes,  and  may  be

dissolved from time to time without the assistance of the courts. Besides, he

will remark that there is a much greater choice of friends than of wives--you

may have more of them and they will be far more improving to your mind.

They will not keep you dawdling at home, or dancing attendance upon them;

or withdraw you from the great world and stirring scenes of life and action

which would make a man of you.  In such a manner, turning the seamy side outwards, a modern Socrates

might describe the evils of married and domestic life. They are evils which

mankind  in  general  have  agreed  to  conceal,  partly  because  they  are

compensated by greater goods. Socrates or Archilochus would soon have to

sing a palinode for the injustice done to lovely Helen, or some misfortune

worse  than  blindness  might  be  fall  them.  Then  they  would  take  up  their

parable again and say:--that there were two loves, a higher and a lower, holy

and unholy, a love of the mind and a love of the body.


  'Let me not to the marriage of true minds Admit impediments. Love is not

love Which alters when it alteration finds.


  ...


  Love's not time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks Within his bending

sickle's compass come; Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks, But

bears it out even to the edge of doom.'


  But this true love of the mind cannot exist between two souls, until they

are purified from the grossness of earthly passion: they must pass through a

time  of  trial  and  conflict  first;  in  the  language  of  religion  they  must  be

converted or born again. Then they would see the world transformed into a

scene of heavenly beauty; a divine idea would accompany them in all their

thoughts and actions. Something too of the recollections of childhood might

float about them still; they might regain that old simplicity which had been

theirs in other days at their first entrance on life. And although their love of

one another was ever present to them, they would acknowledge also a higher

love of duty and of God, which united them. And their happiness would

depend upon their preserving in them this principle-- not losing the ideals of

justice and holiness and truth, but renewing them at the fountain of light.

When they have attained to this exalted state, let them marry (something too

may be conceded to the animal nature of man): or live together in holy and

innocent friendship. The poet might describe in eloquent words the nature of

such a union; how after many struggles the true love was found: how the two

passed  their  lives  together  in  the  service  of  God  and  man;  how  their

characters were reflected upon one another, and seemed to grow more like

year  by  year;  how  they  read  in  one  another's  eyes  the  thoughts,  wishes,actions of the other; how they saw each other in God; how in a figure they

grew wings like doves, and were 'ready to fly away together and be at rest.'

And lastly, he might tell how, after a time at no long intervals, first one and

then  the  other  fell  asleep,  and  'appeared  to  the  unwise'  to  die,  but  were

reunited in another state of being, in which they saw justice and holiness and

truth, not according to the imperfect copies of them which are found in this

world, but justice absolute in existence absolute, and so of the rest. And they

would  hold  converse  not  only  with  each  other,  but  with  blessed  souls

everywhere;  and  would  be  employed  in  the  service  of  God,  every  soul

fulfilling his own nature and character, and would see into the wonders of

earth and heaven, and trace the works of creation to their author.


  So, partly in jest but also 'with a certain degree of seriousness,' we may

appropriate to ourselves the words of Plato. The use of such a parody, though

very  imperfect,  is  to  transfer  his  thoughts  to  our  sphere  of  religion  and

feeling, to bring him nearer to us and us to him. Like the Scriptures, Plato

admits of endless applications, if we allow for the difference of times and

manners; and we lose the better half of him when we regard his Dialogues

merely as literary compositions. Any ancient work which is worth reading

has a practical and speculative as well as a literary interest. And in Plato,

more than in any other Greek writer, the local and transitory is inextricably

blended with what is spiritual and eternal. Socrates is necessarily ironical; for

he has to withdraw from the received opinions and beliefs of mankind. We

cannot separate the transitory from the permanent; nor can we translate the

language of irony into that of plain reflection and common sense. But we can

imagine  the  mind  of  Socrates  in  another  age  and  country;  and  we  can

interpret him by analogy with reference to the errors and prejudices which

prevail among ourselves. To return to the Phaedrus:--


  Both  speeches  are  strongly  condemned  by  Socrates  as  sinful  and

blasphemous towards the god Love, and as worthy only of some haunt of

sailors to which good manners were unknown. The meaning of this and other

wild language to the same effect, which is introduced by way of contrast to

the formality of the two speeches (Socrates has a sense of relief when he has

escaped from the trammels of rhetoric), seems to be that the two speeches

proceed upon the supposition that love is and ought to be interested, and that

no such thing as a real or disinterested passion, which would be at the sametime lasting, could be conceived. 'But did I call this "love"? O God, forgive

my blasphemy. This is not love. Rather it is the love of the world. But there is

another kingdom of love, a kingdom not of this world, divine, eternal. And

this other love I will now show you in a mystery.'


  Then follows the famous myth, which is a sort of parable, and like other

parables  ought  not  to  receive  too  minute  an  interpretation.  In  all  such

allegories there is a great deal which is merely ornamental, and the interpreter

has  to  separate  the  important  from  the  unimportant.  Socrates  himself  has

given the right clue when, in using his own discourse afterwards as the text

for  his  examination  of  rhetoric,  he  characterizes  it  as  a  'partly  true  and

tolerably  credible  mythus,'  in  which  amid  poetical  figures,  order  and

arrangement were not forgotten.


  The soul is described in magnificent language as the self-moved and the

source of motion in all other things. This is the philosophical theme or proem

of the whole. But ideas must be given through something, and under the

pretext that to realize the true nature of the soul would be not only tedious but

impossible, we at once pass on to describe the souls of gods as well as men

under the figure of two winged steeds and a charioteer. No connection is

traced between the soul as the great motive power and the triple soul which is

thus imaged. There is no difficulty in seeing that the charioteer represents the

reason, or that the black horse is the symbol of the sensual or concupiscent

element of human nature. The white horse also represents rational impulse,

but the description, 'a lover of honour and modesty and temperance, and a

follower  of  true  glory,'  though  similar,  does  not  at  once  recall  the  'spirit'

(thumos) of the Republic. The two steeds really correspond in a figure more

nearly to the appetitive and moral or semi-rational soul of Aristotle. And

thus,  for  the  first  time  perhaps  in  the  history  of  philosophy,  we  have

represented  to  us  the  threefold  division  of  psychology.  The  image  of  the

charioteer  and  the  steeds  has  been  compared  with  a  similar  image  which

occurs in the verses of Parmenides; but it is important to remark that the

horses of Parmenides have no allegorical meaning, and that the poet is only

describing his own approach in a chariot to the regions of light and the house

of the goddess of truth.


  The triple soul has had a previous existence, in which following in thetrain of some god, from whom she derived her character, she beheld partially

and imperfectly the vision of absolute truth. All her after existence, passed in

many forms of men and animals, is spent in regaining this. The stages of the

conflict  are  many  and  various;  and  she  is  sorely  let  and  hindered  by  the

animal desires of the inferior or concupiscent steed. Again and again she

beholds the flashing beauty of the beloved. But before that vision can be

finally enjoyed the animal desires must be subjected.


  The moral or spiritual element in man is represented by the immortal

steed which, like thumos in the Republic, always sides with the reason. Both

are dragged out of their course by the furious impulses of desire. In the end

something is conceded to the desires, after they have been finally humbled

and  overpowered.  And  yet  the  way  of  philosophy,  or  perfect  love  of  the

unseen, is total abstinence from bodily delights. 'But all men cannot receive

this saying': in the lower life of ambition they may be taken off their guard

and stoop to folly unawares, and then, although they do not attain to the

highest bliss, yet if they have once conquered they may be happy enough.


  The language of the Meno and the Phaedo as well as of the Phaedrus

seems  to  show  that  at  one  time  of  his  life  Plato  was  quite  serious  in

maintaining  a  former  state  of  existence.  His  mission  was  to  realize  the

abstract; in that, all good and truth, all the hopes of this and another life

seemed to centre. To him abstractions, as we call them, were another kind of

knowledge--an inner and unseen world, which seemed to exist far more truly

than the fleeting objects of sense which were without him. When we are once

able to imagine the intense power which abstract ideas exercised over the

mind of Plato, we see that there was no more difficulty to him in realizing the

eternal existence of them and of the human minds which were associated

with them, in the past and future than in the present. The difficulty was not

how they could exist, but how they could fail to exist. In the attempt to regain

this 'saving' knowledge of the ideas, the sense was found to be as great an

enemy as the desires; and hence two things which to us seem quite distinct

are inextricably blended in the representation of Plato.


  Thus far we may believe that Plato was serious in his conception of the

soul as a motive power, in his reminiscence of a former state of being, in his

elevation of the reason over sense and passion, and perhaps in his doctrine oftransmigration. Was he equally serious in the rest? For example, are we to

attribute  his  tripartite  division  of  the  soul  to  the  gods?  Or  is  this  merely

assigned to them by way of parallelism with men? The latter is the more

probable; for the horses of the gods are both white, i.e. their every impulse is

in harmony with reason; their dualism, on the other hand, only carries out the

figure of the chariot. Is he serious, again, in regarding love as 'a madness'?

That seems to arise out of the antithesis to the former conception of love. At

the same time he appears to intimate here, as in the Ion, Apology, Meno, and

elsewhere, that there is a faculty in man, whether to be termed in modern

language genius, or inspiration, or imagination, or idealism, or communion

with God, which cannot be reduced to rule and measure. Perhaps, too, he is

ironically repeating the common language of mankind about philosophy, and

is turning their jest into a sort of earnest. (Compare Phaedo, Symp.) Or is he

serious in holding that each soul bears the character of a god? He may have

had no other account to give of the differences of human characters to which

he  afterwards  refers.  Or,  again,  in  his  absurd  derivation  of  mantike  and

oionistike and imeros (compare Cratylus)? It is characteristic of the irony of

Socrates to mix up sense and nonsense in such a way that no exact line can be

drawn between them. And allegory helps to increase this sort of confusion.


  As  is  often  the  case  in  the  parables  and  prophecies  of  Scripture,  the

meaning is allowed to break through the figure, and the details are not always

consistent. When the charioteers and their steeds stand upon the dome of

heaven they behold the intangible invisible essences which are not objects of

sight. This is because the force of language can no further go. Nor can we

dwell much on the circumstance, that at the completion of ten thousand years

all are to return to the place from whence they came; because he represents

their return as dependent on their own good conduct in the successive stages

of existence. Nor again can we attribute anything to the accidental inference

which  would  also  follow,  that  even  a  tyrant  may  live  righteously  in  the

condition of life to which fate has called him ('he aiblins might, I dinna ken').

But to suppose this would be at variance with Plato himself and with Greek

notions  generally.  He  is  much  more  serious  in  distinguishing  men  from

animals by their recognition of the universal which they have known in a

former state, and in denying that this gift of reason can ever be obliterated or

lost.  In  the  language  of  some  modern  theologians  he  might  be  said  to

maintain the 'final perseverance' of those who have entered on their pilgrim'sprogress. Other intimations of a 'metaphysic' or 'theology' of the future may

also be discerned in him: (1) The moderate predestinarianism which here, as

in the Republic, acknowledges the element of chance in human life, and yet

asserts the freedom and responsibility of man; (2) The recognition of a moral

as well as an intellectual principle in man under the image of an immortal

steed; (3) The notion that the divine nature exists by the contemplation of

ideas of virtue and justice--or, in other words, the assertion of the essentially

moral nature of God; (4) Again, there is the hint that human life is a life of

aspiration only, and that the true ideal is not to be found in art; (5) There

occurs  the  first  trace  of  the  distinction  between  necessary  and  contingent

matter; (6) The conception of the soul itself as the motive power and reason

of the universe.


  The conception of the philosopher, or the philosopher and lover in one, as

a sort of madman, may be compared with the Republic and Theaetetus, in

both of which the philosopher is regarded as a stranger and monster upon the

earth. The whole myth, like the other myths of Plato, describes in a figure

things which are beyond the range of human faculties, or inaccessible to the

knowledge  of  the  age.  That  philosophy  should  be  represented  as  the

inspiration of love is a conception that has already become familiar to us in

the Symposium, and is the expression partly of Plato's enthusiasm for the

idea, and is also an indication of the real power exercised by the passion of

friendship over the mind of the Greek. The master in the art of love knew that

there was a mystery in these feelings and their associations, and especially in

the contrast of the sensible and permanent which is afforded by them; and he

sought to explain this, as he explained universal ideas, by a reference to a

former state of existence. The capriciousness of love is also derived by him

from an attachment to some god in a former world. The singular remark that

the beloved is more affected than the lover at the final consummation of their

love, seems likewise to hint at a psychological truth.


  It is difficult to exhaust the meanings of a work like the Phaedrus, which

indicates so much more than it expresses; and is full of inconsistencies and

ambiguities which were not perceived by Plato himself. For example, when

he is speaking of the soul does he mean the human or the divine soul? and are

they  both  equally  self-moving  and  constructed  on  the  same  threefold

principle? We should certainly be disposed to reply that the self-motive is tobe  attributed  to  God  only;  and  on  the  other  hand  that  the  appetitive  and

passionate elements have no place in His nature. So we should infer from the

reason of the thing, but there is no indication in Plato's own writings that this

was his meaning. Or, again, when he explains the different characters of men

by referring them back to the nature of the God whom they served in a former

state of existence, we are inclined to ask whether he is serious: Is he not

rather using a mythological figure, here as elsewhere, to draw a veil over

things  which  are  beyond  the  limits  of  mortal  knowledge?  Once  more,  in

speaking of beauty is he really thinking of some external form such as might

have been expressed in the works of Phidias or Praxiteles; and not rather of

an  imaginary  beauty,  of  a  sort  which  extinguishes  rather  than  stimulates

vulgar love,--a heavenly beauty like that which flashed from time to time

before the eyes of Dante or Bunyan? Surely the latter. But it would be idle to

reconcile all the details of the passage: it is a picture, not a system, and a

picture which is for the greater part an allegory, and an allegory which allows

the meaning to come through. The image of the charioteer and his steeds is

placed side by side with the absolute forms of justice, temperance, and the

like, which are abstract ideas only, and which are seen with the eye of the

soul in her heavenly journey. The first impression of such a passage, in which

no attempt is made to separate the substance from the form, is far truer than

an elaborate philosophical analysis.


  It is too often forgotten that the whole of the second discourse of Socrates

is only an allegory, or figure of speech. For this reason, it is unnecessary to

enquire whether the love of which Plato speaks is the love of men or of

women. It is really a general idea which includes both, and in which the

sensual  element,  though  not  wholly  eradicated,  is  reduced  to  order  and

measure. We must not attribute a meaning to every fanciful detail. Nor is

there any need to call up revolting associations, which as a matter of good

taste should be banished, and which were far enough away from the mind of

Plato. These and similar passages should be interpreted by the Laws. Nor is

there anything in the Symposium, or in the Charmides, in reality inconsistent

with the sterner rule which Plato lays down in the Laws. At the same time it

is not to be denied that love and philosophy are described by Socrates in

figures  of  speech  which  would  not  be  used  in  Christian  times;  or  that

nameless vices were prevalent at Athens and in other Greek cities; or that

friendships between men were a more sacred tie, and had a more importantsocial  and  educational  influence  than  among  ourselves.  (See  note  on

Symposium.)


  In the Phaedrus, as well as in the Symposium, there are two kinds of love,

a lower and a higher, the one answering to the natural wants of the animal,

the other rising above them and contemplating with religious awe the forms

of justice, temperance, holiness, yet finding them also 'too dazzling bright for

mortal eye,' and shrinking from them in amazement. The opposition between

these two kinds of love may be compared to the opposition between the flesh

and the spirit in the Epistles of St. Paul. It would be unmeaning to suppose

that Plato, in describing the spiritual combat, in which the rational soul is

finally  victor  and  master  of  both  the  steeds,  condescends  to  allow  any

indulgence of unnatural lusts.


  Two other thoughts about love are suggested by this passage. First of all,

love is represented here, as in the Symposium, as one of the great powers of

nature,  which  takes  many  forms  and  two  principal  ones,  having  a

predominant influence over the lives of men. And these two, though opposed,

are not absolutely separated the one from the other. Plato, with his great

knowledge of human nature, was well aware how easily one is transformed

into the other, or how soon the noble but fleeting aspiration may return into

the  nature  of  the  animal,  while  the  lower  instinct  which  is  latent  always

remains. The intermediate sentimentalism, which has exercised so great an

influence on the literature of modern Europe, had no place in the classical

times of Hellas; the higher love, of which Plato speaks, is the subject, not of

poetry or fiction, but of philosophy.


  Secondly, there seems to be indicated a natural yearning of the human

mind that the great ideas of justice, temperance, wisdom, should be expressed

in some form of visible beauty, like the absolute purity and goodness which

Christian art has sought to realize in the person of the Madonna. But although

human nature has often attempted to represent outwardly what can be only

'spiritually discerned,' men feel that in pictures and images, whether painted

or carved, or described in words only, we have not the substance but the

shadow of the truth which is in heaven. There is no reason to suppose that in

the fairest works of Greek art, Plato ever conceived himself to behold an

image, however faint, of ideal truths. 'Not in that way was wisdom seen.'  We may now pass on to the second part of the Dialogue, which is a

criticism  on  the  first.  Rhetoric  is  assailed  on  various  grounds:  first,  as

desiring  to  persuade,  without  a  knowledge  of  the  truth;  and  secondly,  as

ignoring  the  distinction  between  certain  and  probable  matter.  The  three

speeches are then passed in review: the first of them has no definition of the

nature of love, and no order in the topics (being in these respects far inferior

to the second); while the third of them is found (though a fancy of the hour)

to be framed upon real dialectical principles. But dialectic is not rhetoric;

nothing on that subject is to be found in the endless treatises of rhetoric,

however prolific in hard names. When Plato has sufficiently put them to the

test of ridicule he touches, as with the point of a needle, the real error, which

is  the  confusion  of  preliminary  knowledge  with  creative  power.  No

attainments will provide the speaker with genius; and the sort of attainments

which can alone be of any value are the higher philosophy and the power of

psychological analysis, which is given by dialectic, but not by the rules of the

rhetoricians.


  In this latter portion of the Dialogue there are many texts which may help

us to speak and to think. The names dialectic and rhetoric are passing out of

use; we hardly examine seriously into their nature and limits, and probably

the arts both of speaking and of conversation have been unduly neglected by

us. But the mind of Socrates pierces through the differences of times and

countries into the essential nature of man; and his words apply equally to the

modern world and to the Athenians of old. Would he not have asked of us, or

rather is he not asking of us, Whether we have ceased to prefer appearances

to reality? Let us take a survey of the professions to which he refers and try

them  by  his  standard.  Is  not  all  literature  passing  into  criticism,  just  as

Athenian literature in the age of Plato was degenerating into sophistry and

rhetoric? We can discourse and write about poems and paintings, but we

seem to have lost the gift of creating them. Can we wonder that few of them

'come sweetly from nature,' while ten thousand reviewers (mala murioi) are

engaged in dissecting them? Young men, like Phaedrus, are enamoured of

their own literary clique and have but a feeble sympathy with the master-

minds of former ages. They recognize 'a POETICAL necessity in the writings

of their favourite author, even when he boldly wrote off just what came in his

head.' They are beginning to think that Art is enough, just at the time when

Art is about to disappear from the world. And would not a great painter, suchas Michael Angelo, or a great poet, such as Shakespeare, returning to earth,

'courteously rebuke' us--would he not say that we are putting 'in the place of

Art the preliminaries of Art,' confusing Art the expression of mind and truth

with Art the composition of colours and forms; and perhaps he might more

severely chastise some of us for trying to invent 'a new shudder' instead of

bringing to the birth living and healthy creations? These he would regard as

the signs of an age wanting in original power.


  Turning from literature and the arts to law and politics, again we fall

under the lash of Socrates. For do we not often make 'the worse appear the

better cause;' and do not 'both parties sometimes agree to tell lies'? Is not

pleading 'an art of speaking unconnected with the truth'? There is another text

of Socrates which must not be forgotten in relation to this subject. In the

endless maze of English law is there any 'dividing the whole into parts or

reuniting  the  parts  into  a  whole'--any  semblance  of  an  organized  being

'having hands and feet and other members'? Instead of a system there is the

Chaos of Anaxagoras (omou panta chremata) and no Mind or Order. Then

again in the noble art of politics, who thinks of first principles and of true

ideas? We avowedly follow not the truth but the will of the many (compare

Republic).  Is  not  legislation  too  a  sort  of  literary  effort,  and  might  not

statesmanship be described as the 'art of enchanting' the house? While there

are some politicians who have no knowledge of the truth, but only of what is

likely to be approved by 'the many who sit in judgment,' there are others who

can give no form to their ideal, neither having learned 'the art of persuasion,'

nor  having  any  insight  into  the  'characters  of  men.'  Once  more,  has  not

medical science become a professional routine, which many 'practise without

being able to say who were their instructors'--the application of a few drugs

taken from a book instead of a life-long study of the natures and constitutions

of human beings? Do we see as clearly as Hippocrates 'that the nature of the

body can only be understood as a whole'? (Compare Charm.) And are not

they held to be the wisest physicians who have the greatest distrust of their

art? What would Socrates think of our newspapers, of our theology? Perhaps

he would be afraid to speak of them;--the one vox populi, the other vox Dei,

he  might  hesitate  to  attack  them;  or  he  might  trace  a  fanciful  connexion

between them, and ask doubtfully, whether they are not equally inspired? He

would remark that we are always searching for a belief and deploring our

unbelief, seeming to prefer popular opinions unverified and contradictory tounpopular truths which are assured to us by the most certain proofs: that our

preachers  are  in  the  habit  of  praising  God  'without  regard  to  truth  and

falsehood, attributing to Him every species of greatness and glory, saying that

He is all this and the cause of all that, in order that we may exhibit Him as the

fairest and best of all' (Symp.) without any consideration of His real nature

and character or of the laws by which He governs the world--seeking for a

'private judgment' and not for the truth or 'God's judgment.' What would he

say  of  the  Church,  which  we  praise  in  like  manner,  'meaning  ourselves,'

without regard to history or experience? Might he not ask, whether we 'care

more for the truth of religion, or for the speaker and the country from which

the truth comes'? or, whether the 'select wise' are not 'the many' after all?

(Symp.) So we may fill up the sketch of Socrates, lest, as Phaedrus says, the

argument  should  be  too  'abstract  and  barren  of  illustrations.'  (Compare

Symp., Apol., Euthyphro.)


  He next proceeds with enthusiasm to define the royal art of dialectic as

the power of dividing a whole into parts, and of uniting the parts in a whole,

and which may also be regarded (compare Soph.) as the process of the mind

talking with herself. The latter view has probably led Plato to the paradox that

speech is superior to writing, in which he may seem also to be doing an

injustice to himself. For the two cannot be fairly compared in the manner

which  Plato  suggests.  The  contrast  of  the  living  and  dead  word,  and  the

example of Socrates, which he has represented in the form of the Dialogue,

seem  to  have  misled  him.  For  speech  and  writing  have  really  different

functions; the one is more transitory, more diffuse, more elastic and capable

of  adaptation  to  moods  and  times;  the  other  is  more  permanent,  more

concentrated, and is uttered not to this or that person or audience, but to all

the world. In the Politicus the paradox is carried further; the mind or will of

the  king  is  preferred  to  the  written  law;  he  is  supposed  to  be  the  Law

personified, the ideal made Life.


  Yet in both these statements there is also contained a truth; they may be

compared with one another, and also with the other famous paradox, that

'knowledge  cannot  be  taught.'  Socrates  means  to  say,  that  what  is  truly

written is written in the soul, just as what is truly taught grows up in the soul

from  within  and  is  not  forced  upon  it  from  without.  When  planted  in  a

congenial soil the little seed becomes a tree, and 'the birds of the air buildtheir nests in the branches.' There is an echo of this in the prayer at the end of

the Dialogue, 'Give me beauty in the inward soul, and may the inward and

outward man be at one.' We may further compare the words of St. Paul,

'Written not on tables of stone, but on fleshly tables of the heart;' and again,

'Ye are my epistles known and read of all men.' There may be a use in writing

as a preservative against the forgetfulness of old age, but to live is higher far,

to be ourselves the book, or the epistle, the truth embodied in a person, the

Word made flesh. Something like this we may believe to have passed before

Plato's mind when he affirmed that speech was superior to writing. So in

other  ages,  weary  of  literature  and  criticism,  of  making  many  books,  of

writing  articles  in  reviews,  some  have  desired  to  live  more  closely  in

communion with their fellow-men, to speak heart to heart, to speak and act

only, and not to write, following the example of Socrates and of Christ...


  Some other touches of inimitable grace and art and of the deepest wisdom

may be also noted; such as the prayer or 'collect' which has just been cited,

'Give me beauty,' etc.; or 'the great name which belongs to God alone;' or 'the

saying of wiser men than ourselves that a man of sense should try to please

not his fellow-servants, but his good and noble masters,' like St. Paul again;

or the description of the 'heavenly originals'...


  The chief criteria for determining the date of the Dialogue are (1) the ages

of Lysias and Isocrates; (2) the character of the work.


  Lysias was born in the year 458; Isocrates in the year 436, about seven

years  before  the  birth  of  Plato.  The  first  of  the  two  great  rhetoricians  is

described as in the zenith of his fame; the second is still young and full of

promise. Now it is argued that this must have been written in the youth of

Isocrates, when the promise was not yet fulfilled. And thus we should have to

assign the Dialogue to a year not later than 406, when Isocrates was thirty

and Plato twenty-three years of age, and while Socrates himself was still

alive.


  Those who argue in this way seem not to reflect how easily Plato can

'invent Egyptians or anything else,' and how careless he is of historical truth

or  probability.  Who  would  suspect  that  the  wise  Critias,  the  virtuous

Charmides,  had  ended  their  lives  among  the  thirty  tyrants?  Who  wouldimagine that Lysias, who is here assailed by Socrates, is the son of his old

friend  Cephalus?  Or  that  Isocrates  himself  is  the  enemy  of  Plato  and  his

school?  No  arguments  can  be  drawn  from  the  appropriateness  or

inappropriateness  of  the  characters  of  Plato.  (Else,  perhaps,  it  might  be

further argued that, judging from their extant remains, insipid rhetoric is far

more  characteristic  of  Isocrates  than  of  Lysias.)  But  Plato  makes  use  of

names which have often hardly any connection with the historical characters

to  whom  they  belong.  In  this  instance  the  comparative  favour  shown  to

Isocrates may possibly be accounted for by the circumstance of his belonging

to the aristocratical, as Lysias to the democratical party.


  Few persons will be inclined to suppose, in the superficial manner of

some ancient critics, that a dialogue which treats of love must necessarily

have been written in youth. As little weight can be attached to the argument

that Plato must have visited Egypt before he wrote the story of Theuth and

Thamus. For there is no real proof that he ever went to Egypt; and even if he

did, he might have known or invented Egyptian traditions before he went

there.  The  late  date  of  the  Phaedrus  will  have  to  be  established  by  other

arguments than these: the maturity of the thought, the perfection of the style,

the insight, the relation to the other Platonic Dialogues, seem to contradict the

notion that it could have been the work of a youth of twenty or twenty-three

years of age. The cosmological notion of the mind as the primum mobile, and

the admission of impulse into the immortal nature, also afford grounds for

assigning a later date. (Compare Tim., Soph., Laws.) Add to this that the

picture of Socrates, though in some lesser particulars,--e.g. his going without

sandals, his habit of remaining within the walls, his emphatic declaration that

his study is human nature,--an exact resemblance, is in the main the Platonic

and not the real Socrates. Can we suppose 'the young man to have told such

lies' about his master while he was still alive? Moreover, when two Dialogues

are  so  closely  connected  as  the  Phaedrus  and  Symposium,  there  is  great

improbability in supposing that one of them was written at least twenty years

after the other. The conclusion seems to be, that the Dialogue was written at

some  comparatively  late  but  unknown  period  of  Plato's  life,  after  he  had

deserted the purely Socratic point of view, but before he had entered on the

more abstract speculations of the Sophist or the Philebus. Taking into account

the divisions of the soul, the doctrine of transmigration, the contemplative

nature of the philosophic life, and the character of the style, we shall not befar wrong in placing the Phaedrus in the neighbourhood of the Republic;

remarking only that allowance must be made for the poetical element in the

Phaedrus, which, while falling short of the Republic in definite philosophic

results, seems to have glimpses of a truth beyond.


  Two short passages, which are unconnected with the main subject of the

Dialogue, may seem to merit a more particular notice: (1) the locus classicus

about mythology; (2) the tale of the grasshoppers.


  The first passage is remarkable as showing that Plato was entirely free

from  what  may  be  termed  the  Euhemerism  of  his  age.  For  there  were

Euhemerists  in  Hellas  long  before  Euhemerus.  Early  philosophers,  like

Anaxagoras  and  Metrodorus,  had  found  in  Homer  and  mythology  hidden

meanings. Plato, with a truer instinct, rejects these attractive interpretations;

he regards the inventor of them as 'unfortunate;' and they draw a man off

from the knowledge of himself. There is a latent criticism, and also a poetical

sense in Plato, which enable him to discard them, and yet in another way to

make use of poetry and mythology as a vehicle of thought and feeling. What

would he have said of the discovery of Christian doctrines in these old Greek

legends? While acknowledging that such interpretations are 'very nice,' would

he  not  have  remarked  that  they  are  found  in  all  sacred  literatures?  They

cannot be tested by any criterion of truth, or used to establish any truth; they

add nothing to the sum of human knowledge; they are--what we please, and if

employed as 'peacemakers' between the new and old are liable to serious

misconstruction, as he elsewhere remarks (Republic). And therefore he would

have 'bid Farewell to them; the study of them would take up too much of his

time;  and  he  has  not  as  yet  learned  the  true  nature  of  religion.'  The

'sophistical' interest of Phaedrus, the little touch about the two versions of the

story,  the  ironical  manner  in  which  these  explanations  are  set  aside--'the

common opinion about them is enough for me'--the allusion to the serpent

Typho may be noted in passing; also the general agreement between the tone

of this speech and the remark of Socrates which follows afterwards, 'I am a

diviner, but a poor one.'


  The tale of the grasshoppers is naturally suggested by the surrounding

scene. They are also the representatives of the Athenians as children of the

soil. Under the image of the lively chirruping grasshoppers who inform theMuses in heaven about those who honour them on earth, Plato intends to

represent an Athenian audience (tettigessin eoikotes). The story is introduced,

apparently, to mark a change of subject, and also, like several other allusions

which occur in the course of the Dialogue, in order to preserve the scene in

the recollection of the reader.


  ...


  No  one  can  duly  appreciate  the  dialogues  of  Plato,  especially  the

Phaedrus, Symposium, and portions of the Republic, who has not a sympathy

with mysticism. To the uninitiated, as he would himself have acknowledged,

they will appear to be the dreams of a poet who is disguised as a philosopher.

There  is  a  twofold  difficulty  in  apprehending  this  aspect  of  the  Platonic

writings. First, we do not immediately realize that under the marble exterior

of  Greek  literature  was  concealed  a  soul  thrilling  with  spiritual  emotion.

Secondly, the forms or figures which the Platonic philosophy assumes, are

not like the images of the prophet Isaiah, or of the Apocalypse, familiar to us

in the days of our youth. By mysticism we mean, not the extravagance of an

erring fancy, but the concentration of reason in feeling, the enthusiastic love

of the good, the true, the one, the sense of the infinity of knowledge and of

the marvel of the human faculties. When feeding upon such thoughts the

'wing of the soul' is renewed and gains strength; she is raised above 'the

manikins  of  earth'  and  their  opinions,  waiting  in  wonder  to  know,  and

working with reverence to find out what God in this or in another life may

reveal to her.


  ON THE DECLINE OF GREEK LITERATURE.


  One of the main purposes of Plato in the Phaedrus is to satirize Rhetoric,

or rather the Professors of Rhetoric who swarmed at Athens in the fourth

century before Christ. As in the opening of the Dialogue he ridicules the

interpreters of mythology; as in the Protagoras he mocks at the Sophists; as in

the  Euthydemus  he  makes  fun  of  the  word-splitting  Eristics;  as  in  the

Cratylus he ridicules the fancies of Etymologers; as in the Meno and Gorgias

and some other dialogues he makes reflections and casts sly imputation upon

the higher classes at Athens; so in the Phaedrus, chiefly in the latter part, he

aims his shafts at the rhetoricians. The profession of rhetoric was the greatestand most popular in Athens, necessary 'to a man's salvation,' or at any rate to

his attainment of wealth or power; but Plato finds nothing wholesome or

genuine in the purpose of it. It is a veritable 'sham,' having no relation to fact,

or to truth of any kind. It is antipathetic to him not only as a philosopher, but

also as a great writer. He cannot abide the tricks of the rhetoricians, or the

pedantries and mannerisms which they introduce into speech and writing. He

sees clearly how far removed they are from the ways of simplicity and truth,

and how ignorant of the very elements of the art which they are professing to

teach. The thing which is most necessary of all, the knowledge of human

nature, is hardly if at all considered by them. The true rules of composition,

which are very few, are not to be found in their voluminous systems. Their

pretentiousness, their omniscience, their large fortunes, their impatience of

argument, their indifference to first principles, their stupidity, their progresses

through Hellas accompanied by a troop of their disciples--these things were

very distasteful to Plato, who esteemed genius far above art, and was quite

sensible of the interval which separated them (Phaedrus). It is the interval

which  separates  Sophists  and  rhetoricians  from  ancient  famous  men  and

women such as Homer and Hesiod, Anacreon and Sappho, Aeschylus and

Sophocles; and the Platonic Socrates is afraid that, if he approves the former,

he  will  be  disowned  by  the  latter.  The  spirit  of  rhetoric  was  soon  to

overspread all Hellas; and Plato with prophetic insight may have seen, from

afar, the great literary waste or dead level, or interminable marsh, in which

Greek literature was soon to disappear. A similar vision of the decline of the

Greek drama and of the contrast of the old literature and the new was present

to  the  mind  of  Aristophanes  after  the  death  of  the  three  great  tragedians

(Frogs). After about a hundred, or at most two hundred years if we exclude

Homer, the genius of Hellas had ceased to flower or blossom. The dreary

waste which follows, beginning with the Alexandrian writers and even before

them in the platitudes of Isocrates and his school, spreads over much more

than  a  thousand  years.  And  from  this  decline  the  Greek  language  and

literature, unlike the Latin, which has come to life in new forms and been

developed into the great European languages, never recovered.


  This monotony of literature, without merit, without genius and without

character, is a phenomenon which deserves more attention than it has hitherto

received; it is a phenomenon unique in the literary history of the world. How

could there have been so much cultivation, so much diligence in writing, andso  little  mind  or  real  creative  power?  Why  did  a  thousand  years  invent

nothing better than Sibylline books, Orphic poems, Byzantine imitations of

classical histories, Christian reproductions of Greek plays, novels like the

silly and obscene romances of Longus and Heliodorus, innumerable forged

epistles, a great many epigrams, biographies of the meanest and most meagre

description, a sham philosophy which was the bastard progeny of the union

between Hellas and the East? Only in Plutarch, in Lucian, in Longinus, in the

Roman  emperors  Marcus  Aurelius  and  Julian,  in  some  of  the  Christian

fathers are there any traces of good sense or originality, or any power of

arousing the interest of later ages. And when new books ceased to be written,

why did hosts of grammarians and interpreters flock in, who never attain to

any sound notion either of grammar or interpretation? Why did the physical

sciences never arrive at any true knowledge or make any real progress? Why

did poetry droop and languish? Why did history degenerate into fable? Why

did  words  lose  their  power  of  expression?  Why  were  ages  of  external

greatness and magnificence attended by all the signs of decay in the human

mind which are possible?


  To these questions many answers may be given, which if not the true

causes, are at least to be reckoned among the symptoms of the decline. There

is the want of method in physical science, the want of criticism in history, the

want of simplicity or delicacy in poetry, the want of political freedom, which

is the true atmosphere of public speaking, in oratory. The ways of life were

luxurious and commonplace. Philosophy had become extravagant, eclectic,

abstract, devoid of any real content. At length it ceased to exist. It had spread

words like plaster over the whole field of knowledge. It had grown ascetic on

one side, mystical on the other. Neither of these tendencies was favourable to

literature. There was no sense of beauty either in language or in art. The

Greek world became vacant, barbaric, oriental. No one had anything new to

say, or any conviction of truth. The age had no remembrance of the past, no

power of understanding what other ages thought and felt. The Catholic faith

had degenerated into dogma and controversy. For more than a thousand years

not a single writer of first-rate, or even of second-rate, reputation has a place

in the innumerable rolls of Greek literature.


  If we seek to go deeper, we can still only describe the outward nature of

the clouds or darkness which were spread over the heavens during so manyages without relief or light. We may say that this, like several other long

periods in the history of the human race, was destitute, or deprived of the

moral qualities which are the root of literary excellence. It had no life or

aspiration, no national or political force, no desire for consistency, no love of

knowledge for its own sake. It did not attempt to pierce the mists which

surrounded it. It did not propose to itself to go forward and scale the heights

of knowledge, but to go backwards and seek at the beginning what can only

be found towards the end. It was lost in doubt and ignorance. It rested upon

tradition and authority. It had none of the higher play of fancy which creates

poetry;  and  where  there  is  no  true  poetry,  neither  can  there  be  any  good

prose. It had no great characters, and therefore it had no great writers. It was

incapable of distinguishing between words and things. It was so hopelessly

below the ancient standard of classical Greek art and literature that it had no

power of understanding or of valuing them. It is doubtful whether any Greek

author was justly appreciated in antiquity except by his own contemporaries;

and this neglect of the great authors of the past led to the disappearance of the

larger part of them, while the Greek fathers were mostly preserved. There is

no reason to suppose that, in the century before the taking of Constantinople,

much more was in existence than the scholars of the Renaissance carried

away with them to Italy.


  The character of Greek literature sank lower as time went on. It consisted

more  and  more  of  compilations,  of  scholia,  of  extracts,  of  commentaries,

forgeries, imitations. The commentator or interpreter had no conception of his

author as a whole, and very little of the context of any passage which he was

explaining.  The  least  things  were  preferred  by  him  to  the  greatest.  The

question of a reading, or a grammatical form, or an accent, or the uses of a

word, took the place of the aim or subject of the book. He had no sense of the

beauties  of  an  author,  and  very  little  light  is  thrown  by  him  on  real

difficulties. He interprets past ages by his own. The greatest classical writers

are the least appreciated by him. This seems to be the reason why so many of

them have perished, why the lyric poets have almost wholly disappeared;

why, out of the eighty or ninety tragedies of Aeschylus and Sophocles, only

seven of each had been preserved.


  Such an age of sciolism and scholasticism may possibly once more get

the better of the literary world. There are those who prophesy that the signs ofsuch a day are again appearing among us, and that at the end of the present

century no writer of the first class will be still alive. They think that the Muse

of Literature may transfer herself to other countries less dried up or worn out

than our own. They seem to see the withering effect of criticism on original

genius. No one can doubt that such a decay or decline of literature and of art

seriously affects the manners and character of a nation. It takes away half the

joys and refinements of life; it increases its dulness and grossness. Hence it

becomes  a  matter  of  great  interest  to  consider  how,  if  at  all,  such  a

degeneracy may be averted. Is there any elixir which can restore life and

youth  to  the  literature  of  a  nation,  or  at  any  rate  which  can  prevent  it

becoming unmanned and enfeebled?


  First there is the progress of education. It is possible, and even probable,

that  the  extension  of  the  means  of  knowledge  over  a  wider  area  and  to

persons living under new conditions may lead to many new combinations of

thought and language. But, as yet, experience does not favour the realization

of  such  a  hope  or  promise.  It  may  be  truly  answered  that  at  present  the

training of teachers and the methods of education are very imperfect, and

therefore that we cannot judge of the future by the present. When more of our

youth are trained in the best literatures, and in the best parts of them, their

minds  may  be  expected  to  have  a  larger  growth.  They  will  have  more

interests, more thoughts, more material for conversation; they will have a

higher standard and begin to think for themselves. The number of persons

who will have the opportunity of receiving the highest education through the

cheap  press,  and  by  the  help  of  high  schools  and  colleges,  may  increase

tenfold. It is likely that in every thousand persons there is at least one who is

far above the average in natural capacity, but the seed which is in him dies for

want of cultivation. It has never had any stimulus to grow, or any field in

which to blossom and produce fruit. Here is a great reservoir or treasure-

house of human intelligence out of which new waters may flow and cover the

earth. If at any time the great men of the world should die out, and originality

or genius appear to suffer a partial eclipse, there is a boundless hope in the

multitude of intelligences for future generations. They may bring gifts to men

such as the world has never received before. They may begin at a higher

point and yet take with them all the results of the past. The co-operation of

many may have effects not less striking, though different in character from

those which the creative genius of a single man, such as Bacon or Newton,formerly produced. There is also great hope to be derived, not merely from

the extension of education over a wider area, but from the continuance of it

during many generations. Educated parents will have children fit to receive

education;  and  these  again  will  grow  up  under  circumstances  far  more

favourable to the growth of intelligence than any which have hitherto existed

in our own or in former ages.


  Even if we were to suppose no more men of genius to be produced, the

great writers of ancient or of modern times will remain to furnish abundant

materials of education to the coming generation. Now that every nation holds

communication with every other, we may truly say in a fuller sense than

formerly that 'the thoughts of men are widened with the process of the suns.'

They will not be 'cribbed, cabined, and confined' within a province or an

island. The East will provide elements of culture to the West as well as the

West to the East. The religions and literatures of the world will be open

books, which he who wills may read. The human race may not be always

ground  down  by  bodily  toil,  but  may  have  greater  leisure  for  the

improvement of the mind. The increasing sense of the greatness and infinity

of nature will tend to awaken in men larger and more liberal thoughts. The

love of mankind may be the source of a greater development of literature than

nationality has ever been. There may be a greater freedom from prejudice and

party; we may better understand the whereabouts of truth, and therefore there

may be more success and fewer failures in the search for it. Lastly, in the

coming ages we shall carry with us the recollection of the past, in which are

necessarily contained many seeds of revival and renaissance in the future. So

far  is  the  world  from  becoming  exhausted,  so  groundless  is  the  fear  that

literature will ever die out.Phaedrus


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettPERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: Socrates, Phaedrus.


SCENE: Under a plane-tree, by the banks of the Ilissus.


SOCRATES:  My  dear  Phaedrus,  whence  come  you,  and  whither  are  you

going?


PHAEDRUS: I come from Lysias the son of Cephalus, and I am going to

take a walk outside the wall, for I have been sitting with him the whole

morning; and our common friend Acumenus tells me that it is much more

refreshing to walk in the open air than to be shut up in a cloister.


SOCRATES: There he is right. Lysias then, I suppose, was in the town?


PHAEDRUS:  Yes,  he  was  staying  with  Epicrates,  here  at  the  house  of

Morychus; that house which is near the temple of Olympian Zeus.


SOCRATES: And how did he entertain you? Can I be wrong in supposing

that Lysias gave you a feast of discourse?


PHAEDRUS: You shall hear, if you can spare time to accompany me.


SOCRATES: And should I not deem the conversation of you and Lysias 'a

thing  of  higher  import,'  as  I  may  say  in  the  words  of  Pindar,  'than  any

business'?


PHAEDRUS: Will you go on?


SOCRATES: And will you go on with the narration?


PHAEDRUS: My tale, Socrates, is one of your sort, for love was the theme

which occupied us--love after a fashion: Lysias has been writing about a fair

youth who was being tempted, but not by a lover; and this was the point: he

ingeniously  proved  that  the  non-lover  should  be  accepted  rather  than  the

lover.


SOCRATES: O that is noble of him! I wish that he would say the poor manrather than the rich, and the old man rather than the young one;--then he

would meet the case of me and of many a man; his words would be quite

refreshing, and he would be a public benefactor. For my part, I do so long to

hear his speech, that if you walk all the way to Megara, and when you have

reached the wall come back, as Herodicus recommends, without going in, I

will keep you company.


PHAEDRUS: What do you mean, my good Socrates? How can you imagine

that my unpractised memory can do justice to an elaborate work, which the

greatest  rhetorician  of  the  age  spent  a  long  time  in  composing.  Indeed,  I

cannot; I would give a great deal if I could.


SOCRATES: I believe that I know Phaedrus about as well as I know myself,

and I am very sure that the speech of Lysias was repeated to him, not once

only, but again and again;--he insisted on hearing it many times over and

Lysias was very willing to gratify him; at last, when nothing else would do,

he got hold of the book, and looked at what he most wanted to see,-- this

occupied him during the whole morning;--and then when he was tired with

sitting, he went out to take a walk, not until, by the dog, as I believe, he had

simply learned by heart the entire discourse, unless it was unusually long, and

he went to a place outside the wall that he might practise his lesson. There he

saw a certain lover of discourse who had a similar weakness;--he saw and

rejoiced; now thought he, 'I shall have a partner in my revels.' And he invited

him to come and walk with him. But when the lover of discourse begged that

he would repeat the tale, he gave himself airs and said, 'No I cannot,' as if he

were indisposed; although, if the hearer had refused, he would sooner or later

have been compelled by him to listen whether he would or no. Therefore,

Phaedrus, bid him do at once what he will soon do whether bidden or not.


PHAEDRUS: I see that you will not let me off until I speak in some fashion

or other; verily therefore my best plan is to speak as I best can.


SOCRATES: A very true remark, that of yours.


PHAEDRUS: I will do as I say; but believe me, Socrates, I did not learn the

very words--O no; nevertheless I have a general notion of what he said, and

will give you a summary of the points in which the lover differed from thenon-lover. Let me begin at the beginning.


SOCRATES: Yes, my sweet one; but you must first of all show what you

have in your left hand under your cloak, for that roll, as I suspect, is the

actual discourse. Now, much as I love you, I would not have you suppose that

I am going to have your memory exercised at my expense, if you have Lysias

himself here.


PHAEDRUS: Enough; I see that I have no hope of practising my art upon

you. But if I am to read, where would you please to sit?


SOCRATES: Let us turn aside and go by the Ilissus; we will sit down at

some quiet spot.


PHAEDRUS: I am fortunate in not having my sandals, and as you never have

any, I think that we may go along the brook and cool our feet in the water;

this will be the easiest way, and at midday and in the summer is far from

being unpleasant.


SOCRATES: Lead on, and look out for a place in which we can sit down.


PHAEDRUS: Do you see the tallest plane-tree in the distance?


SOCRATES: Yes.


PHAEDRUS: There are shade and gentle breezes, and grass on which we

may either sit or lie down.


SOCRATES: Move forward.


PHAEDRUS:  I  should  like  to  know,  Socrates,  whether  the  place  is  not

somewhere here at which Boreas is said to have carried off Orithyia from the

banks of the Ilissus?


SOCRATES: Such is the tradition.


PHAEDRUS: And is this the exact spot? The little stream is delightfully clear

and bright; I can fancy that there might be maidens playing near.SOCRATES: I believe that the spot is not exactly here, but about a quarter of

a mile lower down, where you cross to the temple of Artemis, and there is, I

think, some sort of an altar of Boreas at the place.


PHAEDRUS: I have never noticed it; but I beseech you to tell me, Socrates,

do you believe this tale?


SOCRATES: The wise are doubtful, and I should not be singular if, like

them, I too doubted. I might have a rational explanation that Orithyia was

playing  with  Pharmacia,  when  a  northern  gust  carried  her  over  the

neighbouring rocks; and this being the manner of her death, she was said to

have been carried away by Boreas. There is a discrepancy, however, about

the locality; according to another version of the story she was taken from

Areopagus,  and  not  from  this  place.  Now  I  quite  acknowledge  that  these

allegories are very nice, but he is not to be envied who has to invent them;

much labour and ingenuity will be required of him; and when he has once

begun,  he  must  go  on  and  rehabilitate  Hippocentaurs  and  chimeras  dire.

Gorgons  and  winged  steeds  flow  in  apace,  and  numberless  other

inconceivable and portentous natures. And if he is sceptical about them, and

would fain reduce them one after another to the rules of probability, this sort

of crude philosophy will take up a great deal of time. Now I have no leisure

for such enquiries; shall I tell you why? I must first know myself, as the

Delphian inscription says; to be curious about that which is not my concern,

while  I  am  still  in  ignorance  of  my  own  self,  would  be  ridiculous.  And

therefore I bid farewell to all this; the common opinion is enough for me. For,

as I was saying, I want to know not about this, but about myself: am I a

monster more complicated and swollen with passion than the serpent Typho,

or  a  creature  of  a  gentler  and  simpler  sort,  to  whom  Nature  has  given  a

diviner and lowlier destiny? But let me ask you, friend: have we not reached

the plane-tree to which you were conducting us?


PHAEDRUS: Yes, this is the tree.


SOCRATES: By Here, a fair resting-place, full of summer sounds and scents.

Here is this lofty and spreading plane-tree, and the agnus castus high and

clustering, in the fullest blossom and the greatest fragrance; and the stream

which flows beneath the plane-tree is deliciously cold to the feet. Judgingfrom the ornaments and images, this must be a spot sacred to Achelous and

the Nymphs. How delightful is the breeze:--so very sweet; and there is a

sound in the air shrill and summerlike which makes answer to the chorus of

the cicadae. But the greatest charm of all is the grass, like a pillow gently

sloping to the head. My dear Phaedrus, you have been an admirable guide.


PHAEDRUS: What an incomprehensible being you are, Socrates: when you

are in the country, as you say, you really are like some stranger who is led

about by a guide. Do you ever cross the border? I rather think that you never

venture even outside the gates.


SOCRATES: Very true, my good friend; and I hope that you will excuse me

when you hear the reason, which is, that I am a lover of knowledge, and the

men who dwell in the city are my teachers, and not the trees or the country.

Though I do indeed believe that you have found a spell with which to draw

me out of the city into the country, like a hungry cow before whom a bough

or a bunch of fruit is waved. For only hold up before me in like manner a

book, and you may lead me all round Attica, and over the wide world. And

now having arrived, I intend to lie down, and do you choose any posture in

which you can read best. Begin.


PHAEDRUS: Listen. You know how matters stand with me; and how, as I

conceive, this affair may be arranged for the advantage of both of us. And I

maintain that I ought not to fail in my suit, because I am not your lover: for

lovers repent of the kindnesses which they have shown when their passion

ceases, but to the non-lovers who are free and not under any compulsion, no

time of repentance ever comes; for they confer their benefits according to the

measure of their ability, in the way which is most conducive to their own

interest. Then again, lovers consider how by reason of their love they have

neglected their own concerns and rendered service to others: and when to

these benefits conferred they add on the troubles which they have endured,

they think that they have long ago made to the beloved a very ample return.

But  the  non-lover  has  no  such  tormenting  recollections;  he  has  never

neglected his affairs or quarrelled with his relations; he has no troubles to add

up or excuses to invent; and being well rid of all these evils, why should he

not freely do what will gratify the beloved? If you say that the lover is more

to be esteemed, because his love is thought to be greater; for he is willing tosay and do what is hateful to other men, in order to please his beloved;--that,

if true, is only a proof that he will prefer any future love to his present, and

will injure his old love at the pleasure of the new. And how, in a matter of

such infinite importance, can a man be right in trusting himself to one who is

afflicted with a malady which no experienced person would attempt to cure,

for  the  patient  himself  admits  that  he  is  not  in  his  right  mind,  and

acknowledges that he is wrong in his mind, but says that he is unable to

control himself? And if he came to his right mind, would he ever imagine that

the desires were good which he conceived when in his wrong mind? Once

more, there are many more non-lovers than lovers; and if you choose the best

of the lovers, you will not have many to choose from; but if from the non-

lovers, the choice will be larger, and you will be far more likely to find

among them a person who is worthy of your friendship. If public opinion be

your dread, and you would avoid reproach, in all probability the lover, who is

always thinking that other men are as emulous of him as he is of them, will

boast to some one of his successes, and make a show of them openly in the

pride of his heart;--he wants others to know that his labour has not been lost;

but the non-lover is more his own master, and is desirous of solid good, and

not of the opinion of mankind. Again, the lover may be generally noted or

seen following the beloved (this is his regular occupation), and whenever

they are observed to exchange two words they are supposed to meet about

some  affair  of  love  either  past  or  in  contemplation;  but  when  non-lovers

meet,  no  one  asks  the  reason  why,  because  people  know  that  talking  to

another is natural, whether friendship or mere pleasure be the motive. Once

more, if you fear the fickleness of friendship, consider that in any other case a

quarrel might be a mutual calamity; but now, when you have given up what is

most precious to you, you will be the greater loser, and therefore, you will

have more reason in being afraid of the lover, for his vexations are many, and

he is always fancying that every one is leagued against him. Wherefore also

he debars his beloved from society; he will not have you intimate with the

wealthy, lest they should exceed him in wealth, or with men of education, lest

they should be his superiors in understanding; and he is equally afraid of

anybody's influence who has any other advantage over himself. If he can

persuade you to break with them, you are left without a friend in the world;

or if, out of a regard to your own interest, you have more sense than to

comply with his desire, you will have to quarrel with him. But those who are

non-lovers, and whose success in love is the reward of their merit, will not bejealous of the companions of their beloved, and will rather hate those who

refuse to be his associates, thinking that their favourite is slighted by the

latter and benefited by the former; for more love than hatred may be expected

to come to him out of his friendship with others. Many lovers too have loved

the person of a youth before they knew his character or his belongings; so

that when their passion has passed away, there is no knowing whether they

will continue to be his friends; whereas, in the case of non-lovers who were

always friends, the friendship is not lessened by the favours granted; but the

recollection of these remains with them, and is an earnest of good things to

come.


Further, I say that you are likely to be improved by me, whereas the lover

will spoil you. For they praise your words and actions in a wrong way; partly,

because  they  are  afraid  of  offending  you,  and  also,  their  judgment  is

weakened by passion. Such are the feats which love exhibits; he makes things

painful to the disappointed which give no pain to others; he compels the

successful lover to praise what ought not to give him pleasure, and therefore

the beloved is to be pitied rather than envied. But if you listen to me, in the

first place, I, in my intercourse with you, shall not merely regard present

enjoyment, but also future advantage, being not mastered by love, but my

own master; nor for small causes taking violent dislikes, but even when the

cause is great, slowly laying up little wrath-- unintentional offences I shall

forgive, and intentional ones I shall try to prevent; and these are the marks of

a friendship which will last.


Do you think that a lover only can be a firm friend? reflect:--if this were true,

we should set small value on sons, or fathers, or mothers; nor should we ever

have loyal friends, for our love of them arises not from passion, but from

other associations. Further, if we ought to shower favours on those who are

the most eager suitors,--on that principle, we ought always to do good, not to

the most virtuous, but to the most needy; for they are the persons who will be

most relieved, and will therefore be the most grateful; and when you make a

feast you should invite not your friend, but the beggar and the empty soul; for

they will love you, and attend you, and come about your doors, and will be

the best pleased, and the most grateful, and will invoke many a blessing on

your head. Yet surely you ought not to be granting favours to those who

besiege you with prayer, but to those who are best able to reward you; nor tothe lover only, but to those who are worthy of love; nor to those who will

enjoy the bloom of your youth, but to those who will share their possessions

with  you  in  age;  nor  to  those  who,  having  succeeded,  will  glory  in  their

success to others, but to those who will be modest and tell no tales; nor to

those who care about you for a moment only, but to those who will continue

your friends through life; nor to those who, when their passion is over, will

pick a quarrel with you, but rather to those who, when the charm of youth has

left  you,  will  show  their  own  virtue.  Remember  what  I  have  said;  and

consider yet this further point: friends admonish the lover under the idea that

his way of life is bad, but no one of his kindred ever yet censured the non-

lover, or thought that he was ill-advised about his own interests.


'Perhaps you will ask me whether I propose that you should indulge every

non-lover. To which I reply that not even the lover would advise you to

indulge  all  lovers,  for  the  indiscriminate  favour  is  less  esteemed  by  the

rational  recipient,  and  less  easily  hidden  by  him  who  would  escape  the

censure of the world. Now love ought to be for the advantage of both parties,

and for the injury of neither.


'I believe that I have said enough; but if there is anything more which you

desire or which in your opinion needs to be supplied, ask and I will answer.'


Now,  Socrates,  what  do  you  think?  Is  not  the  discourse  excellent,  more

especially in the matter of the language?


SOCRATES: Yes, quite admirable; the effect on me was ravishing. And this

I owe to you, Phaedrus, for I observed you while reading to be in an ecstasy,

and thinking that you are more experienced in these matters than I am, I

followed your example, and, like you, my divine darling, I became inspired

with a phrenzy.


PHAEDRUS: Indeed, you are pleased to be merry.


SOCRATES: Do you mean that I am not in earnest?


PHAEDRUS: Now don't talk in that way, Socrates, but let me have your real

opinion; I adjure you, by Zeus, the god of friendship, to tell me whether youthink that any Hellene could have said more or spoken better on the same

subject.


SOCRATES: Well, but are you and I expected to praise the sentiments of the

author, or only the clearness, and roundness, and finish, and tournure of the

language? As to the first I willingly submit to your better judgment, for I am

not worthy to form an opinion, having only attended to the rhetorical manner;

and I was doubting whether this could have been defended even by Lysias

himself; I thought, though I speak under correction, that he repeated himself

two or three times, either from want of words or from want of pains; and also,

he appeared to me ostentatiously to exult in showing how well he could say

the same thing in two or three ways.


PHAEDRUS: Nonsense, Socrates; what you call repetition was the especial

merit of the speech; for he omitted no topic of which the subject rightly

allowed, and I do not think that any one could have spoken better or more

exhaustively.


SOCRATES: There I cannot go along with you. Ancient sages, men and

women,  who  have  spoken  and  written  of  these  things,  would  rise  up  in

judgment against me, if out of complaisance I assented to you.


PHAEDRUS: Who are they, and where did you hear anything better than

this?


SOCRATES: I am sure that I must have heard; but at this moment I do not

remember from whom; perhaps from Sappho the fair, or Anacreon the wise;

or, possibly, from a prose writer. Why do I say so? Why, because I perceive

that my bosom is full, and that I could make another speech as good as that of

Lysias, and different. Now I am certain that this is not an invention of my

own, who am well aware that I know nothing, and therefore I can only infer

that I have been filled through the ears, like a pitcher, from the waters of

another,  though  I  have  actually  forgotten  in  my  stupidity  who  was  my

informant.


PHAEDRUS: That is grand:--but never mind where you heard the discourse

or from whom; let that be a mystery not to be divulged even at my earnestdesire. Only, as you say, promise to make another and better oration, equal in

length and entirely new, on the same subject; and I, like the nine Archons,

will promise to set up a golden image at Delphi, not only of myself, but of

you, and as large as life.


SOCRATES: You are a dear golden ass if you suppose me to mean that

Lysias has altogether missed the mark, and that I can make a speech from

which all his arguments are to be excluded. The worst of authors will say

something which is to the point. Who, for example, could speak on this thesis

of yours without praising the discretion of the non-lover and blaming the

indiscretion of the lover? These are the commonplaces of the subject which

must come in (for what else is there to be said?) and must be allowed and

excused; the only merit is in the arrangement of them, for there can be none

in the invention; but when you leave the commonplaces, then there may be

some originality.


PHAEDRUS: I admit that there is reason in what you say, and I too will be

reasonable, and will allow you to start with the premiss that the lover is more

disordered in his wits than the non-lover; if in what remains you make a

longer and better speech than Lysias, and use other arguments, then I say

again, that a statue you shall have of beaten gold, and take your place by the

colossal offerings of the Cypselids at Olympia.


SOCRATES: How profoundly in earnest is the lover, because to tease him I

lay a finger upon his love! And so, Phaedrus, you really imagine that I am

going to improve upon the ingenuity of Lysias?


PHAEDRUS: There I have you as you had me, and you must just speak 'as

you best can.' Do not let us exchange 'tu quoque' as in a farce, or compel me

to say to you as you said to me, 'I know Socrates as well as I know myself,

and he was wanting to speak, but he gave himself airs.' Rather I would have

you  consider  that  from  this  place  we  stir  not  until  you  have  unbosomed

yourself  of  the  speech;  for  here  are  we  all  alone,  and  I  am  stronger,

remember, and younger than you:--Wherefore perpend, and do not compel

me to use violence.


SOCRATES: But, my sweet Phaedrus, how ridiculous it would be of me tocompete with Lysias in an extempore speech! He is a master in his art and I

am an untaught man.


PHAEDRUS: You see how matters stand; and therefore let there be no more

pretences; for, indeed, I know the word that is irresistible.


SOCRATES: Then don't say it.


PHAEDRUS: Yes, but I will; and my word shall be an oath. 'I say, or rather

swear'--but  what  god  will  be  witness  of  my  oath?--'By  this  plane-  tree  I

swear, that unless you repeat the discourse here in the face of this very plane-

tree, I will never tell you another; never let you have word of another!'


SOCRATES: Villain! I am conquered; the poor lover of discourse has no

more to say.


PHAEDRUS: Then why are you still at your tricks?


SOCRATES: I am not going to play tricks now that you have taken the oath,

for I cannot allow myself to be starved.


PHAEDRUS: Proceed.


SOCRATES: Shall I tell you what I will do?


PHAEDRUS: What?


SOCRATES: I will veil my face and gallop through the discourse as fast as I

can, for if I see you I shall feel ashamed and not know what to say.


PHAEDRUS: Only go on and you may do anything else which you please.


SOCRATES: Come, O ye Muses, melodious, as ye are called, whether you

have received this name from the character of your strains, or because the

Melians are a musical race, help, O help me in the tale which my good friend

here desires me to rehearse, in order that his friend whom he always deemed

wise may seem to him to be wiser than ever.Once upon a time there was a fair boy, or, more properly speaking, a youth;

he was very fair and had a great many lovers; and there was one special

cunning one, who had persuaded the youth that he did not love him, but he

really loved him all the same; and one day when he was paying his addresses

to him, he used this very argument--that he ought to accept the non-lover

rather than the lover; his words were as follows:--


'All good counsel begins in the same way; a man should know what he is

advising about, or his counsel will all come to nought. But people imagine

that they know about the nature of things, when they don't know about them,

and, not having come to an understanding at first because they think that they

know,  they  end,  as  might  be  expected,  in  contradicting  one  another  and

themselves.  Now  you  and  I  must  not  be  guilty  of  this  fundamental  error

which we condemn in others; but as our question is whether the lover or non-

lover is to be preferred, let us first of all agree in defining the nature and

power of love, and then, keeping our eyes upon the definition and to this

appealing,  let  us  further  enquire  whether  love  brings  advantage  or

disadvantage.


'Every one sees that love is a desire, and we know also that non-lovers desire

the beautiful and good. Now in what way is the lover to be distinguished

from the non-lover? Let us note that in every one of us there are two guiding

and ruling principles which lead us whither they will; one is the natural desire

of pleasure, the other is an acquired opinion which aspires after the best; and

these two are sometimes in harmony and then again at war, and sometimes

the one, sometimes the other conquers. When opinion by the help of reason

leads us to the best, the conquering principle is called temperance; but when

desire, which is devoid of reason, rules in us and drags us to pleasure, that

power of misrule is called excess. Now excess has many names, and many

members, and many forms, and any of these forms when very marked gives a

name, neither honourable nor creditable, to the bearer of the name. The desire

of eating, for example, which gets the better of the higher reason and the

other desires, is called gluttony, and he who is possessed by it is called a

glutton; the tyrannical desire of drink, which inclines the possessor of the

desire to drink, has a name which is only too obvious, and there can be as

little doubt by what name any other appetite of the same family would be

called;--it will be the name of that which happens to be dominant. And now Ithink that you will perceive the drift of my discourse; but as every spoken

word is in a manner plainer than the unspoken, I had better say further that

the irrational desire which overcomes the tendency of opinion towards right,

and  is  led  away  to  the  enjoyment  of  beauty,  and  especially  of  personal

beauty, by the desires which are her own kindred--that supreme desire, I say,

which by leading conquers and by the force of passion is reinforced, from

this very force, receiving a name, is called love (erromenos eros).'


And now, dear Phaedrus, I shall pause for an instant to ask whether you do

not think me, as I appear to myself, inspired?


PHAEDRUS: Yes, Socrates, you seem to have a very unusual flow of words.


SOCRATES: Listen to me, then, in silence; for surely the place is holy; so

that you must not wonder, if, as I proceed, I appear to be in a divine fury, for

already I am getting into dithyrambics.


PHAEDRUS: Nothing can be truer.


SOCRATES: The responsibility rests with you. But hear what follows, and

perhaps the fit may be averted; all is in their hands above. I will go on talking

to my youth. Listen:--


Thus, my friend, we have declared and defined the nature of the subject.

Keeping  the  definition  in  view,  let  us  now  enquire  what  advantage  or

disadvantage is likely to ensue from the lover or the non-lover to him who

accepts their advances.


He who is the victim of his passions and the slave of pleasure will of course

desire to make his beloved as agreeable to himself as possible. Now to him

who has a mind diseased anything is agreeable which is not opposed to him,

but that which is equal or superior is hateful to him, and therefore the lover

will not brook any superiority or equality on the part of his beloved; he is

always  employed  in  reducing  him  to  inferiority.  And  the  ignorant  is  the

inferior  of  the  wise,  the  coward  of  the  brave,  the  slow  of  speech  of  the

speaker, the dull of the clever. These, and not these only, are the mental

defects  of  the  beloved;--defects  which,  when  implanted  by  nature,  arenecessarily a delight to the lover, and when not implanted, he must contrive

to implant them in him, if he would not be deprived of his fleeting joy. And

therefore he cannot help being jealous, and will debar his beloved from the

advantages of society which would make a man of him, and especially from

that society which would have given him wisdom, and thereby he cannot fail

to do him great harm. That is to say, in his excessive fear lest he should come

to be despised in his eyes he will be compelled to banish from him divine

philosophy; and there is no greater injury which he can inflict upon him than

this.  He  will  contrive  that  his  beloved  shall  be  wholly  ignorant,  and  in

everything shall look to him; he is to be the delight of the lover's heart, and a

curse to himself. Verily, a lover is a profitable guardian and associate for him

in all that relates to his mind.


Let us next see how his master, whose law of life is pleasure and not good,

will keep and train the body of his servant. Will he not choose a beloved who

is delicate rather than sturdy and strong? One brought up in shady bowers and

not in the bright sun, a stranger to manly exercises and the sweat of toil,

accustomed only to a soft and luxurious diet, instead of the hues of health

having the colours of paint and ornament, and the rest of a piece?--such a life

as any one can imagine and which I need not detail at length. But I may sum

up all that I have to say in a word, and pass on. Such a person in war, or in

any of the great crises of life, will be the anxiety of his friends and also of his

lover, and certainly not the terror of his enemies; which nobody can deny.


And now let us tell what advantage or disadvantage the beloved will receive

from the guardianship and society of his lover in the matter of his property;

this is the next point to be considered. The lover will be the first to see what,

indeed, will be sufficiently evident to all men, that he desires above all things

to deprive his beloved of his dearest and best and holiest possessions, father,

mother, kindred, friends, of all whom he thinks may be hinderers or reprovers

of their most sweet converse; he will even cast a jealous eye upon his gold

and silver or other property, because these make him a less easy prey, and

when  caught  less  manageable;  hence  he  is  of  necessity  displeased  at  his

possession of them and rejoices at their loss; and he would like him to be

wifeless, childless, homeless, as well; and the longer the better, for the longer

he is all this, the longer he will enjoy him.There are some sort of animals, such as flatterers, who are dangerous and

mischievous enough, and yet nature has mingled a temporary pleasure and

grace  in  their  composition.  You  may  say  that  a  courtesan  is  hurtful,  and

disapprove of such creatures and their practices, and yet for the time they are

very pleasant. But the lover is not only hurtful to his love; he is also an

extremely  disagreeable  companion.  The  old  proverb  says  that  'birds  of  a

feather flock together'; I suppose that equality of years inclines them to the

same pleasures, and similarity begets friendship; yet you may have more than

enough even of this; and verily constraint is always said to be grievous. Now

the lover is not only unlike his beloved, but he forces himself upon him. For

he is old and his love is young, and neither day nor night will he leave him if

he can help; necessity and the sting of desire drive him on, and allure him

with  the  pleasure  which  he  receives  from  seeing,  hearing,  touching,

perceiving him in every way. And therefore he is delighted to fasten upon

him and to minister to him. But what pleasure or consolation can the beloved

be receiving all this time? Must he not feel the extremity of disgust when he

looks at an old shrivelled face and the remainder to match, which even in a

description is disagreeable, and quite detestable when he is forced into daily

contact with his lover; moreover he is jealously watched and guarded against

everything and everybody, and has to hear misplaced and exaggerated praises

of himself, and censures equally inappropriate, which are intolerable when

the man is sober, and, besides being intolerable, are published all over the

world in all their indelicacy and wearisomeness when he is drunk.


And not only while his love continues is he mischievous and unpleasant, but

when his love ceases he becomes a perfidious enemy of him on whom he

showered his oaths and prayers and promises, and yet could hardly prevail

upon  him  to  tolerate  the  tedium  of  his  company  even  from  motives  of

interest. The hour of payment arrives, and now he is the servant of another

master;  instead  of  love  and  infatuation,  wisdom  and  temperance  are  his

bosom's lords; but the beloved has not discovered the change which has taken

place in him, when he asks for a return and recalls to his recollection former

sayings and doings; he believes himself to be speaking to the same person,

and the other, not having the courage to confess the truth, and not knowing

how to fulfil the oaths and promises which he made when under the dominion

of folly, and having now grown wise and temperate, does not want to do as

he did or to be as he was before. And so he runs away and is constrained tobe a defaulter; the oyster-shell (In allusion to a game in which two parties

fled or pursued according as an oyster-shell which was thrown into the air fell

with  the  dark  or  light  side  uppermost.)  has  fallen  with  the  other  side

uppermost--he changes pursuit into flight, while the other is compelled to

follow him with passion and imprecation, not knowing that he ought never

from the first to have accepted a demented lover instead of a sensible non-

lover;  and  that  in  making  such  a  choice  he  was  giving  himself  up  to  a

faithless, morose, envious, disagreeable being, hurtful to his estate, hurtful to

his bodily health, and still more hurtful to the cultivation of his mind, than

which there neither is nor ever will be anything more honoured in the eyes

both  of  gods  and  men.  Consider  this,  fair  youth,  and  know  that  in  the

friendship of the lover there is no real kindness; he has an appetite and wants

to feed upon you:


'As wolves love lambs so lovers love their loves.'


But I told you so, I am speaking in verse, and therefore I had better make an

end; enough.


PHAEDRUS: I thought that you were only half-way and were going to make

a similar speech about all the advantages of accepting the non-lover. Why do

you not proceed?


SOCRATES:  Does  not  your  simplicity  observe  that  I  have  got  out  of

dithyrambics into heroics, when only uttering a censure on the lover? And if I

am to add the praises of the non-lover what will become of me? Do you not

perceive  that  I  am  already  overtaken  by  the  Nymphs  to  whom  you  have

mischievously exposed me? And therefore I will only add that the non-lover

has all the advantages in which the lover is accused of being deficient. And

now I will say no more; there has been enough of both of them. Leaving the

tale to its fate, I will cross the river and make the best of my way home, lest a

worse thing be inflicted upon me by you.


PHAEDRUS: Not yet, Socrates; not until the heat of the day has passed; do

you not see that the hour is almost noon? there is the midday sun standing

still, as people say, in the meridian. Let us rather stay and talk over what has

been said, and then return in the cool.SOCRATES:  Your  love  of  discourse,  Phaedrus,  is  superhuman,  simply

marvellous, and I do not believe that there is any one of your contemporaries

who has either made or in one way or another has compelled others to make

an equal number of speeches. I would except Simmias the Theban, but all the

rest are far behind you. And now I do verily believe that you have been the

cause of another.


PHAEDRUS: That is good news. But what do you mean?


SOCRATES: I mean to say that as I was about to cross the stream the usual

sign was given to me,--that sign which always forbids, but never bids, me to

do anything which I am going to do; and I thought that I heard a voice saying

in my ear that I had been guilty of impiety, and that I must not go away until I

had made an atonement. Now I am a diviner, though not a very good one, but

I have enough religion for my own use, as you might say of a bad writer--his

writing is good enough for him; and I am beginning to see that I was in error.

O my friend, how prophetic is the human soul! At the time I had a sort of

misgiving, and, like Ibycus, 'I was troubled; I feared that I might be buying

honour from men at the price of sinning against the gods.' Now I recognize

my error.


PHAEDRUS: What error?


SOCRATES: That was a dreadful speech which you brought with you, and

you made me utter one as bad.


PHAEDRUS: How so?


SOCRATES: It was foolish, I say,--to a certain extent, impious; can anything

be more dreadful?


PHAEDRUS: Nothing, if the speech was really such as you describe.


SOCRATES: Well, and is not Eros the son of Aphrodite, and a god?


PHAEDRUS: So men say.


SOCRATES: But that was not acknowledged by Lysias in his speech, nor byyou in that other speech which you by a charm drew from my lips. For if love

be, as he surely is, a divinity, he cannot be evil. Yet this was the error of both

the speeches. There was also a simplicity about them which was refreshing;

having  no  truth  or  honesty  in  them,  nevertheless  they  pretended  to  be

something, hoping to succeed in deceiving the manikins of earth and gain

celebrity among them. Wherefore I must have a purgation. And I bethink me

of  an  ancient  purgation  of  mythological  error  which  was  devised,  not  by

Homer,  for  he  never  had  the  wit  to  discover  why  he  was  blind,  but  by

Stesichorus, who was a philosopher and knew the reason why; and therefore,

when he lost his eyes, for that was the penalty which was inflicted upon him

for reviling the lovely Helen, he at once purged himself. And the purgation

was a recantation, which began thus,--


'False is that word of mine--the truth is that thou didst not embark in ships,

nor ever go to the walls of Troy;'


and  when  he  had  completed  his  poem,  which  is  called  'the  recantation,'

immediately  his  sight  returned  to  him.  Now  I  will  be  wiser  than  either

Stesichorus or Homer, in that I am going to make my recantation for reviling

love  before  I  suffer;  and  this  I  will  attempt,  not  as  before,  veiled  and

ashamed, but with forehead bold and bare.


PHAEDRUS: Nothing could be more agreeable to me than to hear you say

so.


SOCRATES: Only think, my good Phaedrus, what an utter want of delicacy

was shown in the two discourses; I mean, in my own and in that which you

recited out of the book. Would not any one who was himself of a noble and

gentle nature, and who loved or ever had loved a nature like his own, when

we  tell  of  the  petty  causes  of  lovers'  jealousies,  and  of  their  exceeding

animosities, and of the injuries which they do to their beloved, have imagined

that our ideas of love were taken from some haunt of sailors to which good

manners were unknown--he would certainly never have admitted the justice

of our censure?


PHAEDRUS: I dare say not, Socrates.SOCRATES: Therefore, because I blush at the thought of this person, and

also because I am afraid of Love himself, I desire to wash the brine out of my

ears with water from the spring; and I would counsel Lysias not to delay, but

to write another discourse, which shall prove that 'ceteris paribus' the lover

ought to be accepted rather than the non-lover.


PHAEDRUS: Be assured that he shall. You shall speak the praises of the

lover, and Lysias shall be compelled by me to write another discourse on the

same theme.


SOCRATES: You will be true to your nature in that, and therefore I believe

you.


PHAEDRUS: Speak, and fear not.


SOCRATES: But where is the fair youth whom I was addressing before, and

who ought to listen now; lest, if he hear me not, he should accept a non- lover

before he knows what he is doing?


PHAEDRUS: He is close at hand, and always at your service.


SOCRATES: Know then, fair youth, that the former discourse was the word

of  Phaedrus,  the  son  of  Vain  Man,  who  dwells  in  the  city  of  Myrrhina

(Myrrhinusius).  And  this  which  I  am  about  to  utter  is  the  recantation  of

Stesichorus the son of Godly Man (Euphemus), who comes from the town of

Desire (Himera), and is to the following effect: 'I told a lie when I said' that

the beloved ought to accept the non-lover when he might have the lover,

because the one is sane, and the other mad. It might be so if madness were

simply an evil; but there is also a madness which is a divine gift, and the

source of the chiefest blessings granted to men. For prophecy is a madness,

and the prophetess at Delphi and the priestesses at Dodona when out of their

senses have conferred great benefits on Hellas, both in public and private life,

but when in their senses few or none. And I might also tell you how the Sibyl

and other inspired persons have given to many an one many an intimation of

the future which has saved them from falling. But it would be tedious to

speak of what every one knows.There will be more reason in appealing to the ancient inventors of names

(compare Cratylus), who would never have connected prophecy (mantike)

which foretells the future and is the noblest of arts, with madness (manike),

or called them both by the same name, if they had deemed madness to be a

disgrace or dishonour;--they must have thought that there was an inspired

madness which was a noble thing; for the two words, mantike and manike,

are really the same, and the letter tau is only a modern and tasteless insertion.

And this is confirmed by the name which was given by them to the rational

investigation of futurity, whether made by the help of birds or of other signs--

this, for as much as it is an art which supplies from the reasoning faculty

mind  (nous)  and  information  (istoria)  to  human  thought  (oiesis)  they

originally termed oionoistike, but the word has been lately altered and made

sonorous by the modern introduction of the letter Omega (oionoistike and

oionistike),  and  in  proportion  as  prophecy  (mantike)  is  more  perfect  and

august than augury, both in name and fact, in the same proportion, as the

ancients testify, is madness superior to a sane mind (sophrosune) for the one

is only of human, but the other of divine origin. Again, where plagues and

mightiest woes have bred in certain families, owing to some ancient blood-

guiltiness,  there  madness  has  entered  with  holy  prayers  and  rites,  and  by

inspired utterances found a way of deliverance for those who are in need; and

he who has part in this gift, and is truly possessed and duly out of his mind, is

by the use of purifications and mysteries made whole and exempt from evil,

future as well as present, and has a release from the calamity which was

afflicting him. The third kind is the madness of those who are possessed by

the  Muses;  which  taking  hold  of  a  delicate  and  virgin  soul,  and  there

inspiring frenzy, awakens lyrical and all other numbers; with these adorning

the myriad actions of ancient heroes for the instruction of posterity. But he

who, having no touch of the Muses' madness in his soul, comes to the door

and thinks that he will get into the temple by the help of art--he, I say, and his

poetry are not admitted; the sane man disappears and is nowhere when he

enters into rivalry with the madman.


I might tell of many other noble deeds which have sprung from inspired

madness. And therefore, let no one frighten or flutter us by saying that the

temperate friend is to be chosen rather than the inspired, but let him further

show that love is not sent by the gods for any good to lover or beloved; if he

can do so we will allow him to carry off the palm. And we, on our part, willprove in answer to him that the madness of love is the greatest of heaven's

blessings, and the proof shall be one which the wise will receive, and the

witling disbelieve. But first of all, let us view the affections and actions of the

soul  divine  and  human,  and  try  to  ascertain  the  truth  about  them.  The

beginning of our proof is as follows:-


(Translated by Cic. Tus. Quaest.) The soul through all her being is immortal,

for that which is ever in motion is immortal; but that which moves another

and is moved by another, in ceasing to move ceases also to live. Only the

self-moving, never leaving self, never ceases to move, and is the fountain and

beginning  of  motion  to  all  that  moves  besides.  Now,  the  beginning  is

unbegotten, for that which is begotten has a beginning; but the beginning is

begotten of nothing, for if it were begotten of something, then the begotten

would  not  come  from  a  beginning.  But  if  unbegotten,  it  must  also  be

indestructible; for if beginning were destroyed, there could be no beginning

out of anything, nor anything out of a beginning; and all things must have a

beginning. And therefore the self- moving is the beginning of motion; and

this can neither be destroyed nor begotten, else the whole heavens and all

creation would collapse and stand still, and never again have motion or birth.

But if the self-moving is proved to be immortal, he who affirms that self-

motion is the very idea and essence of the soul will not be put to confusion.

For the body which is moved from without is soulless; but that which is

moved from within has a soul, for such is the nature of the soul. But if this be

true,  must  not  the  soul  be  the  self-moving,  and  therefore  of  necessity

unbegotten and immortal? Enough of the soul's immortality.


Of the nature of the soul, though her true form be ever a theme of large and

more than mortal discourse, let me speak briefly, and in a figure. And let the

figure  be  composite--a  pair  of  winged  horses  and  a  charioteer.  Now  the

winged horses and the charioteers of the gods are all of them noble and of

noble descent, but those of other races are mixed; the human charioteer drives

his in a pair; and one of them is noble and of noble breed, and the other is

ignoble and of ignoble breed; and the driving of them of necessity gives a

great deal of trouble to him. I will endeavour to explain to you in what way

the mortal differs from the immortal creature. The soul in her totality has the

care of inanimate being everywhere, and traverses the whole heaven in divers

forms  appearing--when  perfect  and  fully  winged  she  soars  upward,  andorders the whole world; whereas the imperfect soul, losing her wings and

drooping  in  her  flight  at  last  settles  on  the  solid  ground--there,  finding  a

home, she receives an earthly frame which appears to be self-moved, but is

really moved by her power; and this composition of soul and body is called a

living and mortal creature. For immortal no such union can be reasonably

believed to be; although fancy, not having seen nor surely known the nature

of God, may imagine an immortal creature having both a body and also a soul

which are united throughout all time. Let that, however, be as God wills, and

be spoken of acceptably to him. And now let us ask the reason why the soul

loses her wings!


The wing is the corporeal element which is most akin to the divine, and

which  by  nature  tends  to  soar  aloft  and  carry  that  which  gravitates

downwards into the upper region, which is the habitation of the gods. The

divine is beauty, wisdom, goodness, and the like; and by these the wing of the

soul is nourished, and grows apace; but when fed upon evil and foulness and

the opposite of good, wastes and falls away. Zeus, the mighty lord, holding

the reins of a winged chariot, leads the way in heaven, ordering all and taking

care  of  all;  and  there  follows  him  the  array  of  gods  and  demi-gods,

marshalled in eleven bands; Hestia alone abides at home in the house of

heaven; of the rest they who are reckoned among the princely twelve march

in their appointed order. They see many blessed sights in the inner heaven,

and  there  are  many  ways  to  and  fro,  along  which  the  blessed  gods  are

passing, every one doing his own work; he may follow who will and can, for

jealousy has no place in the celestial choir. But when they go to banquet and

festival, then they move up the steep to the top of the vault of heaven. The

chariots of the gods in even poise, obeying the rein, glide rapidly; but the

others  labour,  for  the  vicious  steed  goes  heavily,  weighing  down  the

charioteer to the earth when his steed has not been thoroughly trained:--and

this  is  the  hour  of  agony  and  extremest  conflict  for  the  soul.  For  the

immortals, when they are at the end of their course, go forth and stand upon

the outside of heaven, and the revolution of the spheres carries them round,

and they behold the things beyond. But of the heaven which is above the

heavens, what earthly poet ever did or ever will sing worthily? It is such as I

will describe; for I must dare to speak the truth, when truth is my theme.

There abides the very being with which true knowledge is concerned; the

colourless, formless, intangible essence, visible only to mind, the pilot of thesoul. The divine intelligence, being nurtured upon mind and pure knowledge,

and the intelligence of every soul which is capable of receiving the food

proper to it, rejoices at beholding reality, and once more gazing upon truth, is

replenished  and  made  glad,  until  the  revolution  of  the  worlds  brings  her

round again to the same place. In the revolution she beholds justice, and

temperance, and knowledge absolute, not in the form of generation or of

relation,  which  men  call  existence,  but  knowledge  absolute  in  existence

absolute; and beholding the other true existences in like manner, and feasting

upon  them,  she  passes  down  into  the  interior  of  the  heavens  and  returns

home; and there the charioteer putting up his horses at the stall, gives them

ambrosia to eat and nectar to drink.


Such is the life of the gods; but of other souls, that which follows God best

and is likest to him lifts the head of the charioteer into the outer world, and is

carried  round  in  the  revolution,  troubled  indeed  by  the  steeds,  and  with

difficulty beholding true being; while another only rises and falls, and sees,

and again fails to see by reason of the unruliness of the steeds. The rest of the

souls are also longing after the upper world and they all follow, but not being

strong enough they are carried round below the surface, plunging, treading on

one another, each striving to be first; and there is confusion and perspiration

and the extremity of effort; and many of them are lamed or have their wings

broken through the ill- driving of the charioteers; and all of them after a

fruitless toil, not having attained to the mysteries of true being, go away, and

feed upon opinion. The reason why the souls exhibit this exceeding eagerness

to behold the plain of truth is that pasturage is found there, which is suited to

the highest part of the soul; and the wing on which the soul soars is nourished

with this. And there is a law of Destiny, that the soul which attains any vision

of truth in company with a god is preserved from harm until the next period,

and if attaining always is always unharmed. But when she is unable to follow,

and  fails  to  behold  the  truth,  and  through  some  ill-hap  sinks  beneath  the

double load of forgetfulness and vice, and her wings fall from her and she

drops to the ground, then the law ordains that this soul shall at her first birth

pass, not into any other animal, but only into man; and the soul which has

seen most of truth shall come to the birth as a philosopher, or artist, or some

musical and loving nature; that which has seen truth in the second degree

shall be some righteous king or warrior chief; the soul which is of the third

class shall be a politician, or economist, or trader; the fourth shall be a loverof gymnastic toils, or a physician; the fifth shall lead the life of a prophet or

hierophant; to the sixth the character of poet or some other imitative artist

will be assigned; to the seventh the life of an artisan or husbandman; to the

eighth that of a sophist or demagogue; to the ninth that of a tyrant--all these

are states of probation, in which he who does righteously improves, and he

who does unrighteously, deteriorates his lot.


Ten thousand years must elapse before the soul of each one can return to the

place from whence she came, for she cannot grow her wings in less; only the

soul of a philosopher, guileless and true, or the soul of a lover, who is not

devoid of philosophy, may acquire wings in the third of the recurring periods

of a thousand years; he is distinguished from the ordinary good man who

gains wings in three thousand years:--and they who choose this life three

times in succession have wings given them, and go away at the end of three

thousand  years.  But  the  others  (The  philosopher  alone  is  not  subject  to

judgment (krisis), for he has never lost the vision of truth.) receive judgment

when they have completed their first life, and after the judgment they go,

some of them to the houses of correction which are under the earth, and are

punished; others to some place in heaven whither they are lightly borne by

justice, and there they live in a manner worthy of the life which they led here

when in the form of men. And at the end of the first thousand years the good

souls and also the evil souls both come to draw lots and choose their second

life, and they may take any which they please. The soul of a man may pass

into the life of a beast, or from the beast return again into the man. But the

soul which has never seen the truth will not pass into the human form. For a

man must have intelligence of universals, and be able to proceed from the

many  particulars  of  sense  to  one  conception  of  reason;--this  is  the

recollection of those things which our soul once saw while following God--

when regardless of that which we now call being she raised her head up

towards the true being. And therefore the mind of the philosopher alone has

wings; and this is just, for he is always, according to the measure of his

abilities, clinging in recollection to those things in which God abides, and in

beholding  which  He  is  what  He  is.  And  he  who  employs  aright  these

memories is ever being initiated into perfect mysteries and alone becomes

truly perfect. But, as he forgets earthly interests and is rapt in the divine, the

vulgar deem him mad, and rebuke him; they do not see that he is inspired.Thus far I have been speaking of the fourth and last kind of madness, which

is imputed to him who, when he sees the beauty of earth, is transported with

the recollection of the true beauty; he would like to fly away, but he cannot;

he is like a bird fluttering and looking upward and careless of the world

below; and he is therefore thought to be mad. And I have shown this of all

inspirations to be the noblest and highest and the offspring of the highest to

him who has or shares in it, and that he who loves the beautiful is called a

lover because he partakes of it. For, as has been already said, every soul of

man has in the way of nature beheld true being; this was the condition of her

passing into the form of man. But all souls do not easily recall the things of

the other world; they may have seen them for a short time only, or they may

have been unfortunate in their earthly lot, and, having had their hearts turned

to unrighteousness through some corrupting influence, they may have lost the

memory of the holy things which once they saw. Few only retain an adequate

remembrance of them; and they, when they behold here any image of that

other world, are rapt in amazement; but they are ignorant of what this rapture

means, because they do not clearly perceive. For there is no light of justice or

temperance or any of the higher ideas which are precious to souls in the

earthly copies of them: they are seen through a glass dimly; and there are few

who, going to the images, behold in them the realities, and these only with

difficulty. There was a time when with the rest of the happy band they saw

beauty shining in brightness,--we philosophers following in the train of Zeus,

others in company with other gods; and then we beheld the beatific vision

and were initiated into a mystery which may be truly called most blessed,

celebrated by us in our state of innocence, before we had any experience of

evils to come, when we were admitted to the sight of apparitions innocent

and simple and calm and happy, which we beheld shining in pure light, pure

ourselves and not yet enshrined in that living tomb which we carry about,

now that we are imprisoned in the body, like an oyster in his shell. Let me

linger over the memory of scenes which have passed away.


But of beauty, I repeat again that we saw her there shining in company with

the celestial forms; and coming to earth we find her here too, shining in

clearness through the clearest aperture of sense. For sight is the most piercing

of our bodily senses; though not by that is wisdom seen; her loveliness would

have been transporting if there had been a visible image of her, and the other

ideas, if they had visible counterparts, would be equally lovely. But this is theprivilege of beauty, that being the loveliest she is also the most palpable to

sight. Now he who is not newly initiated or who has become corrupted, does

not easily rise out of this world to the sight of true beauty in the other; he

looks only at her earthly namesake, and instead of being awed at the sight of

her, he is given over to pleasure, and like a brutish beast he rushes on to

enjoy and beget; he consorts with wantonness, and is not afraid or ashamed

of pursuing pleasure in violation of nature. But he whose initiation is recent,

and who has been the spectator of many glories in the other world, is amazed

when he sees any one having a godlike face or form, which is the expression

of divine beauty; and at first a shudder runs through him, and again the old

awe steals over him; then looking upon the face of his beloved as of a god he

reverences  him,  and  if  he  were  not  afraid  of  being  thought  a  downright

madman, he would sacrifice to his beloved as to the image of a god; then

while he gazes on him there is a sort of reaction, and the shudder passes into

an unusual heat and perspiration; for, as he receives the effluence of beauty

through the eyes, the wing moistens and he warms. And as he warms, the

parts out of which the wing grew, and which had been hitherto closed and

rigid, and had prevented the wing from shooting forth, are melted, and as

nourishment streams upon him, the lower end of the wing begins to swell and

grow from the root upwards; and the growth extends under the whole soul--

for once the whole was winged. During this process the whole soul is all in a

state  of  ebullition  and  effervescence,--which  may  be  compared  to  the

irritation and uneasiness in the gums at the time of cutting teeth,--bubbles up,

and has a feeling of uneasiness and tickling; but when in like manner the soul

is beginning to grow wings, the beauty of the beloved meets her eye and she

receives  the  sensible  warm  motion  of  particles  which  flow  towards  her,

therefore called emotion (imeros), and is refreshed and warmed by them, and

then she ceases from her pain with joy. But when she is parted from her

beloved and her moisture fails, then the orifices of the passage out of which

the wing shoots dry up and close, and intercept the germ of the wing; which,

being shut up with the emotion, throbbing as with the pulsations of an artery,

pricks the aperture which is nearest, until at length the entire soul is pierced

and  maddened  and  pained,  and  at  the  recollection  of  beauty  is  again

delighted.  And  from  both  of  them  together  the  soul  is  oppressed  at  the

strangeness of her condition, and is in a great strait and excitement, and in her

madness  can  neither  sleep  by  night  nor  abide  in  her  place  by  day.  And

wherever  she  thinks  that  she  will  behold  the  beautiful  one,  thither  in  herdesire she runs. And when she has seen him, and bathed herself in the waters

of beauty, her constraint is loosened, and she is refreshed, and has no more

pangs and pains; and this is the sweetest of all pleasures at the time, and is the

reason why the soul of the lover will never forsake his beautiful one, whom

he esteems above all; he has forgotten mother and brethren and companions,

and he thinks nothing of the neglect and loss of his property; the rules and

proprieties of life, on which he formerly prided himself, he now despises, and

is ready to sleep like a servant, wherever he is allowed, as near as he can to

his desired one, who is the object of his worship, and the physician who can

alone assuage the greatness of his pain. And this state, my dear imaginary

youth to whom I am talking, is by men called love, and among the gods has a

name at which you, in your simplicity, may be inclined to mock; there are

two lines in the apocryphal writings of Homer in which the name occurs. One

of them is rather outrageous, and not altogether metrical. They are as follows:


'Mortals call him fluttering love, But the immortals call him winged one,

Because the growing of wings (Or, reading pterothoiton, 'the movement of

wings.') is a necessity to him.'


You may believe this, but not unless you like. At any rate the loves of lovers

and their causes are such as I have described.


Now the lover who is taken to be the attendant of Zeus is better able to bear

the winged god, and can endure a heavier burden; but the attendants and

companions of Ares, when under the influence of love, if they fancy that they

have been at all wronged, are ready to kill and put an end to themselves and

their beloved. And he who follows in the train of any other god, while he is

unspoiled and the impression lasts, honours and imitates him, as far as he is

able; and after the manner of his God he behaves in his intercourse with his

beloved and with the rest of the world during the first period of his earthly

existence. Every one chooses his love from the ranks of beauty according to

his character, and this he makes his god, and fashions and adorns as a sort of

image which he is to fall down and worship. The followers of Zeus desire

that their beloved should have a soul like him; and therefore they seek out

some one of a philosophical and imperial nature, and when they have found

him and loved him, they do all they can to confirm such a nature in him, and

if they have no experience of such a disposition hitherto, they learn of any