which is the most free-spoken state in Hellas, you when you got there, and

you alone, should be deprived of the power of speech--that would be hard

indeed. But then consider my case:--shall not I be very hardly used, if, when

you are making a long oration, and refusing to answer what you are asked, I

am compelled to stay and listen to you, and may not go away? I say rather, if

you have a real interest in the argument, or, to repeat my former expression,

have  any  desire  to  set  it  on  its  legs,  take  back  any  statement  which  you

please; and in your turn ask and answer, like myself and Gorgias--refute and

be refuted: for I suppose that you would claim to know what Gorgias knows--

would you not?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And you, like him, invite any one to ask you about anything

which he pleases, and you will know how to answer him?


POLUS: To be sure.


SOCRATES: And now, which will you do, ask or answer?


POLUS: I will ask; and do you answer me, Socrates, the same question which

Gorgias, as you suppose, is unable to answer: What is rhetoric?


SOCRATES: Do you mean what sort of an art?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: To say the truth, Polus, it is not an art at all, in my opinion.


POLUS: Then what, in your opinion, is rhetoric?


SOCRATES: A thing which, as I was lately reading in a book of yours, you

say that you have made an art.


POLUS: What thing?


SOCRATES: I should say a sort of experience.POLUS: Does rhetoric seem to you to be an experience?


SOCRATES: That is my view, but you may be of another mind.


POLUS: An experience in what?


SOCRATES: An experience in producing a sort of delight and gratification.


POLUS: And if able to gratify others, must not rhetoric be a fine thing?


SOCRATES:  What  are  you  saying,  Polus?  Why  do  you  ask  me  whether

rhetoric is a fine thing or not, when I have not as yet told you what rhetoric

is?


POLUS: Did I not hear you say that rhetoric was a sort of experience?


SOCRATES: Will you, who are so desirous to gratify others, afford a slight

gratification to me?


POLUS: I will.


SOCRATES: Will you ask me, what sort of an art is cookery?


POLUS: What sort of an art is cookery?


SOCRATES: Not an art at all, Polus.


POLUS: What then?


SOCRATES: I should say an experience.


POLUS: In what? I wish that you would explain to me.


SOCRATES: An experience in producing a sort of delight and gratification,

Polus.


POLUS: Then are cookery and rhetoric the same?SOCRATES: No, they are only different parts of the same profession.


POLUS: Of what profession?


SOCRATES: I am afraid that the truth may seem discourteous; and I hesitate

to answer, lest Gorgias should imagine that I am making fun of his own

profession.  For  whether  or  no  this  is  that  art  of  rhetoric  which  Gorgias

practises I really cannot tell:--from what he was just now saying, nothing

appeared of what he thought of his art, but the rhetoric which I mean is a part

of a not very creditable whole.


GORGIAS: A part of what, Socrates? Say what you mean, and never mind

me.


SOCRATES: In my opinion then, Gorgias, the whole of which rhetoric is a

part is not an art at all, but the habit of a bold and ready wit, which knows

how to manage mankind: this habit I sum up under the word 'flattery'; and it

appears to me to have many other parts, one of which is cookery, which may

seem to be an art, but, as I maintain, is only an experience or routine and not

an art:--another part is rhetoric, and the art of attiring and sophistry are two

others: thus there are four branches, and four different things answering to

them. And Polus may ask, if he likes, for he has not as yet been informed,

what part of flattery is rhetoric: he did not see that I had not yet answered him

when he proceeded to ask a further question: Whether I do not think rhetoric

a fine thing? But I shall not tell him whether rhetoric is a fine thing or not,

until I have first answered, 'What is rhetoric?' For that would not be right,

Polus; but I shall be happy to answer, if you will ask me, What part of flattery

is rhetoric?


POLUS: I will ask and do you answer? What part of flattery is rhetoric?


SOCRATES: Will you understand my answer? Rhetoric, according to my

view, is the ghost or counterfeit of a part of politics.


POLUS: And noble or ignoble?


SOCRATES: Ignoble, I should say, if I am compelled to answer, for I callwhat  is  bad  ignoble:  though  I  doubt  whether  you  understand  what  I  was

saying before.


GORGIAS: Indeed, Socrates, I cannot say that I understand myself.


SOCRATES:  I  do  not  wonder,  Gorgias;  for  I  have  not  as  yet  explained

myself, and our friend Polus, colt by name and colt by nature, is apt to run

away. (This is an untranslatable play on the name 'Polus,' which means 'a

colt.')


GORGIAS: Never mind him, but explain to me what you mean by saying

that rhetoric is the counterfeit of a part of politics.


SOCRATES: I will try, then, to explain my notion of rhetoric, and if I am

mistaken, my friend Polus shall refute me. We may assume the existence of

bodies and of souls?


GORGIAS: Of course.


SOCRATES: You would further admit that there is a good condition of either

of them?


GORGIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  Which  condition  may  not  be  really  good,  but  good  only  in

appearance? I mean to say, that there are many persons who appear to be in

good health, and whom only a physician or trainer will discern at first sight

not to be in good health.


GORGIAS: True.


SOCRATES: And this applies not only to the body, but also to the soul: in

either there may be that which gives the appearance of health and not the

reality?


GORGIAS: Yes, certainly.


SOCRATES: And now I will endeavour to explain to you more clearly what Imean: The soul and body being two, have two arts corresponding to them:

there is the art of politics attending on the soul; and another art attending on

the body, of which I know no single name, but which may be described as

having two divisions, one of them gymnastic, and the other medicine. And in

politics there is a legislative part, which answers to gymnastic, as justice does

to medicine; and the two parts run into one another, justice having to do with

the  same  subject  as  legislation,  and  medicine  with  the  same  subject  as

gymnastic, but with a difference. Now, seeing that there are these four arts,

two attending on the body and two on the soul for their highest good; flattery

knowing, or rather guessing their natures, has distributed herself into four

shams or simulations of them; she puts on the likeness of some one or other

of them, and pretends to be that which she simulates, and having no regard

for men's highest interests, is ever making pleasure the bait of the unwary,

and deceiving them into the belief that she is of the highest value to them.

Cookery simulates the disguise of medicine, and pretends to know what food

is the best for the body; and if the physician and the cook had to enter into a

competition in which children were the judges, or men who had no more

sense than children, as to which of them best understands the goodness or

badness of food, the physician would be starved to death. A flattery I deem

this to be and of an ignoble sort, Polus, for to you I am now addressing

myself, because it aims at pleasure without any thought of the best. An art I

do not call it, but only an experience, because it is unable to explain or to

give a reason of the nature of its own applications. And I do not call any

irrational thing an art; but if you dispute my words, I am prepared to argue in

defence of them.


Cookery, then, I maintain to be a flattery which takes the form of medicine;

and tiring, in like manner, is a flattery which takes the form of gymnastic, and

is knavish, false, ignoble, illiberal, working deceitfully by the help of lines,

and colours, and enamels, and garments, and making men affect a spurious

beauty to the neglect of the true beauty which is given by gymnastic.


I would rather not be tedious, and therefore I will only say, after the manner

of the geometricians (for I think that by this time you will be able to follow)


as tiring : gymnastic :: cookery : medicine;or rather,


as tiring : gymnastic :: sophistry : legislation;


and


as cookery : medicine :: rhetoric : justice.


And  this,  I  say,  is  the  natural  difference  between  the  rhetorician  and  the

sophist, but by reason of their near connection, they are apt to be jumbled up

together; neither do they know what to make of themselves, nor do other men

know what to make of them. For if the body presided over itself, and were

not  under  the  guidance  of  the  soul,  and  the  soul  did  not  discern  and

discriminate  between  cookery  and  medicine,  but  the  body  was  made  the

judge of them, and the rule of judgment was the bodily delight which was

given by them, then the word of Anaxagoras, that word with which you,

friend  Polus,  are  so  well  acquainted,  would  prevail  far  and  wide:  'Chaos'

would come again, and cookery, health, and medicine would mingle in an

indiscriminate mass. And now I have told you my notion of rhetoric, which

is, in relation to the soul, what cookery is to the body. I may have been

inconsistent  in  making  a  long  speech,  when  I  would  not  allow  you  to

discourse at length. But I think that I may be excused, because you did not

understand me, and could make no use of my answer when I spoke shortly,

and therefore I had to enter into an explanation. And if I show an equal

inability to make use of yours, I hope that you will speak at equal length; but

if I am able to understand you, let me have the benefit of your brevity, as is

only fair: And now you may do what you please with my answer.


POLUS: What do you mean? do you think that rhetoric is flattery?


SOCRATES: Nay, I said a part of flattery; if at your age, Polus, you cannot

remember, what will you do by-and-by, when you get older?


POLUS: And are the good rhetoricians meanly regarded in states, under the

idea that they are flatterers?


SOCRATES: Is that a question or the beginning of a speech?POLUS: I am asking a question.


SOCRATES: Then my answer is, that they are not regarded at all.


POLUS: How not regarded? Have they not very great power in states?


SOCRATES: Not if you mean to say that power is a good to the possessor.


POLUS: And that is what I do mean to say.


SOCRATES: Then, if so, I think that they have the least power of all the

citizens.


POLUS: What! are they not like tyrants? They kill and despoil and exile any

one whom they please.


SOCRATES: By the dog, Polus, I cannot make out at each deliverance of

yours, whether you are giving an opinion of your own, or asking a question

of me.


POLUS: I am asking a question of you.


SOCRATES: Yes, my friend, but you ask two questions at once.


POLUS: How two questions?


SOCRATES: Why, did you not say just now that the rhetoricians are like

tyrants, and that they kill and despoil or exile any one whom they please?


POLUS: I did.


SOCRATES: Well then, I say to you that here are two questions in one, and I

will answer both of them. And I tell you, Polus, that rhetoricians and tyrants

have the least possible power in states, as I was just now saying; for they do

literally nothing which they will, but only what they think best.


POLUS: And is not that a great power?SOCRATES: Polus has already said the reverse.


POLUS: Said the reverse! nay, that is what I assert.


SOCRATES: No, by the great--what do you call him?--not you, for you say

that power is a good to him who has the power.


POLUS: I do.


SOCRATES: And would you maintain that if a fool does what he thinks best,

this is a good, and would you call this great power?


POLUS: I should not.


SOCRATES: Then you must prove that the rhetorician is not a fool, and that

rhetoric is an art and not a flattery--and so you will have refuted me; but if

you leave me unrefuted, why, the rhetoricians who do what they think best in

states,  and  the  tyrants,  will  have  nothing  upon  which  to  congratulate

themselves, if as you say, power be indeed a good, admitting at the same time

that what is done without sense is an evil.


POLUS: Yes; I admit that.


SOCRATES: How then can the rhetoricians or the tyrants have great power

in states, unless Polus can refute Socrates, and prove to him that they do as

they will?


POLUS: This fellow--


SOCRATES: I say that they do not do as they will;--now refute me.


POLUS: Why, have you not already said that they do as they think best?


SOCRATES: And I say so still.


POLUS: Then surely they do as they will?


SOCRATES: I deny it.POLUS: But they do what they think best?


SOCRATES: Aye.


POLUS: That, Socrates, is monstrous and absurd.


SOCRATES: Good words, good Polus, as I may say in your own peculiar

style; but if you have any questions to ask of me, either prove that I am in

error or give the answer yourself.


POLUS: Very well, I am willing to answer that I may know what you mean.


SOCRATES: Do men appear to you to will that which they do, or to will that

further end for the sake of which they do a thing? when they take medicine,

for example, at the bidding of a physician, do they will the drinking of the

medicine which is painful, or the health for the sake of which they drink?


POLUS: Clearly, the health.


SOCRATES: And when men go on a voyage or engage in business, they do

not will that which they are doing at the time; for who would desire to take

the risk of a voyage or the trouble of business?--But they will, to have the

wealth for the sake of which they go on a voyage.


POLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And is not this universally true? If a man does something for

the sake of something else, he wills not that which he does, but that for the

sake of which he does it.


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And are not all things either good or evil, or intermediate and

indifferent?


POLUS: To be sure, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Wisdom and health and wealth and the like you would callgoods, and their opposites evils?


POLUS: I should.


SOCRATES:  And  the  things  which  are  neither  good  nor  evil,  and  which

partake sometimes of the nature of good and at other times of evil, or of

neither, are such as sitting, walking, running, sailing; or, again, wood, stones,

and the like:--these are the things which you call neither good nor evil?


POLUS: Exactly so.


SOCRATES: Are these indifferent things done for the sake of the good, or

the good for the sake of the indifferent?


POLUS: Clearly, the indifferent for the sake of the good.


SOCRATES: When we walk we walk for the sake of the good, and under the

idea that it is better to walk, and when we stand we stand equally for the sake

of the good?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And when we kill a man we kill him or exile him or despoil

him of his goods, because, as we think, it will conduce to our good?


POLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Men who do any of these things do them for the sake of the

good?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And did we not admit that in doing something for the sake of

something else, we do not will those things which we do, but that other thing

for the sake of which we do them?


POLUS: Most true.SOCRATES: Then we do not will simply to kill a man or to exile him or to

despoil him of his goods, but we will to do that which conduces to our good,

and if the act is not conducive to our good we do not will it; for we will, as

you say, that which is our good, but that which is neither good nor evil, or

simply evil, we do not will. Why are you silent, Polus? Am I not right?


POLUS: You are right.


SOCRATES: Hence we may infer, that if any one, whether he be a tyrant or a

rhetorician, kills another or exiles another or deprives him of his property,

under the idea that the act is for his own interests when really not for his own

interests, he may be said to do what seems best to him?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: But does he do what he wills if he does what is evil? Why do

you not answer?


POLUS: Well, I suppose not.


SOCRATES: Then if great power is a good as you allow, will such a one

have great power in a state?


POLUS: He will not.


SOCRATES: Then I was right in saying that a man may do what seems good

to him in a state, and not have great power, and not do what he wills?


POLUS: As though you, Socrates, would not like to have the power of doing

what seemed good to you in the state, rather than not; you would not be

jealous when you saw any one killing or despoiling or imprisoning whom he

pleased, Oh, no!


SOCRATES: Justly or unjustly, do you mean?


POLUS: In either case is he not equally to be envied?


SOCRATES: Forbear, Polus!POLUS: Why 'forbear'?


SOCRATES: Because you ought not to envy wretches who are not to be

envied, but only to pity them.


POLUS: And are those of whom I spoke wretches?


SOCRATES: Yes, certainly they are.


POLUS: And so you think that he who slays any one whom he pleases, and

justly slays him, is pitiable and wretched?


SOCRATES: No, I do not say that of him: but neither do I think that he is to

be envied.


POLUS: Were you not saying just now that he is wretched?


SOCRATES: Yes, my friend, if he killed another unjustly, in which case he

is also to be pitied; and he is not to be envied if he killed him justly.


POLUS: At any rate you will allow that he who is unjustly put to death is

wretched, and to be pitied?


SOCRATES: Not so much, Polus, as he who kills him, and not so much as he

who is justly killed.


POLUS: How can that be, Socrates?


SOCRATES:  That  may  very  well  be,  inasmuch  as  doing  injustice  is  the

greatest of evils.


POLUS: But is it the greatest? Is not suffering injustice a greater evil?


SOCRATES: Certainly not.


POLUS: Then would you rather suffer than do injustice?


SOCRATES: I should not like either, but if I must choose between them, Iwould rather suffer than do.


POLUS: Then you would not wish to be a tyrant?


SOCRATES: Not if you mean by tyranny what I mean.


POLUS: I mean, as I said before, the power of doing whatever seems good to

you in a state, killing, banishing, doing in all things as you like.


SOCRATES: Well then, illustrious friend, when I have said my say, do you

reply to me. Suppose that I go into a crowded Agora, and take a dagger under

my arm. Polus, I say to you, I have just acquired rare power, and become a

tyrant; for if I think that any of these men whom you see ought to be put to

death, the man whom I have a mind to kill is as good as dead; and if I am

disposed to break his head or tear his garment, he will have his head broken

or his garment torn in an instant. Such is my great power in this city. And if

you do not believe me, and I show you the dagger, you would probably reply:

Socrates, in that sort of way any one may have great power--he may burn any

house which he pleases, and the docks and triremes of the Athenians, and all

their other vessels, whether public or private-- but can you believe that this

mere doing as you think best is great power?


POLUS: Certainly not such doing as this.


SOCRATES: But can you tell me why you disapprove of such a power?


POLUS: I can.


SOCRATES: Why then?


POLUS:  Why,  because  he  who  did  as  you  say  would  be  certain  to  be

punished.


SOCRATES: And punishment is an evil?


POLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And you would admit once more, my good sir, that great poweris a benefit to a man if his actions turn out to his advantage, and that this is

the meaning of great power; and if not, then his power is an evil and is no

power. But let us look at the matter in another way:--do we not acknowledge

that the things of which we were speaking, the infliction of death, and exile,

and the deprivation of property are sometimes a good and sometimes not a

good?


POLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: About that you and I may be supposed to agree?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Tell me, then, when do you say that they are good and when

that they are evil--what principle do you lay down?


POLUS: I would rather, Socrates, that you should answer as well as ask that

question.


SOCRATES: Well, Polus, since you would rather have the answer from me, I

say that they are good when they are just, and evil when they are unjust.


POLUS: You are hard of refutation, Socrates, but might not a child refute that

statement?


SOCRATES: Then I shall be very grateful to the child, and equally grateful

to you if you will refute me and deliver me from my foolishness. And I hope

that refute me you will, and not weary of doing good to a friend.


POLUS: Yes, Socrates, and I need not go far or appeal to antiquity; events

which happened only a few days ago are enough to refute you, and to prove

that many men who do wrong are happy.


SOCRATES: What events?


POLUS: You see, I presume, that Archelaus the son of Perdiccas is now the

ruler of Macedonia?SOCRATES: At any rate I hear that he is.


POLUS: And do you think that he is happy or miserable?


SOCRATES: I cannot say, Polus, for I have never had any acquaintance with

him.


POLUS: And cannot you tell at once, and without having an acquaintance

with him, whether a man is happy?


SOCRATES: Most certainly not.


POLUS: Then clearly, Socrates, you would say that you did not even know

whether the great king was a happy man?


SOCRATES: And I should speak the truth; for I do not know how he stands

in the matter of education and justice.


POLUS: What! and does all happiness consist in this?


SOCRATES: Yes, indeed, Polus, that is my doctrine; the men and women

who are gentle and good are also happy, as I maintain, and the unjust and evil

are miserable.


POLUS: Then, according to your doctrine, the said Archelaus is miserable?


SOCRATES: Yes, my friend, if he is wicked.


POLUS: That he is wicked I cannot deny; for he had no title at all to the

throne which he now occupies, he being only the son of a woman who was

the slave of Alcetas the brother of Perdiccas; he himself therefore in strict

right was the slave of Alcetas; and if he had meant to do rightly he would

have remained his slave, and then, according to your doctrine, he would have

been happy. But now he is unspeakably miserable, for he has been guilty of

the greatest crimes: in the first place he invited his uncle and master, Alcetas,

to come to him, under the pretence that he would restore to him the throne

which  Perdiccas  has  usurped,  and  after  entertaining  him  and  his  son

Alexander, who was his own cousin, and nearly of an age with him, andmaking them drunk, he threw them into a waggon and carried them off by

night, and slew them, and got both of them out of the way; and when he had

done all this wickedness he never discovered that he was the most miserable

of all men, and was very far from repenting: shall I tell you how he showed

his remorse? he had a younger brother, a child of seven years old, who was

the legitimate son of Perdiccas, and to him of right the kingdom belonged;

Archelaus, however, had no mind to bring him up as he ought and restore the

kingdom to him; that was not his notion of happiness; but not long afterwards

he  threw  him  into  a  well  and  drowned  him,  and  declared  to  his  mother

Cleopatra that he had fallen in while running after a goose, and had been

killed. And now as he is the greatest criminal of all the Macedonians, he may

be supposed to be the most miserable and not the happiest of them, and I dare

say that there are many Athenians, and you would be at the head of them,

who would rather be any other Macedonian than Archelaus!


SOCRATES: I praised you at first, Polus, for being a rhetorician rather than a

reasoner. And this, as I suppose, is the sort of argument with which you fancy

that a child might refute me, and by which I stand refuted when I say that the

unjust man is not happy. But, my good friend, where is the refutation? I

cannot admit a word which you have been saying.


POLUS: That is because you will not; for you surely must think as I do.


SOCRATES: Not so, my simple friend, but because you will refute me after

the manner which rhetoricians practise in courts of law. For there the one

party think that they refute the other when they bring forward a number of

witnesses of good repute in proof of their allegations, and their adversary has

only a single one or none at all. But this kind of proof is of no value where

truth is the aim; a man may often be sworn down by a multitude of false

witnesses who have a great air of respectability. And in this argument nearly

every one, Athenian and stranger alike, would be on your side, if you should

bring witnesses in disproof of my statement;--you may, if you will, summon

Nicias the son of Niceratus, and let his brothers, who gave the row of tripods

which  stand  in  the  precincts  of  Dionysus,  come  with  him;  or  you  may

summon Aristocrates, the son of Scellius, who is the giver of that famous

offering which is at Delphi; summon, if you will, the whole house of Pericles,

or any other great Athenian family whom you choose;-- they will all agreewith you: I only am left alone and cannot agree, for you do not convince me;

although  you  produce  many  false  witnesses  against  me,  in  the  hope  of

depriving  me  of  my  inheritance,  which  is  the  truth.  But  I  consider  that

nothing worth speaking of will have been effected by me unless I make you

the  one  witness  of  my  words;  nor  by  you,  unless  you  make  me  the  one

witness of yours; no matter about the rest of the world. For there are two

ways of refutation, one which is yours and that of the world in general; but

mine is of another sort--let us compare them, and see in what they differ. For,

indeed, we are at issue about matters which to know is honourable and not to

know disgraceful; to know or not to know happiness and misery--that is the

chief of them. And what knowledge can be nobler? or what ignorance more

disgraceful than this? And therefore I will begin by asking you whether you

do not think that a man who is unjust and doing injustice can be happy,

seeing that you think Archelaus unjust, and yet happy? May I assume this to

be your opinion?


POLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: But I say that this is an impossibility--here is one point about

which we are at issue:--very good. And do you mean to say also that if he

meets with retribution and punishment he will still be happy?


POLUS: Certainly not; in that case he will be most miserable.


SOCRATES:  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  unjust  be  not  punished,  then,

according to you, he will be happy?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: But in my opinion, Polus, the unjust or doer of unjust actions is

miserable in any case,--more miserable, however, if he be not punished and

does  not  meet  with  retribution,  and  less  miserable  if  he  be  punished  and

meets with retribution at the hands of gods and men.


POLUS: You are maintaining a strange doctrine, Socrates.


SOCRATES: I shall try to make you agree with me, O my friend, for as afriend I regard you. Then these are the points at issue between us--are they

not? I was saying that to do is worse than to suffer injustice?


POLUS: Exactly so.


SOCRATES: And you said the opposite?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: I said also that the wicked are miserable, and you refuted me?


POLUS: By Zeus, I did.


SOCRATES: In your own opinion, Polus.


POLUS: Yes, and I rather suspect that I was in the right.


SOCRATES:  You  further  said  that  the  wrong-doer  is  happy  if  he  be

unpunished?


POLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And I affirm that he is most miserable, and that those who are

punished are less miserable--are you going to refute this proposition also?


POLUS: A proposition which is harder of refutation than the other, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Say rather, Polus, impossible; for who can refute the truth?


POLUS: What do you mean? If a man is detected in an unjust attempt to

make himself a tyrant, and when detected is racked, mutilated, has his eyes

burned out, and after having had all sorts of great injuries inflicted on him,

and having seen his wife and children suffer the like, is at last impaled or

tarred and burned alive, will he be happier than if he escape and become a

tyrant, and continue all through life doing what he likes and holding the reins

of government, the envy and admiration both of citizens and strangers? Is that

the paradox which, as you say, cannot be refuted?SOCRATES: There again, noble Polus, you are raising hobgoblins instead of

refuting me; just now you were calling witnesses against me. But please to

refresh  my  memory  a  little;  did  you  say--'in  an  unjust  attempt  to  make

himself a tyrant'?


POLUS: Yes, I did.


SOCRATES: Then I say that neither of them will be happier than the other, --

neither he who unjustly acquires a tyranny, nor he who suffers in the attempt,

for of two miserables one cannot be the happier, but that he who escapes and

becomes a tyrant is the more miserable of the two. Do you laugh, Polus?

Well, this is a new kind of refutation,--when any one says anything, instead

of refuting him to laugh at him.


POLUS:  But  do  you  not  think,  Socrates,  that  you  have  been  sufficiently

refuted,  when  you  say  that  which  no  human  being  will  allow?  Ask  the

company.


SOCRATES: O Polus, I am not a public man, and only last year, when my

tribe were serving as Prytanes, and it became my duty as their president to

take the votes, there was a laugh at me, because I was unable to take them.

And  as  I  failed  then,  you  must  not  ask  me  to  count  the  suffrages  of  the

company now; but if, as I was saying, you have no better argument than

numbers, let me have a turn, and do you make trial of the sort of proof which,

as I think, is required; for I shall produce one witness only of the truth of my

words, and he is the person with whom I am arguing; his suffrage I know

how to take; but with the many I have nothing to do, and do not even address

myself to them. May I ask then whether you will answer in turn and have

your words put to the proof? For I certainly think that I and you and every

man do really believe, that to do is a greater evil than to suffer injustice: and

not to be punished than to be punished.


POLUS: And I should say neither I, nor any man: would you yourself, for

example, suffer rather than do injustice?


SOCRATES: Yes, and you, too; I or any man would.POLUS: Quite the reverse; neither you, nor I, nor any man.


SOCRATES: But will you answer?


POLUS: To be sure, I will; for I am curious to hear what you can have to say.


SOCRATES: Tell me, then, and you will know, and let us suppose that I am

beginning at the beginning: which of the two, Polus, in your opinion, is the

worst?--to do injustice or to suffer?


POLUS: I should say that suffering was worst.


SOCRATES: And which is the greater disgrace?--Answer.


POLUS: To do.


SOCRATES: And the greater disgrace is the greater evil?


POLUS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES:  I  understand  you  to  say,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  that  the

honourable is not the same as the good, or the disgraceful as the evil?


POLUS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: Let me ask a question of you: When you speak of beautiful

things, such as bodies, colours, figures, sounds, institutions, do you not call

them  beautiful  in  reference  to  some  standard:  bodies,  for  example,  are

beautiful  in  proportion  as  they  are  useful,  or  as  the  sight  of  them  gives

pleasure to the spectators; can you give any other account of personal beauty?


POLUS: I cannot.


SOCRATES: And you would say of figures or colours generally that they

were beautiful, either by reason of the pleasure which they give, or of their

use, or of both?


POLUS: Yes, I should.SOCRATES: And you would call sounds and music beautiful for the same

reason?


POLUS: I should.


SOCRATES: Laws and institutions also have no beauty in them except in so

far as they are useful or pleasant or both?


POLUS: I think not.


SOCRATES: And may not the same be said of the beauty of knowledge?


POLUS: To be sure, Socrates; and I very much approve of your measuring

beauty by the standard of pleasure and utility.


SOCRATES: And deformity or disgrace may be equally measured by the

opposite standard of pain and evil?


POLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Then when of two beautiful things one exceeds in beauty, the

measure of the excess is to be taken in one or both of these; that is to say, in

pleasure or utility or both?


POLUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: And of two deformed things, that which exceeds in deformity

or disgrace, exceeds either in pain or evil--must it not be so?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: But then again, what was the observation which you just now

made,  about  doing  and  suffering  wrong?  Did  you  not  say,  that  suffering

wrong was more evil, and doing wrong more disgraceful?


POLUS: I did.


SOCRATES: Then, if doing wrong is more disgraceful than suffering, themore disgraceful must be more painful and must exceed in pain or in evil or

both: does not that also follow?


POLUS: Of course.


SOCRATES:  First,  then,  let  us  consider  whether  the  doing  of  injustice

exceeds the suffering in the consequent pain: Do the injurers suffer more than

the injured?


POLUS: No, Socrates; certainly not.


SOCRATES: Then they do not exceed in pain?


POLUS: No.


SOCRATES: But if not in pain, then not in both?


POLUS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: Then they can only exceed in the other?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: That is to say, in evil?


POLUS: True.


SOCRATES:  Then  doing  injustice  will  have  an  excess  of  evil,  and  will

therefore be a greater evil than suffering injustice?


POLUS: Clearly.


SOCRATES:  But  have  not  you  and  the  world  already  agreed  that  to  do

injustice is more disgraceful than to suffer?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And that is now discovered to be more evil?POLUS: True.


SOCRATES: And would you prefer a greater evil or a greater dishonour to a

less one? Answer, Polus, and fear not; for you will come to no harm if you

nobly resign yourself into the healing hand of the argument as to a physician

without shrinking, and either say 'Yes' or 'No' to me.


POLUS: I should say 'No.'


SOCRATES: Would any other man prefer a greater to a less evil?


POLUS: No, not according to this way of putting the case, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Then I said truly, Polus, that neither you, nor I, nor any man,

would rather do than suffer injustice; for to do injustice is the greater evil of

the two.


POLUS: That is the conclusion.


SOCRATES:  You  see,  Polus,  when  you  compare  the  two  kinds  of

refutations, how unlike they are. All men, with the exception of myself, are of

your way of thinking; but your single assent and witness are enough for me,--

I have no need of any other, I take your suffrage, and am regardless of the

rest. Enough of this, and now let us proceed to the next question; which is,

Whether the greatest of evils to a guilty man is to suffer punishment, as you

supposed,  or  whether  to  escape  punishment  is  not  a  greater  evil,  as  I

supposed.  Consider:--You  would  say  that  to  suffer  punishment  is  another

name for being justly corrected when you do wrong?


POLUS: I should.


SOCRATES: And would you not allow that all just things are honourable in

so far as they are just? Please to reflect, and tell me your opinion.


POLUS: Yes, Socrates, I think that they are.


SOCRATES: Consider again:--Where there is an agent, must there not also

be a patient?POLUS: I should say so.


SOCRATES: And will not the patient suffer that which the agent does, and

will not the suffering have the quality of the action? I mean, for example, that

if a man strikes, there must be something which is stricken?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And if the striker strikes violently or quickly, that which is

struck will he struck violently or quickly?


POLUS: True.


SOCRATES: And the suffering to him who is stricken is of the same nature

as the act of him who strikes?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And if a man burns, there is something which is burned?


POLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And if he burns in excess or so as to cause pain, the thing

burned will be burned in the same way?


POLUS: Truly.


SOCRATES:  And  if  he  cuts,  the  same  argument  holds--there  will  be

something cut?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And if the cutting be great or deep or such as will cause pain,

the cut will be of the same nature?


POLUS: That is evident.


SOCRATES: Then you would agree generally to the universal propositionwhich I was just now asserting: that the affection of the patient answers to the

affection of the agent?


POLUS: I agree.


SOCRATES: Then, as this is admitted, let me ask whether being punished is

suffering or acting?


POLUS: Suffering, Socrates; there can be no doubt of that.


SOCRATES: And suffering implies an agent?


POLUS: Certainly, Socrates; and he is the punisher.


SOCRATES: And he who punishes rightly, punishes justly?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And therefore he acts justly?


POLUS: Justly.


SOCRATES: Then he who is punished and suffers retribution, suffers justly?


POLUS: That is evident.


SOCRATES: And that which is just has been admitted to be honourable?


POLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Then the punisher does what is honourable, and the punished

suffers what is honourable?


POLUS: True.


SOCRATES:  And  if  what  is  honourable,  then  what  is  good,  for  the

honourable is either pleasant or useful?POLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Then he who is punished suffers what is good?


POLUS: That is true.


SOCRATES: Then he is benefited?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  Do  I  understand  you  to  mean  what  I  mean  by  the  term

'benefited'? I mean, that if he be justly punished his soul is improved.


POLUS: Surely.


SOCRATES: Then he who is punished is delivered from the evil of his soul?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And is he not then delivered from the greatest evil? Look at the

matter in this way:--In respect of a man's estate, do you see any greater evil

than poverty?


POLUS: There is no greater evil.


SOCRATES: Again, in a man's bodily frame, you would say that the evil is

weakness and disease and deformity?


POLUS: I should.


SOCRATES: And do you not imagine that the soul likewise has some evil of

her own?


POLUS: Of course.


SOCRATES: And this you would call injustice and ignorance and cowardice,

and the like?POLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: So then, in mind, body, and estate, which are three, you have

pointed out three corresponding evils--injustice, disease, poverty?


POLUS: True.


SOCRATES: And which of the evils is the most disgraceful?--Is not the most

disgraceful of them injustice, and in general the evil of the soul?


POLUS: By far the most.


SOCRATES: And if the most disgraceful, then also the worst?


POLUS: What do you mean, Socrates?


SOCRATES:  I  mean  to  say,  that  is  most  disgraceful  has  been  already

admitted to be most painful or hurtful, or both.


POLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And now injustice and all evil in the soul has been admitted by

us to be most disgraceful?


POLUS: It has been admitted.


SOCRATES: And most disgraceful either because most painful and causing

excessive pain, or most hurtful, or both?


POLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And therefore to be unjust and intemperate, and cowardly and

ignorant, is more painful than to be poor and sick?


POLUS: Nay, Socrates; the painfulness does not appear to me to follow from

your premises.


SOCRATES: Then, if, as you would argue, not more painful, the evil of thesoul is of all evils the most disgraceful; and the excess of disgrace must be

caused by some preternatural greatness, or extraordinary hurtfulness of the

evil.


POLUS: Clearly.


SOCRATES: And that which exceeds most in hurtfulness will be the greatest

of evils?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then injustice and intemperance, and in general the depravity

of the soul, are the greatest of evils?


POLUS: That is evident.


SOCRATES: Now, what art is there which delivers us from poverty? Does

not the art of making money?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  And  what  art  frees  us  from  disease?  Does  not  the  art  of

medicine?


POLUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: And what from vice and injustice? If you are not able to answer

at once, ask yourself whither we go with the sick, and to whom we take them.


POLUS: To the physicians, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And to whom do we go with the unjust and intemperate?


POLUS: To the judges, you mean.


SOCRATES: --Who are to punish them?


POLUS: Yes.SOCRATES: And do not those who rightly punish others, punish them in

accordance with a certain rule of justice?


POLUS: Clearly.


SOCRATES:  Then  the  art  of  money-making  frees  a  man  from  poverty;

medicine from disease; and justice from intemperance and injustice?


POLUS: That is evident.


SOCRATES: Which, then, is the best of these three?


POLUS: Will you enumerate them?


SOCRATES: Money-making, medicine, and justice.


POLUS: Justice, Socrates, far excels the two others.


SOCRATES: And justice, if the best, gives the greatest pleasure or advantage

or both?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: But is the being healed a pleasant thing, and are those who are

being healed pleased?


POLUS: I think not.


SOCRATES: A useful thing, then?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Yes, because the patient is delivered from a great evil; and this

is the advantage of enduring the pain--that you get well?


POLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And would he be the happier man in his bodily condition, whois healed, or who never was out of health?


POLUS: Clearly he who was never out of health.


SOCRATES: Yes; for happiness surely does not consist in being delivered

from evils, but in never having had them.


POLUS: True.


SOCRATES: And suppose the case of two persons who have some evil in

their bodies, and that one of them is healed and delivered from evil, and

another  is  not  healed,  but  retains  the  evil--which  of  them  is  the  most

miserable?


POLUS: Clearly he who is not healed.


SOCRATES: And was not punishment said by us to be a deliverance from

the greatest of evils, which is vice?


POLUS: True.


SOCRATES: And justice punishes us, and makes us more just, and is the

medicine of our vice?


POLUS: True.


SOCRATES: He, then, has the first place in the scale of happiness who has

never had vice in his soul; for this has been shown to be the greatest of evils.


POLUS: Clearly.


SOCRATES: And he has the second place, who is delivered from vice?


POLUS: True.


SOCRATES: That is to say, he who receives admonition and rebuke and

punishment?POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  Then  he  lives  worst,  who,  having  been  unjust,  has  no

deliverance from injustice?


POLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: That is, he lives worst who commits the greatest crimes, and

who, being the most unjust of men, succeeds in escaping rebuke or correction

or punishment; and this, as you say, has been accomplished by Archelaus and

other tyrants and rhetoricians and potentates? (Compare Republic.)


POLUS: True.


SOCRATES: May not their way of proceeding, my friend, be compared to

the conduct of a person who is afflicted with the worst of diseases and yet

contrives  not  to  pay  the  penalty  to  the  physician  for  his  sins  against  his

constitution, and will not be cured, because, like a child, he is afraid of the

pain of being burned or cut:--Is not that a parallel case?


POLUS: Yes, truly.


SOCRATES: He would seem as if he did not know the nature of health and

bodily vigour; and if we are right, Polus, in our previous conclusions, they

are in a like case who strive to evade justice, which they see to be painful, but

are blind to the advantage which ensues from it, not knowing how far more

miserable a companion a diseased soul is than a diseased body; a soul, I say,

which is corrupt and unrighteous and unholy. And hence they do all that they

can to avoid punishment and to avoid being released from the greatest of

evils; they provide themselves with money and friends, and cultivate to the

utmost their powers of persuasion. But if we, Polus, are right, do you see

what follows, or shall we draw out the consequences in form?


POLUS: If you please.


SOCRATES: Is it not a fact that injustice, and the doing of injustice, is the

greatest of evils?POLUS: That is quite clear.


SOCRATES: And further, that to suffer punishment is the way to be released

from this evil?


POLUS: True.


SOCRATES: And not to suffer, is to perpetuate the evil?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: To do wrong, then, is second only in the scale of evils; but to

do wrong and not to be punished, is first and greatest of all?


POLUS: That is true.


SOCRATES: Well, and was not this the point in dispute, my friend? You

deemed  Archelaus  happy,  because  he  was  a  very  great  criminal  and

unpunished: I, on the other hand, maintained that he or any other who like

him has done wrong and has not been punished, is, and ought to be, the most

miserable of all men; and that the doer of injustice is more miserable than the

sufferer;  and  he  who  escapes  punishment,  more  miserable  than  he  who

suffers.--Was not that what I said?


POLUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And it has been proved to be true?


POLUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES:  Well,  Polus,  but  if  this  is  true,  where  is  the  great  use  of

rhetoric? If we admit what has been just now said, every man ought in every

way to guard himself against doing wrong, for he will thereby suffer great

evil?


POLUS: True.


SOCRATES: And if he, or any one about whom he cares, does wrong, heought of his own accord to go where he will be immediately punished; he

will run to the judge, as he would to the physician, in order that the disease of

injustice may not be rendered chronic and become the incurable cancer of the

soul; must we not allow this consequence, Polus, if our former admissions are

to stand:--is any other inference consistent with them?


POLUS: To that, Socrates, there can be but one answer.


SOCRATES: Then rhetoric is of no use to us, Polus, in helping a man to

excuse his own injustice, that of his parents or friends, or children or country;

but may be of use to any one who holds that instead of excusing he ought to

accuse--himself above all, and in the next degree his family or any of his

friends who may be doing wrong; he should bring to light the iniquity and not

conceal it, that so the wrong-doer may suffer and be made whole; and he

should even force himself and others not to shrink, but with closed eyes like

brave  men  to  let  the  physician  operate  with  knife  or  searing  iron,  not

regarding the pain, in the hope of attaining the good and the honourable; let

him who has done things worthy of stripes, allow himself to be scourged, if

of bonds, to be bound, if of a fine, to be fined, if of exile, to be exiled, if of

death, to die, himself being the first to accuse himself and his own relations,

and using rhetoric to this end, that his and their unjust actions may be made

manifest, and that they themselves may be delivered from injustice, which is

the greatest evil. Then, Polus, rhetoric would indeed be useful. Do you say

'Yes' or 'No' to that?


POLUS: To me, Socrates, what you are saying appears very strange, though

probably in agreement with your premises.


SOCRATES: Is not this the conclusion, if the premises are not disproven?


POLUS: Yes; it certainly is.


SOCRATES: And from the opposite point of view, if indeed it be our duty to

harm another, whether an enemy or not--I except the case of self-defence--

then I have to be upon my guard--but if my enemy injures a third person, then

in every sort of way, by word as well as deed, I should try to prevent his

being punished, or appearing before the judge; and if he appears, I shouldcontrive that he should escape, and not suffer punishment: if he has stolen a

sum of money, let him keep what he has stolen and spend it on him and his,

regardless of religion and justice; and if he have done things worthy of death,

let him not die, but rather be immortal in his wickedness; or, if this is not

possible, let him at any rate be allowed to live as long as he can. For such

purposes, Polus, rhetoric may be useful, but is of small if of any use to him

who is not intending to commit injustice; at least, there was no such use

discovered by us in the previous discussion.


CALLICLES: Tell me, Chaerephon, is Socrates in earnest, or is he joking?


CHAEREPHON: I should say, Callicles, that he is in most profound earnest;

but you may well ask him.


CALLICLES: By the gods, and I will. Tell me, Socrates, are you in earnest,

or only in jest? For if you are in earnest, and what you say is true, is not the

whole of human life turned upside down; and are we not doing, as would

appear, in everything the opposite of what we ought to be doing?


SOCRATES:  O  Callicles,  if  there  were  not  some  community  of  feelings

among  mankind,  however  varying  in  different  persons--I  mean  to  say,  if

every man's feelings were peculiar to himself and were not shared by the rest

of his species--I do not see how we could ever communicate our impressions

to one another. I make this remark because I perceive that you and I have a

common  feeling.  For  we  are  lovers  both,  and  both  of  us  have  two  loves

apiece:--I am the lover of Alcibiades, the son of Cleinias, and of philosophy;

and you of the Athenian Demus, and of Demus the son of Pyrilampes. Now, I

observe that you, with all your cleverness, do not venture to contradict your

favourite  in  any  word  or  opinion  of  his;  but  as  he  changes  you  change,

backwards and forwards. When the Athenian Demus denies anything that you

are saying in the assembly, you go over to his opinion; and you do the same

with Demus, the fair young son of Pyrilampes. For you have not the power to

resist the words and ideas of your loves; and if a person were to express

surprise at the strangeness of what you say from time to time when under

their influence, you would probably reply to him, if you were honest, that you

cannot help saying what your loves say unless they are prevented; and that

you can only be silent when they are. Now you must understand that mywords are an echo too, and therefore you need not wonder at me; but if you

want to silence me, silence philosophy, who is my love, for she is always

telling me what I am now telling you, my friend; neither is she capricious like

my other love, for the son of Cleinias says one thing to-day and another thing

to-morrow, but philosophy is always true. She is the teacher at whose words

you are now wondering, and you have heard her yourself. Her you must

refute, and either show, as I was saying, that to do injustice and to escape

punishment is not the worst of all evils; or, if you leave her word unrefuted,

by the dog the god of Egypt, I declare, O Callicles, that Callicles will never

be at one with himself, but that his whole life will be a discord. And yet, my

friend, I would rather that my lyre should be inharmonious, and that there

should be no music in the chorus which I provided; aye, or that the whole

world should be at odds with me, and oppose me, rather than that I myself

should be at odds with myself, and contradict myself.


CALLICLES:  O  Socrates,  you  are  a  regular  declaimer,  and  seem  to  be

running  riot  in  the  argument.  And  now  you  are  declaiming  in  this  way

because Polus has fallen into the same error himself of which he accused

Gorgias:--for he said that when Gorgias was asked by you, whether, if some

one came to him who wanted to learn rhetoric, and did not know justice, he

would  teach  him  justice,  Gorgias  in  his  modesty  replied  that  he  would,

because  he  thought  that  mankind  in  general  would  be  displeased  if  he

answered  'No';  and  then  in  consequence  of  this  admission,  Gorgias  was

compelled to contradict himself, that being just the sort of thing in which you

delight. Whereupon Polus laughed at you deservedly, as I think; but now he

has himself fallen into the same trap. I cannot say very much for his wit when

he conceded to you that to do is more dishonourable than to suffer injustice,

for this was the admission which led to his being entangled by you; and

because he was too modest to say what he thought, he had his mouth stopped.

For the truth is, Socrates, that you, who pretend to be engaged in the pursuit

of truth, are appealing now to the popular and vulgar notions of right, which

are not natural, but only conventional. Convention and nature are generally at

variance with one another: and hence, if a person is too modest to say what

he thinks, he is compelled to contradict himself; and you, in your ingenuity

perceiving  the  advantage  to  be  thereby  gained,  slyly  ask  of  him  who  is

arguing conventionally a question which is to be determined by the rule of

nature; and if he is talking of the rule of nature, you slip away to custom: as,for  instance,  you  did  in  this  very  discussion  about  doing  and  suffering

injustice. When Polus was speaking of the conventionally dishonourable, you

assailed him from the point of view of nature; for by the rule of nature, to

suffer  injustice  is  the  greater  disgrace  because  the  greater  evil;  but

conventionally,  to  do  evil  is  the  more  disgraceful.  For  the  suffering  of

injustice is not the part of a man, but of a slave, who indeed had better die

than live; since when he is wronged and trampled upon, he is unable to help

himself, or any other about whom he cares. The reason, as I conceive, is that

the makers of laws are the majority who are weak; and they make laws and

distribute praises and censures with a view to themselves and to their own

interests; and they terrify the stronger sort of men, and those who are able to

get the better of them, in order that they may not get the better of them; and

they  say,  that  dishonesty  is  shameful  and  unjust;  meaning,  by  the  word

injustice, the desire of a man to have more than his neighbours; for knowing

their  own  inferiority,  I  suspect  that  they  are  too  glad  of  equality.  And

therefore the endeavour to have more than the many, is conventionally said to

be shameful and unjust, and is called injustice (compare Republic), whereas

nature herself intimates that it is just for the better to have more than the

worse, the more powerful than the weaker; and in many ways she shows,

among men as well as among animals, and indeed among whole cities and

races, that justice consists in the superior ruling over and having more than

the inferior. For on what principle of justice did Xerxes invade Hellas, or his

father the Scythians? (not to speak of numberless other examples). Nay, but

these are the men who act according to nature; yes, by Heaven, and according

to the law of nature: not, perhaps, according to that artificial law, which we

invent and impose upon our fellows, of whom we take the best and strongest

from their youth upwards, and tame them like young lions,-- charming them

with the sound of the voice, and saying to them, that with equality they must

be content, and that the equal is the honourable and the just. But if there were

a man who had sufficient force, he would shake off and break through, and

escape from all this; he would trample under foot all our formulas and spells

and charms, and all our laws which are against nature: the slave would rise in

rebellion and be lord over us, and the light of natural justice would shine

forth. And this I take to be the sentiment of Pindar, when he says in his poem,

that


'Law is the king of all, of mortals as well as of immortals;'this, as he says,


'Makes might to be right, doing violence with highest hand; as I infer from

the  deeds  of  Heracles,  for  without  buying  them--'  (Fragm.  Incert.  151

(Bockh).)


--I do not remember the exact words, but the meaning is, that without buying

them,  and  without  their  being  given  to  him,  he  carried  off  the  oxen  of

Geryon, according to the law of natural right, and that the oxen and other

possessions of the weaker and inferior properly belong to the stronger and

superior. And this is true, as you may ascertain, if you will leave philosophy

and go on to higher things: for philosophy, Socrates, if pursued in moderation

and at the proper age, is an elegant accomplishment, but too much philosophy

is the ruin of human life. Even if a man has good parts, still, if he carries

philosophy into later life, he is necessarily ignorant of all those things which

a gentleman and a person of honour ought to know; he is inexperienced in the

laws of the State, and in the language which ought to be used in the dealings

of  man  with  man,  whether  private  or  public,  and  utterly  ignorant  of  the

pleasures and desires of mankind and of human character in general. And

people of this sort, when they betake themselves to politics or business, are as

ridiculous as I imagine the politicians to be, when they make their appearance

in the arena of philosophy. For, as Euripides says,


'Every man shines in that and pursues that, and devotes the greatest portion of

the day to that in which he most excels,' (Antiope, fragm. 20 (Dindorf).)


but anything in which he is inferior, he avoids and depreciates, and praises

the opposite from partiality to himself, and because he thinks that he will thus

praise himself. The true principle is to unite them. Philosophy, as a part of

education, is an excellent thing, and there is no disgrace to a man while he is

young in pursuing such a study; but when he is more advanced in years, the

thing becomes ridiculous, and I feel towards philosophers as I do towards

those who lisp and imitate children. For I love to see a little child, who is not

of an age to speak plainly, lisping at his play; there is an appearance of grace

and freedom in his utterance, which is natural to his childish years. But when

I hear some small creature carefully articulating its words, I am offended; the

sound is disagreeable, and has to my ears the twang of slavery. So when Ihear a man lisping, or see him playing like a child, his behaviour appears to

me  ridiculous  and  unmanly  and  worthy  of  stripes.  And  I  have  the  same

feeling about students of philosophy; when I see a youth thus engaged,--the

study  appears  to  me  to  be  in  character,  and  becoming  a  man  of  liberal

education, and him who neglects philosophy I regard as an inferior man, who

will never aspire to anything great or noble. But if I see him continuing the

study in later life, and not leaving off, I should like to beat him, Socrates; for,

as I was saying, such a one, even though he have good natural parts, becomes

effeminate. He flies from the busy centre and the market-place, in which, as

the poet says, men become distinguished; he creeps into a corner for the rest

of his life, and talks in a whisper with three or four admiring youths, but

never speaks out like a freeman in a satisfactory manner. Now I, Socrates, am

very well inclined towards you, and my feeling may be compared with that of

Zethus towards Amphion, in the play of Euripides, whom I was mentioning

just now: for I am disposed to say to you much what Zethus said to his

brother, that you, Socrates, are careless about the things of which you ought

to be careful; and that you


'Who have a soul so noble, are remarkable for a puerile exterior; Neither in a

court of justice could you state a case, or give any reason or proof, Or offer

valiant counsel on another's behalf.'


And you must not be offended, my dear Socrates, for I am speaking out of

good-will towards you, if I ask whether you are not ashamed of being thus

defenceless; which I affirm to be the condition not of you only but of all

those who will carry the study of philosophy too far. For suppose that some

one were to take you, or any one of your sort, off to prison, declaring that you

had done wrong when you had done no wrong, you must allow that you

would not know what to do:--there you would stand giddy and gaping, and

not having a word to say; and when you went up before the Court, even if the

accuser were a poor creature and not good for much, you would die if he

were disposed to claim the penalty of death. And yet, Socrates, what is the

value of


'An art which converts a man of sense into a fool,'


who is helpless, and has no power to save either himself or others, when he isin the greatest danger and is going to be despoiled by his enemies of all his

goods, and has to live, simply deprived of his rights of citizenship?--he being

a man who, if I may use the expression, may be boxed on the ears with

impunity. Then, my good friend, take my advice, and refute no more:


'Learn the philosophy of business, and acquire the reputation of wisdom. But

leave to others these niceties,'


whether they are to be described as follies or absurdities:


'For they will only Give you poverty for the inmate of your dwelling.'


Cease, then, emulating these paltry splitters of words, and emulate only the

man of substance and honour, who is well to do.


SOCRATES: If my soul, Callicles, were made of gold, should I not rejoice to

discover one of those stones with which they test gold, and the very best

possible one to which I might bring my soul; and if the stone and I agreed in

approving of her training, then I should know that I was in a satisfactory

state, and that no other test was needed by me.


CALLICLES: What is your meaning, Socrates?


SOCRATES: I will tell you; I think that I have found in you the desired

touchstone.


CALLICLES: Why?


SOCRATES: Because I am sure that if you agree with me in any of the

opinions which my soul forms, I have at last found the truth indeed. For I

consider that if a man is to make a complete trial of the good or evil of the

soul, he ought to have three qualities--knowledge, good-will, outspokenness,

which are all possessed by you. Many whom I meet are unable to make trial

of me, because they are not wise as you are; others are wise, but they will not

tell me the truth, because they have not the same interest in me which you

have; and these two strangers, Gorgias and Polus, are undoubtedly wise men

and my very good friends, but they are not outspoken enough, and they aretoo modest. Why, their modesty is so great that they are driven to contradict

themselves,  first  one  and  then  the  other  of  them,  in  the  face  of  a  large

company, on matters of the highest moment. But you have all the qualities in

which these others are deficient, having received an excellent education; to

this many Athenians can testify. And you are my friend. Shall I tell you why I

think so? I know that you, Callicles, and Tisander of Aphidnae, and Andron

the  son  of  Androtion,  and  Nausicydes  of  the  deme  of  Cholarges,  studied

together: there were four of you, and I once heard you advising with one

another as to the extent to which the pursuit of philosophy should be carried,

and, as I know, you came to the conclusion that the study should not be

pushed  too  much  into  detail.  You  were  cautioning  one  another  not  to  be

overwise; you were afraid that too much wisdom might unconsciously to

yourselves be the ruin of you. And now when I hear you giving the same

advice to me which you then gave to your most intimate friends, I have a

sufficient evidence of your real good- will to me. And of the frankness of

your nature and freedom from modesty I am assured by yourself, and the

assurance is confirmed by your last speech. Well then, the inference in the

present case clearly is, that if you agree with me in an argument about any

point, that point will have been sufficiently tested by us, and will not require

to be submitted to any further test. For you could not have agreed with me,

either from lack of knowledge or from superfluity of modesty, nor yet from a

desire to deceive me, for you are my friend, as you tell me yourself. And

therefore when you and I are agreed, the result will be the attainment of

perfect truth. Now there is no nobler enquiry, Callicles, than that which you

censure me for making,--What ought the character of a man to be, and what

his pursuits, and how far is he to go, both in maturer years and in youth? For

be assured that if I err in my own conduct I do not err intentionally, but from

ignorance. Do not then desist from advising me, now that you have begun,

until I have learned clearly what this is which I am to practise, and how I may

acquire it. And if you find me assenting to your words, and hereafter not

doing  that  to  which  I  assented,  call  me  'dolt,'  and  deem  me  unworthy  of

receiving further instruction. Once more, then, tell me what you and Pindar

mean by natural justice: Do you not mean that the superior should take the

property of the inferior by force; that the better should rule the worse, the

noble have more than the mean? Am I not right in my recollection?


CALLICLES: Yes; that is what I was saying, and so I still aver.SOCRATES: And do you mean by the better the same as the superior? for I

could not make out what you were saying at the time--whether you meant by

the superior the stronger, and that the weaker must obey the stronger, as you

seemed  to  imply  when  you  said  that  great  cities  attack  small  ones  in

accordance  with  natural  right,  because  they  are  superior  and  stronger,  as

though the superior and stronger and better were the same; or whether the

better may be also the inferior and weaker, and the superior the worse, or

whether better is to be defined in the same way as superior:--this is the point

which I want to have cleared up. Are the superior and better and stronger the

same or different?


CALLICLES: I say unequivocally that they are the same.


SOCRATES: Then the many are by nature superior to the one, against whom,

as you were saying, they make the laws?


CALLICLES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Then the laws of the many are the laws of the superior?


CALLICLES: Very true.


SOCRATES: Then they are the laws of the better; for the superior class are

far better, as you were saying?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And since they are superior, the laws which are made by them

are by nature good?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And are not the many of opinion, as you were lately saying,

that  justice  is  equality,  and  that  to  do  is  more  disgraceful  than  to  suffer

injustice?--is that so or not? Answer, Callicles, and let no modesty be found

to come in the way; do the many think, or do they not think thus?--I must beg

of you to answer, in order that if you agree with me I may fortify myself by

the assent of so competent an authority.CALLICLES: Yes; the opinion of the many is what you say.


SOCRATES: Then not only custom but nature also affirms that to do is more

disgraceful than to suffer injustice, and that justice is equality; so that you

seem to have been wrong in your former assertion, when accusing me you

said  that  nature  and  custom  are  opposed,  and  that  I,  knowing  this,  was

dishonestly playing between them, appealing to custom when the argument is

about nature, and to nature when the argument is about custom?


CALLICLES:  This  man  will  never  cease  talking  nonsense.  At  your  age,

Socrates, are you not ashamed to be catching at words and chuckling over

some  verbal  slip?  do  you  not  see--have  I  not  told  you  already,  that  by

superior I mean better: do you imagine me to say, that if a rabble of slaves

and  nondescripts,  who  are  of  no  use  except  perhaps  for  their  physical

strength, get together, their ipsissima verba are laws?


SOCRATES: Ho! my philosopher, is that your line?


CALLICLES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: I was thinking, Callicles, that something of the kind must have

been in your mind, and that is why I repeated the question,--What is the

superior? I wanted to know clearly what you meant; for you surely do not

think that two men are better than one, or that your slaves are better than you

because they are stronger? Then please to begin again, and tell me who the

better are, if they are not the stronger; and I will ask you, great Sir, to be a

little milder in your instructions, or I shall have to run away from you.


CALLICLES: You are ironical.


SOCRATES: No, by the hero Zethus, Callicles, by whose aid you were just

now saying many ironical things against me, I am not:--tell me, then, whom

you mean, by the better?


CALLICLES: I mean the more excellent.


SOCRATES: Do you not see that you are yourself using words which haveno meaning and that you are explaining nothing?--will you tell me whether

you mean by the better and superior the wiser, or if not, whom?


CALLICLES: Most assuredly, I do mean the wiser.


SOCRATES: Then according to you, one wise man may often be superior to

ten  thousand  fools,  and  he  ought  to  rule  them,  and  they  ought  to  be  his

subjects, and he ought to have more than they should. This is what I believe

that you mean (and you must not suppose that I am word-catching), if you

allow that the one is superior to the ten thousand?


CALLICLES: Yes; that is what I mean, and that is what I conceive to be

natural justice--that the better and wiser should rule and have more than the

inferior.


SOCRATES: Stop there, and let me ask you what you would say in this case:

Let us suppose that we are all together as we are now; there are several of us,

and we have a large common store of meats and drinks, and there are all sorts

of persons in our company having various degrees of strength and weakness,

and one of us, being a physician, is wiser in the matter of food than all the

rest, and he is probably stronger than some and not so strong as others of us--

will he not, being wiser, be also better than we are, and our superior in this

matter of food?


CALLICLES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Either, then, he will have a larger share of the meats and drinks,

because he is better, or he will have the distribution of all of them by reason

of his authority, but he will not expend or make use of a larger share of them

on his own person, or if he does, he will be punished; --his share will exceed

that of some, and be less than that of others, and if he be the weakest of all,

he being the best of all will have the smallest share of all, Callicles:--am I not

right, my friend?


CALLICLES:  You  talk  about  meats  and  drinks  and  physicians  and  other

nonsense; I am not speaking of them.SOCRATES: Well, but do you admit that the wiser is the better? Answer

'Yes' or 'No.'


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And ought not the better to have a larger share?


CALLICLES: Not of meats and drinks.


SOCRATES:  I  understand:  then,  perhaps,  of  coats--the  skilfullest  weaver

ought to have the largest coat, and the greatest number of them, and go about

clothed in the best and finest of them?


CALLICLES: Fudge about coats!


SOCRATES: Then the skilfullest and best in making shoes ought to have the

advantage in shoes; the shoemaker, clearly, should walk about in the largest

shoes, and have the greatest number of them?


CALLICLES: Fudge about shoes! What nonsense are you talking?


SOCRATES: Or, if this is not your meaning, perhaps you would say that the

wise and good and true husbandman should actually have a larger share of

seeds, and have as much seed as possible for his own land?


CALLICLES: How you go on, always talking in the same way, Socrates!


SOCRATES: Yes, Callicles, and also about the same things.


CALLICLES: Yes, by the Gods, you are literally always talking of cobblers

and fullers and cooks and doctors, as if this had to do with our argument.


SOCRATES: But why will you not tell me in what a man must be superior

and  wiser  in  order  to  claim  a  larger  share;  will  you  neither  accept  a

suggestion, nor offer one?


CALLICLES: I have already told you. In the first place, I mean by superiors

not cobblers or cooks, but wise politicians who understand the administrationof a state, and who are not only wise, but also valiant and able to carry out

their designs, and not the men to faint from want of soul.


SOCRATES: See now, most excellent Callicles, how different my charge

against you is from that which you bring against me, for you reproach me

with always saying the same; but I reproach you with never saying the same

about the same things, for at one time you were defining the better and the

superior  to  be  the  stronger,  then  again  as  the  wiser,  and  now  you  bring

forward a new notion; the superior and the better are now declared by you to

be the more courageous: I wish, my good friend, that you would tell me, once

for all, whom you affirm to be the better and superior, and in what they are

better?


CALLICLES: I have already told you that I mean those who are wise and

courageous in the administration of a state--they ought to be the rulers of

their states, and justice consists in their having more than their subjects.


SOCRATES: But whether rulers or subjects will they or will they not have

more than themselves, my friend?


CALLICLES: What do you mean?


SOCRATES: I mean that every man is his own ruler; but perhaps you think

that there is no necessity for him to rule himself; he is only required to rule

others?


CALLICLES: What do you mean by his 'ruling over himself'?


SOCRATES: A simple thing enough; just what is commonly said, that a man

should be temperate and master of himself, and ruler of his own pleasures

and passions.


CALLICLES: What innocence! you mean those fools,--the temperate?


SOCRATES: Certainly:--any one may know that to be my meaning.


CALLICLES: Quite so, Socrates; and they are really fools, for how can a

man be happy who is the servant of anything? On the contrary, I plainlyassert, that he who would truly live ought to allow his desires to wax to the

uttermost,  and  not  to  chastise  them;  but  when  they  have  grown  to  their

greatest he should have courage and intelligence to minister to them and to

satisfy all his longings. And this I affirm to be natural justice and nobility. To

this however the many cannot attain; and they blame the strong man because

they are ashamed of their own weakness, which they desire to conceal, and

hence they say that intemperance is base. As I have remarked already, they

enslave the nobler natures, and being unable to satisfy their pleasures, they

praise temperance and justice out of their own cowardice. For if a man had

been originally the son of a king, or had a nature capable of acquiring an

empire or a tyranny or sovereignty, what could be more truly base or evil

than temperance--to a man like him, I say, who might freely be enjoying

every good, and has no one to stand in his way, and yet has admitted custom

and reason and the opinion of other men to be lords over him?--must not he

be  in  a  miserable  plight  whom  the  reputation  of  justice  and  temperance

hinders from giving more to his friends than to his enemies, even though he

be a ruler in his city? Nay, Socrates, for you profess to be a votary of the

truth, and the truth is this:--that luxury and intemperance and licence, if they

be  provided  with  means,  are  virtue  and  happiness--all  the  rest  is  a  mere

bauble, agreements contrary to nature, foolish talk of men, nothing worth.

(Compare Republic.)


SOCRATES: There is a noble freedom, Callicles, in your way of approaching

the argument; for what you say is what the rest of the world think, but do not

like to say. And I must beg of you to persevere, that the true rule of human

life may become manifest. Tell me, then:--you say, do you not, that in the

rightly-developed man the passions ought not to be controlled, but that we

should let them grow to the utmost and somehow or other satisfy them, and

that this is virtue?


CALLICLES: Yes; I do.


SOCRATES: Then those who want nothing are not truly said to be happy?


CALLICLES:  No  indeed,  for  then  stones  and  dead  men  would  be  the

happiest of all.SOCRATES: But surely life according to your view is an awful thing; and

indeed I think that Euripides may have been right in saying,


'Who knows if life be not death and death life;'


and that we are very likely dead; I have heard a philosopher say that at this

moment we are actually dead, and that the body (soma) is our tomb (sema

(compare Phaedr.)), and that the part of the soul which is the seat of the

desires is liable to be tossed about by words and blown up and down; and

some ingenious person, probably a Sicilian or an Italian, playing with the

word, invented a tale in which he called the soul--because of its believing and

make-believe nature--a vessel (An untranslatable pun,--dia to pithanon te kai

pistikon onomase pithon.), and the ignorant he called the uninitiated or leaky,

and the place in the souls of the uninitiated in which the desires are seated,

being the intemperate and incontinent part, he compared to a vessel full of

holes, because it can never be satisfied. He is not of your way of thinking,

Callicles, for he declares, that of all the souls in Hades, meaning the invisible

world (aeides), these uninitiated or leaky persons are the most miserable, and

that they pour water into a vessel which is full of holes out of a colander

which is similarly perforated. The colander, as my informer assures me, is the

soul, and the soul which he compares to a colander is the soul of the ignorant,

which is likewise full of holes, and therefore incontinent, owing to a bad

memory and want of faith. These notions are strange enough, but they show

the principle which, if I can, I would fain prove to you; that you should

change your mind, and, instead of the intemperate and insatiate life, choose

that which is orderly and sufficient and has a due provision for daily needs.

Do I make any impression on you, and are you coming over to the opinion

that the orderly are happier than the intemperate? Or do I fail to persuade

you, and, however many tales I rehearse to you, do you continue of the same

opinion still?


CALLICLES: The latter, Socrates, is more like the truth.


SOCRATES: Well, I will tell you another image, which comes out of the

same school:--Let me request you to consider how far you would accept this

as an account of the two lives of the temperate and intemperate in a figure:--

There are two men, both of whom have a number of casks; the one man hashis casks sound and full, one of wine, another of honey, and a third of milk,

besides others filled with other liquids, and the streams which fill them are

few and scanty, and he can only obtain them with a great deal of toil and

difficulty; but when his casks are once filled he has no need to feed them any

more, and has no further trouble with them or care about them. The other, in

like  manner,  can  procure  streams,  though  not  without  difficulty;  but  his

vessels are leaky and unsound, and night and day he is compelled to be filling

them, and if he pauses for a moment, he is in an agony of pain. Such are their

respective lives:--And now would you say that the life of the intemperate is

happier than that of the temperate? Do I not convince you that the opposite is

the truth?


CALLICLES: You do not convince me, Socrates, for the one who has filled

himself has no longer any pleasure left; and this, as I was just now saying, is

the life of a stone: he has neither joy nor sorrow after he is once filled; but the

pleasure depends on the superabundance of the influx.


SOCRATES: But the more you pour in, the greater the waste; and the holes

must be large for the liquid to escape.


CALLICLES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: The life which you are now depicting is not that of a dead man,

or of a stone, but of a cormorant; you mean that he is to be hungering and

eating?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And he is to be thirsting and drinking?


CALLICLES: Yes, that is what I mean; he is to have all his desires about

him, and to be able to live happily in the gratification of them.


SOCRATES:  Capital,  excellent;  go  on  as  you  have  begun,  and  have  no

shame; I, too, must disencumber myself of shame: and first, will you tell me

whether you include itching and scratching, provided you have enough of

them and pass your life in scratching, in your notion of happiness?CALLICLES: What a strange being you are, Socrates! a regular mob-orator.


SOCRATES: That was the reason, Callicles, why I scared Polus and Gorgias,

until they were too modest to say what they thought; but you will not be too

modest and will not be scared, for you are a brave man. And now, answer my

question.


CALLICLES: I answer, that even the scratcher would live pleasantly.


SOCRATES: And if pleasantly, then also happily?


CALLICLES: To be sure.


SOCRATES: But what if the itching is not confined to the head? Shall I

pursue the question? And here, Callicles, I would have you consider how you

would reply if consequences are pressed upon you, especially if in the last

resort  you  are  asked,  whether  the  life  of  a  catamite  is  not  terrible,  foul,

miserable? Or would you venture to say, that they too are happy, if they only

get enough of what they want?


CALLICLES: Are you not ashamed, Socrates, of introducing such topics into

the argument?


SOCRATES: Well, my fine friend, but am I the introducer of these topics, or

he who says without any qualification that all who feel pleasure in whatever

manner are happy, and who admits of no distinction between good and bad

pleasures? And I would still ask, whether you say that pleasure and good are

the same, or whether there is some pleasure which is not a good?


CALLICLES: Well, then, for the sake of consistency, I will say that they are

the same.


SOCRATES: You are breaking the original agreement, Callicles, and will no

longer be a satisfactory companion in the search after truth, if you say what is

contrary to your real opinion.


CALLICLES: Why, that is what you are doing too, Socrates.SOCRATES: Then we are both doing wrong. Still, my dear friend, I would

ask you to consider whether pleasure, from whatever source derived, is the

good; for, if this be true, then the disagreeable consequences which have been

darkly intimated must follow, and many others.


CALLICLES: That, Socrates, is only your opinion.


SOCRATES: And do you, Callicles, seriously maintain what you are saying?


CALLICLES: Indeed I do.


SOCRATES:  Then,  as  you  are  in  earnest,  shall  we  proceed  with  the

argument?


CALLICLES: By all means. (Or, 'I am in profound earnest.')


SOCRATES: Well, if you are willing to proceed, determine this question for

me:--There is something, I presume, which you would call knowledge?


CALLICLES: There is.


SOCRATES: And were you not saying just now, that some courage implied

knowledge?


CALLICLES: I was.


SOCRATES:  And  you  were  speaking  of  courage  and  knowledge  as  two

things different from one another?


CALLICLES: Certainly I was.


SOCRATES: And would you say that pleasure and knowledge are the same,

or not the same?


CALLICLES: Not the same, O man of wisdom.


SOCRATES: And would you say that courage differed from pleasure?CALLICLES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Well, then, let us remember that Callicles, the Acharnian, says

that pleasure and good are the same; but that knowledge and courage are not

the same, either with one another, or with the good.


CALLICLES: And what does our friend Socrates, of Foxton, say--does he

assent to this, or not?


SOCRATES: He does not assent; neither will Callicles, when he sees himself

truly. You will admit, I suppose, that good and evil fortune are opposed to

each other?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And if they are opposed to each other, then, like health and

disease,  they  exclude  one  another;  a  man  cannot  have  them  both,  or  be

without them both, at the same time?


CALLICLES: What do you mean?


SOCRATES: Take the case of any bodily affection:--a man may have the

complaint in his eyes which is called ophthalmia?


CALLICLES: To be sure.


SOCRATES: But he surely cannot have the same eyes well and sound at the

same time?


CALLICLES: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: And when he has got rid of his ophthalmia, has he got rid of the

health  of  his  eyes  too?  Is  the  final  result,  that  he  gets  rid  of  them  both

together?


CALLICLES: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: That would surely be marvellous and absurd?CALLICLES: Very.


SOCRATES: I suppose that he is affected by them, and gets rid of them in

turns?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And he may have strength and weakness in the same way, by

fits?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Or swiftness and slowness?


CALLICLES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And does he have and not have good and happiness, and their

opposites, evil and misery, in a similar alternation? (Compare Republic.)


CALLICLES: Certainly he has.


SOCRATES: If then there be anything which a man has and has not at the

same time, clearly that cannot be good and evil--do we agree? Please not to

answer without consideration.


CALLICLES: I entirely agree.


SOCRATES: Go back now to our former admissions.--Did you say that to

hunger, I mean the mere state of hunger, was pleasant or painful?


CALLICLES: I said painful, but that to eat when you are hungry is pleasant.


SOCRATES: I know; but still the actual hunger is painful: am I not right?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And thirst, too, is painful?CALLICLES: Yes, very.


SOCRATES: Need I adduce any more instances, or would you agree that all

wants or desires are painful?


CALLICLES: I agree, and therefore you need not adduce any more instances.


SOCRATES: Very good. And you would admit that to drink, when you are

thirsty, is pleasant?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES:  And  in  the  sentence  which  you  have  just  uttered,  the  word

'thirsty' implies pain?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And the word 'drinking' is expressive of pleasure, and of the

satisfaction of the want?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: There is pleasure in drinking?


CALLICLES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: When you are thirsty?


SOCRATES: And in pain?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES:  Do  you  see  the  inference:--that  pleasure  and  pain  are

simultaneous, when you say that being thirsty, you drink? For are they not

simultaneous, and do they not affect at the same time the same part, whether

of the soul or the body?--which of them is affected cannot be supposed to be

of any consequence: Is not this true?CALLICLES: It is.


SOCRATES: You said also, that no man could have good and evil fortune at

the same time?


CALLICLES: Yes, I did.


SOCRATES: But you admitted, that when in pain a man might also have

pleasure?


CALLICLES: Clearly.


SOCRATES: Then pleasure is not the same as good fortune, or pain the same

as evil fortune, and therefore the good is not the same as the pleasant?


CALLICLES: I wish I knew, Socrates, what your quibbling means.


SOCRATES: You know, Callicles, but you affect not to know.


CALLICLES: Well, get on, and don't keep fooling: then you will know what

a wiseacre you are in your admonition of me.


SOCRATES: Does not a man cease from his thirst and from his pleasure in

drinking at the same time?


CALLICLES: I do not understand what you are saying.


GORGIAS: Nay, Callicles, answer, if only for our sakes;--we should like to

hear the argument out.


CALLICLES: Yes, Gorgias, but I must complain of the habitual trifling of

Socrates; he is always arguing about little and unworthy questions.


GORGIAS:  What  matter?  Your  reputation,  Callicles,  is  not  at  stake.  Let

Socrates argue in his own fashion.


CALLICLES:  Well,  then,  Socrates,  you  shall  ask  these  little  peddling

questions, since Gorgias wishes to have them.SOCRATES: I envy you, Callicles, for having been initiated into the great

mysteries before you were initiated into the lesser. I thought that this was not

allowable.  But  to  return  to  our  argument:--Does  not  a  man  cease  from

thirsting and from the pleasure of drinking at the same moment?


CALLICLES: True.


SOCRATES: And if he is hungry, or has any other desire, does he not cease

from the desire and the pleasure at the same moment?


CALLICLES: Very true.


SOCRATES: Then he ceases from pain and pleasure at the same moment?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: But he does not cease from good and evil at the same moment,

as you have admitted: do you still adhere to what you said?


CALLICLES: Yes, I do; but what is the inference?


SOCRATES: Why, my friend, the inference is that the good is not the same

as the pleasant, or the evil the same as the painful; there is a cessation of

pleasure and pain at the same moment; but not of good and evil, for they are

different. How then can pleasure be the same as good, or pain as evil? And I

would have you look at the matter in another light, which could hardly, I

think, have been considered by you when you identified them: Are not the

good good because they have good present with them, as the beautiful are

those who have beauty present with them?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And do you call the fools and cowards good men? For you

were saying just now that the courageous and the wise are the good--would

you not say so?


CALLICLES: Certainly.SOCRATES: And did you never see a foolish child rejoicing?


CALLICLES: Yes, I have.


SOCRATES: And a foolish man too?


CALLICLES: Yes, certainly; but what is your drift?


SOCRATES: Nothing particular, if you will only answer.


CALLICLES: Yes, I have.


SOCRATES: And did you ever see a sensible man rejoicing or sorrowing?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Which rejoice and sorrow most--the wise or the foolish?


CALLICLES: They are much upon a par, I think, in that respect.


SOCRATES: Enough: And did you ever see a coward in battle?


CALLICLES: To be sure.


SOCRATES: And which rejoiced most at the departure of the enemy, the

coward or the brave?


CALLICLES: I should say 'most' of both; or at any rate, they rejoiced about

equally.


SOCRATES: No matter; then the cowards, and not only the brave, rejoice?


CALLICLES: Greatly.


SOCRATES: And the foolish; so it would seem?


CALLICLES: Yes.SOCRATES:  And  are  only  the  cowards  pained  at  the  approach  of  their

enemies, or are the brave also pained?


CALLICLES: Both are pained.


SOCRATES: And are they equally pained?


CALLICLES: I should imagine that the cowards are more pained.


SOCRATES: And are they not better pleased at the enemy's departure?


CALLICLES: I dare say.


SOCRATES: Then are the foolish and the wise and the cowards and the

brave all pleased and pained, as you were saying, in nearly equal degree; but

are the cowards more pleased and pained than the brave?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: But surely the wise and brave are the good, and the foolish and

the cowardly are the bad?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then the good and the bad are pleased and pained in a nearly

equal degree?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then are the good and bad good and bad in a nearly equal

degree, or have the bad the advantage both in good and evil? (i.e. in having

more pleasure and more pain.)


CALLICLES: I really do not know what you mean.


SOCRATES: Why, do you not remember saying that the good were good

because  good  was  present  with  them,  and  the  evil  because  evil;  and  that

pleasures were goods and pains evils?CALLICLES: Yes, I remember.


SOCRATES:  And  are  not  these  pleasures  or  goods  present  to  those  who

rejoice--if they do rejoice?


CALLICLES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Then those who rejoice are good when goods are present with

them?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And those who are in pain have evil or sorrow present with

them?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And would you still say that the evil are evil by reason of the

presence of evil?


CALLICLES: I should.


SOCRATES: Then those who rejoice are good, and those who are in pain

evil?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: The degrees of good and evil vary with the degrees of pleasure

and of pain?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Have the wise man and the fool, the brave and the coward, joy

and  pain  in  nearly  equal  degrees?  or  would  you  say  that  the  coward  has

more?


CALLICLES: I should say that he has.SOCRATES: Help me then to draw out the conclusion which follows from

our admissions; for it is good to repeat and review what is good twice and

thrice over, as they say. Both the wise man and the brave man we allow to be

good?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And the foolish man and the coward to be evil?


CALLICLES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And he who has joy is good?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And he who is in pain is evil?


CALLICLES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: The good and evil both have joy and pain, but, perhaps, the evil

has more of them?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then must we not infer, that the bad man is as good and bad as

the  good,  or,  perhaps,  even  better?--is  not  this  a  further  inference  which

follows equally with the preceding from the assertion that the good and the

pleasant are the same:--can this be denied, Callicles?


CALLICLES: I have been listening and making admissions to you, Socrates;

and I remark that if a person grants you anything in play, you, like a child,

want to keep hold and will not give it back. But do you really suppose that I

or any other human being denies that some pleasures are good and others

bad?


SOCRATES: Alas, Callicles, how unfair you are! you certainly treat me as if

I were a child, sometimes saying one thing, and then another, as if you were

meaning to deceive me. And yet I thought at first that you were my friend,and would not have deceived me if you could have helped. But I see that I

was mistaken; and now I suppose that I must make the best of a bad business,

as they said of old, and take what I can get out of you.--Well, then, as I

understand you to say, I may assume that some pleasures are good and others

evil?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: The beneficial are good, and the hurtful are evil?


CALLICLES: To be sure.


SOCRATES:  And  the  beneficial  are  those  which  do  some  good,  and  the

hurtful are those which do some evil?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Take, for example, the bodily pleasures of eating and drinking,

which  we  were  just  now  mentioning--you  mean  to  say  that  those  which

promote health, or any other bodily excellence, are good, and their opposites

evil?


CALLICLES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And in the same way there are good pains and there are evil

pains?


CALLICLES: To be sure.


SOCRATES: And ought we not to choose and use the good pleasures and

pains?


CALLICLES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: But not the evil?


CALLICLES: Clearly.SOCRATES: Because, if you remember, Polus and I have agreed that all our

actions are to be done for the sake of the good;--and will you agree with us in

saying, that the good is the end of all our actions, and that all our actions are

to be done for the sake of the good, and not the good for the sake of them?--

will you add a third vote to our two?


CALLICLES: I will.


SOCRATES: Then pleasure, like everything else, is to be sought for the sake

of that which is good, and not that which is good for the sake of pleasure?


CALLICLES: To be sure.


SOCRATES: But can every man choose what pleasures are good and what

are evil, or must he have art or knowledge of them in detail?


CALLICLES: He must have art.


SOCRATES: Let me now remind you of what I was saying to Gorgias and

Polus; I was saying, as you will not have forgotten, that there were some

processes  which  aim  only  at  pleasure,  and  know  nothing  of  a  better  and

worse,  and  there  are  other  processes  which  know  good  and  evil.  And  I

considered that cookery, which I do not call an art, but only an experience,

was of the former class, which is concerned with pleasure, and that the art of

medicine was of the class which is concerned with the good. And now, by the

god of friendship, I must beg you, Callicles, not to jest, or to imagine that I

am  jesting  with  you;  do  not  answer  at  random  and  contrary  to  your  real

opinion--for you will observe that we are arguing about the way of human

life; and to a man who has any sense at all, what question can be more serious

than  this?--whether  he  should  follow  after  that  way  of  life  to  which  you

exhort me, and act what you call the manly part of speaking in the assembly,

and  cultivating  rhetoric,  and  engaging  in  public  affairs,  according  to  the

principles now in vogue; or whether he should pursue the life of philosophy;-

-and in what the latter way differs from the former. But perhaps we had better

first try to distinguish them, as I did before, and when we have come to an

agreement that they are distinct, we may proceed to consider in what they

differ  from  one  another,  and  which  of  them  we  should  choose.  Perhaps,however, you do not even now understand what I mean?


CALLICLES: No, I do not.


SOCRATES: Then I will explain myself more clearly: seeing that you and I

have agreed that there is such a thing as good, and that there is such a thing as

pleasure, and that pleasure is not the same as good, and that the pursuit and

process of acquisition of the one, that is pleasure, is different from the pursuit

and process of acquisition of the other, which is good--I wish that you would

tell me whether you agree with me thus far or not--do you agree?


CALLICLES: I do.


SOCRATES: Then I will proceed, and ask whether you also agree with me,

and whether you think that I spoke the truth when I further said to Gorgias

and Polus that cookery in my opinion is only an experience, and not an art at

all;  and  that  whereas  medicine  is  an  art,  and  attends  to  the  nature  and

constitution of the patient, and has principles of action and reason in each

case, cookery in attending upon pleasure never regards either the nature or

reason of that pleasure to which she devotes herself, but goes straight to her

end, nor ever considers or calculates anything, but works by experience and

routine, and just preserves the recollection of what she has usually done when

producing pleasure. And first, I would have you consider whether I have

proved  what  I  was  saying,  and  then  whether  there  are  not  other  similar

processes which have to do with the soul--some of them processes of art,

making  a  provision  for  the  soul's  highest  interest--  others  despising  the

interest, and, as in the previous case, considering only the pleasure of the

soul, and how this may be acquired, but not considering what pleasures are

good or bad, and having no other aim but to afford gratification, whether

good or bad. In my opinion, Callicles, there are such processes, and this is the

sort of thing which I term flattery, whether concerned with the body or the

soul,  or  whenever  employed  with  a  view  to  pleasure  and  without  any

consideration  of  good  and  evil.  And  now  I  wish  that  you  would  tell  me

whether you agree with us in this notion, or whether you differ.


CALLICLES: I do not differ; on the contrary, I agree; for in that way I shall

soonest bring the argument to an end, and shall oblige my friend Gorgias.SOCRATES: And is this notion true of one soul, or of two or more?


CALLICLES: Equally true of two or more.


SOCRATES: Then a man may delight a whole assembly, and yet have no

regard for their true interests?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Can you tell me the pursuits which delight mankind--or rather,

if you would prefer, let me ask, and do you answer, which of them belong to

the pleasurable class, and which of them not? In the first place, what say you

of flute-playing? Does not that appear to be an art which seeks only pleasure,

Callicles, and thinks of nothing else?


CALLICLES: I assent.


SOCRATES: And is not the same true of all similar arts, as, for example, the

art of playing the lyre at festivals?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES:  And  what  do  you  say  of  the  choral  art  and  of  dithyrambic

poetry?--are not they of the same nature? Do you imagine that Cinesias the

son of Meles cares about what will tend to the moral improvement of his

hearers, or about what will give pleasure to the multitude?


CALLICLES: There can be no mistake about Cinesias, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And what do you say of his father, Meles the harp-player? Did

he perform with any view to the good of his hearers? Could he be said to

regard even their pleasure? For his singing was an infliction to his audience.

And of harp-playing and dithyrambic poetry in general, what would you say?

Have they not been invented wholly for the sake of pleasure?


CALLICLES: That is my notion of them.


SOCRATES:  And  as  for  the  Muse  of  Tragedy,  that  solemn  and  augustpersonage--what are her aspirations? Is all her aim and desire only to give

pleasure to the spectators, or does she fight against them and refuse to speak

of  their  pleasant  vices,  and  willingly  proclaim  in  word  and  song  truths

welcome and unwelcome?--which in your judgment is her character?


CALLICLES: There can be no doubt, Socrates, that Tragedy has her face

turned towards pleasure and the gratification of the audience.


SOCRATES: And is not that the sort of thing, Callicles, which we were just

now describing as flattery?


CALLICLES: Quite true.


SOCRATES: Well now, suppose that we strip all poetry of song and rhythm

and metre, there will remain speech? (Compare Republic.)


CALLICLES: To be sure.


SOCRATES: And this speech is addressed to a crowd of people?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then poetry is a sort of rhetoric?


CALLICLES: True.


SOCRATES:  And  do  not  the  poets  in  the  theatres  seem  to  you  to  be

rhetoricians?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES:  Then  now  we  have  discovered  a  sort  of  rhetoric  which  is

addressed to a crowd of men, women, and children, freemen and slaves. And

this is not much to our taste, for we have described it as having the nature of

flattery.


CALLICLES: Quite true.SOCRATES: Very good. And what do you say of that other rhetoric which

addresses  the  Athenian  assembly  and  the  assemblies  of  freemen  in  other

states? Do the rhetoricians appear to you always to aim at what is best, and

do they seek to improve the citizens by their speeches, or are they too, like

the rest of mankind, bent upon giving them pleasure, forgetting the public

good in the thought of their own interest, playing with the people as with

children, and trying to amuse them, but never considering whether they are

better or worse for this?


CALLICLES: I must distinguish. There are some who have a real care of the

public in what they say, while others are such as you describe.


SOCRATES: I am contented with the admission that rhetoric is of two sorts;

one, which is mere flattery and disgraceful declamation; the other, which is

noble and aims at the training and improvement of the souls of the citizens,

and  strives  to  say  what  is  best,  whether  welcome  or  unwelcome,  to  the

audience; but have you ever known such a rhetoric; or if you have, and can

point out any rhetorician who is of this stamp, who is he?


CALLICLES: But, indeed, I am afraid that I cannot tell you of any such

among the orators who are at present living.


SOCRATES: Well, then, can you mention any one of a former generation,

who may be said to have improved the Athenians, who found them worse and

made them better, from the day that he began to make speeches? for, indeed,

I do not know of such a man.


CALLICLES: What! did you never hear that Themistocles was a good man,

and Cimon and Miltiades and Pericles, who is just lately dead, and whom you

heard yourself?


SOCRATES: Yes, Callicles, they were good men, if, as you said at first, true

virtue consists only in the satisfaction of our own desires and those of others;

but  if  not,  and  if,  as  we  were  afterwards  compelled  to  acknowledge,  the

satisfaction of some desires makes us better, and of others, worse, and we

ought to gratify the one and not the other, and there is an art in distinguishing

them,--can you tell me of any of these statesmen who did distinguish them?CALLICLES: No, indeed, I cannot.


SOCRATES: Yet, surely, Callicles, if you look you will find such a one.

Suppose that we just calmly consider whether any of these was such as I have

described. Will not the good man, who says whatever he says with a view to

the best, speak with a reference to some standard and not at random; just as

all other artists, whether the painter, the builder, the shipwright, or any other

look all of them to their own work, and do not select and apply at random

what they apply, but strive to give a definite form to it? The artist disposes all

things in order, and compels the one part to harmonize and accord with the

other part, until he has constructed a regular and systematic whole; and this is

true of all artists, and in the same way the trainers and physicians, of whom

we spoke before, give order and regularity to the body: do you deny this?


CALLICLES: No; I am ready to admit it.


SOCRATES: Then the house in which order and regularity prevail is good;

that in which there is disorder, evil?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And the same is true of a ship?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And the same may be said of the human body?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And what would you say of the soul? Will the good soul be that

in which disorder is prevalent, or that in which there is harmony and order?


CALLICLES: The latter follows from our previous admissions.


SOCRATES: What is the name which is given to the effect of harmony and

order in the body?


CALLICLES: I suppose that you mean health and strength?SOCRATES: Yes, I do; and what is the name which you would give to the

effect of harmony and order in the soul? Try and discover a name for this as

well as for the other.


CALLICLES: Why not give the name yourself, Socrates?


SOCRATES: Well, if you had rather that I should, I will; and you shall say

whether  you  agree  with  me,  and  if  not,  you  shall  refute  and  answer  me.

'Healthy,' as I conceive, is the name which is given to the regular order of the

body, whence comes health and every other bodily excellence: is that true or

not?


CALLICLES: True.


SOCRATES: And 'lawful' and 'law' are the names which are given to the

regular order and action of the soul, and these make men lawful and orderly:-

-and so we have temperance and justice: have we not?


CALLICLES: Granted.


SOCRATES: And will not the true rhetorician who is honest and understands

his art have his eye fixed upon these, in all the words which he addresses to

the souls of men, and in all his actions, both in what he gives and in what he

takes away? Will not his aim be to implant justice in the souls of his citizens

and take away injustice, to implant temperance and take away intemperance,

to implant every virtue and take away every vice? Do you not agree?


CALLICLES: I agree.


SOCRATES: For what use is there, Callicles, in giving to the body of a sick

man who is in a bad state of health a quantity of the most delightful food or

drink or any other pleasant thing, which may be really as bad for him as if

you gave him nothing, or even worse if rightly estimated. Is not that true?


CALLICLES: I will not say No to it.


SOCRATES: For in my opinion there is no profit in a man's life if his body is

in an evil plight--in that case his life also is evil: am I not right?CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: When a man is in health the physicians will generally allow

him to eat when he is hungry and drink when he is thirsty, and to satisfy his

desires as he likes, but when he is sick they hardly suffer him to satisfy his

desires at all: even you will admit that?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And does not the same argument hold of the soul, my good sir?

While she is in a bad state and is senseless and intemperate and unjust and

unholy, her desires ought to be controlled, and she ought to be prevented

from doing anything which does not tend to her own improvement.


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Such treatment will be better for the soul herself?


CALLICLES: To be sure.


SOCRATES: And to restrain her from her appetites is to chastise her?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES:  Then  restraint  or  chastisement  is  better  for  the  soul  than

intemperance or the absence of control, which you were just now preferring?


CALLICLES: I do not understand you, Socrates, and I wish that you would

ask some one who does.


SOCRATES: Here is a gentleman who cannot endure to be improved or to

subject himself to that very chastisement of which the argument speaks!


CALLICLES: I do not heed a word of what you are saying, and have only

answered hitherto out of civility to Gorgias.


SOCRATES: What are we to do, then? Shall we break off in the middle?CALLICLES: You shall judge for yourself.


SOCRATES: Well, but people say that 'a tale should have a head and not

break off in the middle,' and I should not like to have the argument going

about without a head (compare Laws); please then to go on a little longer, and

put the head on.


CALLICLES: How tyrannical you are, Socrates! I wish that you and your

argument would rest, or that you would get some one else to argue with you.


SOCRATES: But who else is willing?--I want to finish the argument.


CALLICLES: Cannot you finish without my help, either talking straight on,

or questioning and answering yourself?


SOCRATES: Must I then say with Epicharmus, 'Two men spoke before, but

now one shall be enough'? I suppose that there is absolutely no help. And if I

am to carry on the enquiry by myself, I will first of all remark that not only I

but all of us should have an ambition to know what is true and what is false in

this matter, for the discovery of the truth is a common good. And now I will

proceed to argue according to my own notion. But if any of you think that I

arrive at conclusions which are untrue you must interpose and refute me, for I

do not speak from any knowledge of what I am saying; I am an enquirer like

yourselves, and therefore, if my opponent says anything which is of force, I

shall be the first to agree with him. I am speaking on the supposition that the

argument ought to be completed; but if you think otherwise let us leave off

and go our ways.


GORGIAS: I think, Socrates, that we should not go our ways until you have

completed the argument; and this appears to me to be the wish of the rest of

the company; I myself should very much like to hear what more you have to

say.


SOCRATES: I too, Gorgias, should have liked to continue the argument with

Callicles, and then I might have given him an 'Amphion' in return for his

'Zethus'; but since you, Callicles, are unwilling to continue, I hope that you

will listen, and interrupt me if I seem to you to be in error. And if you refuteme, I shall not be angry with you as you are with me, but I shall inscribe you

as the greatest of benefactors on the tablets of my soul.


CALLICLES: My good fellow, never mind me, but get on.


SOCRATES: Listen to me, then, while I recapitulate the argument:--Is the

pleasant the same as the good? Not the same. Callicles and I are agreed about

that. And is the pleasant to be pursued for the sake of the good? or the good

for the sake of the pleasant? The pleasant is to be pursued for the sake of the

good. And that is pleasant at the presence of which we are pleased, and that is

good at the presence of which we are good? To be sure. And we are good,

and all good things whatever are good when some virtue is present in us or

them? That, Callicles, is my conviction. But the virtue of each thing, whether

body or soul, instrument or creature, when given to them in the best way

comes to them not by chance but as the result of the order and truth and art

which are imparted to them: Am I not right? I maintain that I am. And is not

the virtue of each thing dependent on order or arrangement? Yes, I say. And

that which makes a thing good is the proper order inhering in each thing?

Such is my view. And is not the soul which has an order of her own better

than that which has no order? Certainly. And the soul which has order is

orderly? Of course. And that which is orderly is temperate? Assuredly. And

the temperate soul is good? No other answer can I give, Callicles dear; have

you any?


CALLICLES: Go on, my good fellow.


SOCRATES: Then I shall proceed to add, that if the temperate soul is the

good soul, the soul which is in the opposite condition, that is, the foolish and

intemperate, is the bad soul. Very true.


And will not the temperate man do what is proper, both in relation to the gods

and to men;--for he would not be temperate if he did not? Certainly he will do

what is proper. In his relation to other men he will do what is just; and in his

relation to the gods he will do what is holy; and he who does what is just and

holy must be just and holy? Very true. And must he not be courageous? for

the duty of a temperate man is not to follow or to avoid what he ought not,

but what he ought, whether things or men or pleasures or pains, and patientlyto endure when he ought; and therefore, Callicles, the temperate man, being,

as we have described, also just and courageous and holy, cannot be other than

a perfectly good man, nor can the good man do otherwise than well and

perfectly whatever he does; and he who does well must of necessity be happy

and blessed, and the evil man who does evil, miserable: now this latter is he

whom  you  were  applauding--the  intemperate  who  is  the  opposite  of  the

temperate. Such is my position, and these things I affirm to be true. And if

they are true, then I further affirm that he who desires to be happy must

pursue and practise temperance and run away from intemperance as fast as

his  legs  will  carry  him:  he  had  better  order  his  life  so  as  not  to  need

punishment; but if either he or any of his friends, whether private individual

or city, are in need of punishment, then justice must be done and he must

suffer punishment, if he would be happy. This appears to me to be the aim

which a man ought to have, and towards which he ought to direct all the

energies  both  of  himself  and  of  the  state,  acting  so  that  he  may  have

temperance and justice present with him and be happy, not suffering his lusts

to  be  unrestrained,  and  in  the  never-ending  desire  satisfy  them  leading  a

robber's  life.  Such  a  one  is  the  friend  neither  of  God  nor  man,  for  he  is

incapable  of  communion,  and  he  who  is  incapable  of  communion  is  also

incapable of friendship. And philosophers tell us, Callicles, that communion

and  friendship  and  orderliness  and  temperance  and  justice  bind  together

heaven and earth and gods and men, and that this universe is therefore called

Cosmos or order, not disorder or misrule, my friend. But although you are a

philosopher you seem to me never to have observed that geometrical equality

is mighty, both among gods and men; you think that you ought to cultivate

inequality or excess, and do not care about geometry.--Well, then, either the

principle that the happy are made happy by the possession of justice and

temperance, and the miserable miserable by the possession of vice, must be

refuted,  or,  if  it  is  granted,  what  will  be  the  consequences?  All  the

consequences which I drew before, Callicles, and about which you asked me

whether I was in earnest when I said that a man ought to accuse himself and

his son and his friend if he did anything wrong, and that to this end he should

use his rhetoric--all those consequences are true. And that which you thought

that Polus was led to admit out of modesty is true, viz., that, to do injustice, if

more  disgraceful  than  to  suffer,  is  in  that  degree  worse;  and  the  other

position, which, according to Polus, Gorgias admitted out of modesty, that he

who would truly be a rhetorician ought to be just and have a knowledge ofjustice, has also turned out to be true.


And now, these things being as we have said, let us proceed in the next place

to consider whether you are right in throwing in my teeth that I am unable to

help myself or any of my friends or kinsmen, or to save them in the extremity

of danger, and that I am in the power of another like an outlaw to whom any

one may do what he likes,--he may box my ears, which was a brave saying of

yours; or take away my goods or banish me, or even do his worst and kill me;

a condition which, as you say, is the height of disgrace. My answer to you is

one which has been already often repeated, but may as well be repeated once

more. I tell you, Callicles, that to be boxed on the ears wrongfully is not the

worst evil which can befall a man, nor to have my purse or my body cut

open,  but  that  to  smite  and  slay  me  and  mine  wrongfully  is  far  more

disgraceful and more evil; aye, and to despoil and enslave and pillage, or in

any way at all to wrong me and mine, is far more disgraceful and evil to the

doer of the wrong than to me who am the sufferer. These truths, which have

been already set forth as I state them in the previous discussion, would seem

now to have been fixed and riveted by us, if I may use an expression which is

certainly bold, in words which are like bonds of iron and adamant; and unless

you or some other still more enterprising hero shall break them, there is no

possibility of denying what I say. For my position has always been, that I

myself am ignorant how these things are, but that I have never met any one

who could say otherwise, any more than you can, and not appear ridiculous.

This is my position still, and if what I am saying is true, and injustice is the

greatest of evils to the doer of injustice, and yet there is if possible a greater

than this greatest of evils (compare Republic), in an unjust man not suffering

retribution, what is that defence of which the want will make a man truly

ridiculous?  Must  not  the  defence  be  one  which  will  avert  the  greatest  of

human evils? And will not the worst of all defences be that with which a man

is unable to defend himself or his family or his friends? --and next will come

that  which  is  unable  to  avert  the  next  greatest  evil;  thirdly  that  which  is

unable  to  avert  the  third  greatest  evil;  and  so  of  other  evils.  As  is  the

greatness of evil so is the honour of being able to avert them in their several

degrees, and the disgrace of not being able to avert them. Am I not right

Callicles?


CALLICLES: Yes, quite right.SOCRATES: Seeing then that there are these two evils, the doing injustice

and the suffering injustice--and we affirm that to do injustice is a greater, and

to  suffer  injustice  a  lesser  evil--by  what  devices  can  a  man  succeed  in

obtaining  the  two  advantages,  the  one  of  not  doing  and  the  other  of  not

suffering injustice? must he have the power, or only the will to obtain them? I

mean to ask whether a man will escape injustice if he has only the will to

escape, or must he have provided himself with the power?


CALLICLES: He must have provided himself with the power; that is clear.


SOCRATES:  And  what  do  you  say  of  doing  injustice?  Is  the  will  only

sufficient, and will that prevent him from doing injustice, or must he have

provided  himself  with  power  and  art;  and  if  he  have  not  studied  and

practised, will he be unjust still? Surely you might say, Callicles, whether you

think that Polus and I were right in admitting the conclusion that no one does

wrong voluntarily, but that all do wrong against their will?


CALLICLES: Granted, Socrates, if you will only have done.


SOCRATES: Then, as would appear, power and art have to be provided in

order that we may do no injustice?


CALLICLES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And what art will protect us from suffering injustice, if not

wholly, yet as far as possible? I want to know whether you agree with me; for

I think that such an art is the art of one who is either a ruler or even tyrant

himself, or the equal and companion of the ruling power.


CALLICLES: Well said, Socrates; and please to observe how ready I am to

praise you when you talk sense.


SOCRATES: Think and tell me whether you would approve of another view

of mine: To me every man appears to be most the friend of him who is most

like to him--like to like, as ancient sages say: Would you not agree to this?


CALLICLES: I should.SOCRATES:  But  when  the  tyrant  is  rude  and  uneducated,  he  may  be

expected to fear any one who is his superior in virtue, and will never be able

to be perfectly friendly with him.


CALLICLES: That is true.


SOCRATES: Neither will he be the friend of any one who is greatly his

inferior, for the tyrant will despise him, and will never seriously regard him

as a friend.


CALLICLES: That again is true.


SOCRATES: Then the only friend worth mentioning, whom the tyrant can

have, will be one who is of the same character, and has the same likes and

dislikes, and is at the same time willing to be subject and subservient to him;

he is the man who will have power in the state, and no one will injure him

with impunity:--is not that so?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And if a young man begins to ask how he may become great

and formidable, this would seem to be the way--he will accustom himself,

from his youth upward, to feel sorrow and joy on the same occasions as his

master, and will contrive to be as like him as possible?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And in this way he will have accomplished, as you and your

friends would say, the end of becoming a great man and not suffering injury?


CALLICLES: Very true.


SOCRATES: But will he also escape from doing injury? Must not the very

opposite be true,--if he is to be like the tyrant in his injustice, and to have

influence with him? Will he not rather contrive to do as much wrong as

possible, and not be punished?


CALLICLES: True.SOCRATES: And by the imitation of his master and by the power which he

thus acquires will not his soul become bad and corrupted, and will not this be

the greatest evil to him?


CALLICLES: You always contrive somehow or other, Socrates, to invert

everything: do you not know that he who imitates the tyrant will, if he has a

mind, kill him who does not imitate him and take away his goods?


SOCRATES: Excellent Callicles, I am not deaf, and I have heard that a great

many times from you and from Polus and from nearly every man in the city,

but I wish that you would hear me too. I dare say that he will kill him if he

has a mind--the bad man will kill the good and true.


CALLICLES: And is not that just the provoking thing?


SOCRATES: Nay, not to a man of sense, as the argument shows: do you

think that all our cares should be directed to prolonging life to the uttermost,

and to the study of those arts which secure us from danger always; like that

art of rhetoric which saves men in courts of law, and which you advise me to

cultivate?


CALLICLES: Yes, truly, and very good advice too.


SOCRATES: Well, my friend, but what do you think of swimming; is that an

art of any great pretensions?


CALLICLES: No, indeed.


SOCRATES: And yet surely swimming saves a man from death, and there

are occasions on which he must know how to swim. And if you despise the

swimmers, I will tell you of another and greater art, the art of the pilot, who

not only saves the souls of men, but also their bodies and properties from the

extremity of danger, just like rhetoric. Yet his art is modest and unpresuming:

it has no airs or pretences of doing anything extraordinary, and, in return for

the same salvation which is given by the pleader, demands only two obols, if

he brings us from Aegina to Athens, or for the longer voyage from Pontus or

Egypt, at the utmost two drachmae, when he has saved, as I was just nowsaying,  the  passenger  and  his  wife  and  children  and  goods,  and  safely

disembarked them at the Piraeus,--this is the payment which he asks in return

for so great a boon; and he who is the master of the art, and has done all this,

gets out and walks about on the sea-shore by his ship in an unassuming way.

For he is able to reflect and is aware that he cannot tell which of his fellow-

passengers  he  has  benefited,  and  which  of  them  he  has  injured  in  not

allowing them to be drowned. He knows that they are just the same when he

has disembarked them as when they embarked, and not a whit better either in

their bodies or in their souls; and he considers that if a man who is afflicted

by great and incurable bodily diseases is only to be pitied for having escaped,

and is in no way benefited by him in having been saved from drowning,

much less he who has great and incurable diseases, not of the body, but of the

soul, which is the more valuable part of him; neither is life worth having nor

of any profit to the bad man, whether he be delivered from the sea, or the

law-courts, or any other devourer;--and so he reflects that such a one had

better not live, for he cannot live well. (Compare Republic.)


And this is the reason why the pilot, although he is our saviour, is not usually

conceited, any more than the engineer, who is not at all behind either the

general, or the pilot, or any one else, in his saving power, for he sometimes

saves whole cities. Is there any comparison between him and the pleader?

And if he were to talk, Callicles, in your grandiose style, he would bury you

under a mountain of words, declaring and insisting that we ought all of us to

be engine-makers, and that no other profession is worth thinking about; he

would have plenty to say. Nevertheless you despise him and his art, and

sneeringly call him an engine-maker, and you will not allow your daughters

to  marry  his  son,  or  marry  your  son  to  his  daughters.  And  yet,  on  your

principle, what justice or reason is there in your refusal? What right have you

to  despise  the  engine-maker,  and  the  others  whom  I  was  just  now

mentioning? I know that you will say, 'I am better, and better born.' But if the

better is not what I say, and virtue consists only in a man saving himself and

his, whatever may be his character, then your censure of the engine-maker,

and of the physician, and of the other arts of salvation, is ridiculous. O my

friend!  I  want  you  to  see  that  the  noble  and  the  good  may  possibly  be

something different from saving and being saved:--May not he who is truly a

man cease to care about living a certain time?--he knows, as women say, that

no man can escape fate, and therefore he is not fond of life; he leaves all thatwith God, and considers in what way he can best spend his appointed term;--

whether by assimilating himself to the constitution under which he lives, as

you at this moment have to consider how you may become as like as possible

to the Athenian people, if you mean to be in their good graces, and to have

power in the state; whereas I want you to think and see whether this is for the

interest of either of us;--I would not have us risk that which is dearest on the

acquisition of this power, like the Thessalian enchantresses, who, as they say,

bring down the moon from heaven at the risk of their own perdition. But if

you suppose that any man will show you the art of becoming great in the city,

and yet not conforming yourself to the ways of the city, whether for better or

worse, then I can only say that you are mistaken, Callides; for he who would

deserve  to  be  the  true  natural  friend  of  the  Athenian  Demus,  aye,  or  of

Pyrilampes' darling who is called after them, must be by nature like them, and

not an imitator only. He, then, who will make you most like them, will make

you as you desire, a statesman and orator: for every man is pleased when he

is  spoken  to  in  his  own  language  and  spirit,  and  dislikes  any  other.  But

perhaps you, sweet Callicles, may be of another mind. What do you say?


CALLICLES: Somehow or other your words, Socrates, always appear to me

to be good words; and yet, like the rest of the world, I am not quite convinced

by them. (Compare Symp.: 1 Alcib.)


SOCRATES: The reason is, Callicles, that the love of Demus which abides in

your soul is an adversary to me; but I dare say that if we recur to these same

matters, and consider them more thoroughly, you may be convinced for all

that. Please, then, to remember that there are two processes of training all

things, including body and soul; in the one, as we said, we treat them with a

view to pleasure, and in the other with a view to the highest good, and then

we do not indulge but resist them: was not that the distinction which we

drew?


CALLICLES: Very true.


SOCRATES:  And  the  one  which  had  pleasure  in  view  was  just  a  vulgar

flattery:--was not that another of our conclusions?


CALLICLES: Be it so, if you will have it.SOCRATES: And the other had in view the greatest improvement of that

which was ministered to, whether body or soul?


CALLICLES: Quite true.


SOCRATES: And must we not have the same end in view in the treatment of

our city and citizens? Must we not try and make them as good as possible?

For we have already discovered that there is no use in imparting to them any

other good, unless the mind of those who are to have the good, whether

money, or office, or any other sort of power, be gentle and good. Shall we say

that?


CALLICLES: Yes, certainly, if you like.


SOCRATES: Well, then, if you and I, Callicles, were intending to set about

some public business, and were advising one another to undertake buildings,

such as walls, docks or temples of the largest size, ought we not to examine

ourselves, first, as to whether we know or do not know the art of building,

and who taught us?--would not that be necessary, Callicles?


CALLICLES: True.


SOCRATES: In the second place, we should have to consider whether we

had ever constructed any private house, either of our own or for our friends,

and  whether  this  building  of  ours  was  a  success  or  not;  and  if  upon

consideration we found that we had had good and eminent masters, and had

been  successful  in  constructing  many  fine  buildings,  not  only  with  their

assistance, but without them, by our own unaided skill--in that case prudence

would not dissuade us from proceeding to the construction of public works.

But if we had no master to show, and only a number of worthless buildings or

none at all, then, surely, it would be ridiculous in us to attempt public works,

or to advise one another to undertake them. Is not this true?


CALLICLES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And does not the same hold in all other cases? If you and I

were physicians, and were advising one another that we were competent topractise as state-physicians, should I not ask about you, and would you not

ask about me, Well, but how about Socrates himself, has he good health? and

was any one else ever known to be cured by him, whether slave or freeman?

And I should make the same enquiries about you. And if we arrived at the

conclusion that no one, whether citizen or stranger, man or woman, had ever

been any the better for the medical skill of either of us, then, by Heaven,

Callicles, what an absurdity to think that we or any human being should be so

silly as to set up as state-physicians and advise others like ourselves to do the

same, without having first practised in private, whether successfully or not,

and acquired experience of the art! Is not this, as they say, to begin with the

big jar when you are learning the potter's art; which is a foolish thing?


CALLICLES: True.


SOCRATES:  And  now,  my  friend,  as  you  are  already  beginning  to  be  a

public character, and are admonishing and reproaching me for not being one,

suppose that we ask a few questions of one another. Tell me, then, Callicles,

how about making any of the citizens better? Was there ever a man who was

once vicious, or unjust, or intemperate, or foolish, and became by the help of

Callicles good and noble? Was there ever such a man, whether citizen or

stranger, slave or freeman? Tell me, Callicles, if a person were to ask these

questions of you, what would you answer? Whom would you say that you

had improved by your conversation? There may have been good deeds of this

sort which were done by you as a private person, before you came forward in

public. Why will you not answer?


CALLICLES: You are contentious, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Nay, I ask you, not from a love of contention, but because I

really  want  to  know  in  what  way  you  think  that  affairs  should  be

administered among us--whether, when you come to the administration of

them, you have any other aim but the improvement of the citizens? Have we

not already admitted many times over that such is the duty of a public man?

Nay, we have surely said so; for if you will not answer for yourself I must

answer for you. But if this is what the good man ought to effect for the

benefit of his own state, allow me to recall to you the names of those whom

you  were  just  now  mentioning,  Pericles,  and  Cimon,  and  Miltiades,  andThemistocles, and ask whether you still think that they were good citizens.


CALLICLES: I do.


SOCRATES: But if they were good, then clearly each of them must have

made the citizens better instead of worse?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES:  And,  therefore,  when  Pericles  first  began  to  speak  in  the

assembly, the Athenians were not so good as when he spoke last?


CALLICLES: Very likely.


SOCRATES: Nay, my friend, 'likely' is not the word; for if he was a good

citizen, the inference is certain.


CALLICLES: And what difference does that make?


SOCRATES: None; only I should like further to know whether the Athenians

are supposed to have been made better by Pericles, or, on the contrary, to

have been corrupted by him; for I hear that he was the first who gave the

people pay, and made them idle and cowardly, and encouraged them in the

love of talk and money.


CALLICLES: You heard that, Socrates, from the laconising set who bruise

their ears.


SOCRATES: But what I am going to tell you now is not mere hearsay, but

well known both to you and me: that at first, Pericles was glorious and his

character unimpeached by any verdict of the Athenians--this was during the

time when they were not so good--yet afterwards, when they had been made

good and gentle by him, at the very end of his life they convicted him of

theft, and almost put him to death, clearly under the notion that he was a

malefactor.


CALLICLES: Well, but how does that prove Pericles' badness?SOCRATES: Why, surely you would say that he was a bad manager of asses

or  horses  or  oxen,  who  had  received  them  originally  neither  kicking  nor

butting nor biting him, and implanted in them all these savage tricks? Would

he not be a bad manager of any animals who received them gentle, and made

them fiercer than they were when he received them? What do you say?


CALLICLES: I will do you the favour of saying 'yes.'


SOCRATES: And will you also do me the favour of saying whether man is

an animal?


CALLICLES: Certainly he is.


SOCRATES: And was not Pericles a shepherd of men?


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And if he was a good political shepherd, ought not the animals

who were his subjects, as we were just now acknowledging, to have become

more just, and not more unjust?


CALLICLES: Quite true.


SOCRATES: And are not just men gentle, as Homer says?--or are you of

another mind?


CALLICLES: I agree.


SOCRATES: And yet he really did make them more savage than he received

them, and their savageness was shown towards himself; which he must have

been very far from desiring.


CALLICLES: Do you want me to agree with you?


SOCRATES: Yes, if I seem to you to speak the truth.


CALLICLES: Granted then.SOCRATES: And if they were more savage, must they not have been more

unjust and inferior?


CALLICLES: Granted again.


SOCRATES: Then upon this view, Pericles was not a good statesman?


CALLICLES: That is, upon your view.


SOCRATES: Nay, the view is yours, after what you have admitted. Take the

case  of  Cimon  again.  Did  not  the  very  persons  whom  he  was  serving

ostracize him, in order that they might not hear his voice for ten years? and

they did just the same to Themistocles, adding the penalty of exile; and they

voted that Miltiades, the hero of Marathon, should be thrown into the pit of

death, and he was only saved by the Prytanis. And yet, if they had been really

good men, as you say, these things would never have happened to them. For

the good charioteers are not those who at first keep their place, and then,

when  they  have  broken-in  their  horses,  and  themselves  become  better

charioteers, are thrown out--that is not the way either in charioteering or in

any profession.--What do you think?


CALLICLES: I should think not.


SOCRATES: Well, but if so, the truth is as I have said already, that in the

Athenian State no one has ever shown himself to be a good statesman-- you

admitted that this was true of our present statesmen, but not true of former

ones, and you preferred them to the others; yet they have turned out to be no

better than our present ones; and therefore, if they were rhetoricians, they did

not use the true art of rhetoric or of flattery, or they would not have fallen out

of favour.


CALLICLES: But surely, Socrates, no living man ever came near any one of

them in his performances.


SOCRATES: O, my dear friend, I say nothing against them regarded as the

serving-men  of  the  State;  and  I  do  think  that  they  were  certainly  more

serviceable  than  those  who  are  living  now,  and  better  able  to  gratify  thewishes of the State; but as to transforming those desires and not allowing

them to have their way, and using the powers which they had, whether of

persuasion or of force, in the improvement of their fellow citizens, which is

the prime object of the truly good citizen, I do not see that in these respects

they were a whit superior to our present statesmen, although I do admit that

they were more clever at providing ships and walls and docks, and all that.

You  and  I  have  a  ridiculous  way,  for  during  the  whole  time  that  we  are

arguing,  we  are  always  going  round  and  round  to  the  same  point,  and

constantly misunderstanding one another. If I am not mistaken, you have

admitted  and  acknowledged  more  than  once,  that  there  are  two  kinds  of

operations which have to do with the body, and two which have to do with

the soul: one of the two is ministerial, and if our bodies are hungry provides

food for them, and if they are thirsty gives them drink, or if they are cold

supplies them with garments, blankets, shoes, and all that they crave. I use

the same images as before intentionally, in order that you may understand me

the better. The purveyor of the articles may provide them either wholesale or

retail, or he may be the maker of any of them,-- the baker, or the cook, or the

weaver, or the shoemaker, or the currier; and in so doing, being such as he is,

he is naturally supposed by himself and every one to minister to the body. For

none of them know that there is another art--an art of gymnastic and medicine

which is the true minister of the body, and ought to be the mistress of all the

rest, and to use their results according to the knowledge which she has and

they have not, of the real good or bad effects of meats and drinks on the

body. All other arts which have to do with the body are servile and menial

and  illiberal;  and  gymnastic  and  medicine  are,  as  they  ought  to  be,  their

mistresses. Now, when I say that all this is equally true of the soul, you seem

at first to know and understand and assent to my words, and then a little

while afterwards you come repeating, Has not the State had good and noble

citizens? and when I ask you who they are, you reply, seemingly quite in

earnest, as if I had asked, Who are or have been good trainers?--and you had

replied,  Thearion,  the  baker,  Mithoecus,  who  wrote  the  Sicilian  cookery-

book, Sarambus, the vintner: these are ministers of the body, first-rate in their

art; for the first makes admirable loaves, the second excellent dishes, and the

third  capital  wine;--to  me  these  appear  to  be  the  exact  parallel  of  the

statesmen whom you mention. Now you would not be altogether pleased if I

said to you, My friend, you know nothing of gymnastics; those of whom you

are speaking to me are only the ministers and purveyors of luxury, who haveno good or noble notions of their art, and may very likely be filling and

fattening men's bodies and gaining their approval, although the result is that

they lose their original flesh in the long run, and become thinner than they

were before; and yet they, in their simplicity, will not attribute their diseases

and loss of flesh to their entertainers; but when in after years the unhealthy

surfeit brings the attendant penalty of disease, he who happens to be near

them at the time, and offers them advice, is accused and blamed by them, and

if they could they would do him some harm; while they proceed to eulogize

the men who have been the real authors of the mischief. And that, Callicles,

is just what you are now doing. You praise the men who feasted the citizens

and satisfied their desires, and people say that they have made the city great,

not  seeing  that  the  swollen  and  ulcerated  condition  of  the  State  is  to  be

attributed  to  these  elder  statesmen;  for  they  have  filled  the  city  full  of

harbours and docks and walls and revenues and all that, and have left no

room for justice and temperance. And when the crisis of the disorder comes,

the people will blame the advisers of the hour, and applaud Themistocles and

Cimon and Pericles, who are the real authors of their calamities; and if you

are not careful they may assail you and my friend Alcibiades, when they are

losing not only their new acquisitions, but also their original possessions; not

that you are the authors of these misfortunes of theirs, although you may

perhaps be accessories to them. A great piece of work is always being made,

as I see and am told, now as of old; about our statesmen. When the State

treats any of them as malefactors, I observe that there is a great uproar and

indignation at the supposed wrong which is done to them; 'after all their many

services to the State, that they should unjustly perish,'--so the tale runs. But

the cry is all a lie; for no statesman ever could be unjustly put to death by the

city of which he is the head. The case of the professed statesman is, I believe,

very much like that of the professed sophist; for the sophists, although they

are wise men, are nevertheless guilty of a strange piece of folly; professing to

be teachers of virtue, they will often accuse their disciples of wronging them,

and defrauding them of their pay, and showing no gratitude for their services.

Yet what can be more absurd than that men who have become just and good,

and  whose  injustice  has  been  taken  away  from  them,  and  who  have  had

justice implanted in them by their teachers, should act unjustly by reason of

the  injustice  which  is  not  in  them?  Can  anything  be  more  irrational,  my

friends, than this? You, Callicles, compel me to be a mob-orator, because you

will not answer.CALLICLES: And you are the man who cannot speak unless there is some

one to answer?


SOCRATES: I suppose that I can; just now, at any rate, the speeches which I

am making are long enough because you refuse to answer me. But I adjure

you by the god of friendship, my good sir, do tell me whether there does not

appear to you to be a great inconsistency in saying that you have made a man

good, and then blaming him for being bad?


CALLICLES: Yes, it appears so to me.


SOCRATES: Do you never hear our professors of education speaking in this

inconsistent manner?


CALLICLES: Yes, but why talk of men who are good for nothing?


SOCRATES: I would rather say, why talk of men who profess to be rulers,

and  declare  that  they  are  devoted  to  the  improvement  of  the  city,  and

nevertheless upon occasion declaim against the utter vileness of the city: --do

you think that there is any difference between one and the other? My good

friend, the sophist and the rhetorician, as I was saying to Polus, are the same,

or nearly the same; but you ignorantly fancy that rhetoric is a perfect thing,

and sophistry a thing to be despised; whereas the truth is, that sophistry is as

much superior to rhetoric as legislation is to the practice of law, or gymnastic

to medicine. The orators and sophists, as I am inclined to think, are the only

class who cannot complain of the mischief ensuing to themselves from that

which they teach others, without in the same breath accusing themselves of

having done no good to those whom they profess to benefit. Is not this a fact?


CALLICLES: Certainly it is.


SOCRATES: If they were right in saying that they make men better, then

they are the only class who can afford to leave their remuneration to those

who have been benefited by them. Whereas if a man has been benefited in

any other way, if, for example, he has been taught to run by a trainer, he

might possibly defraud him of his pay, if the trainer left the matter to him,

and made no agreement with him that he should receive money as soon as hehad given him the utmost speed; for not because of any deficiency of speed

do men act unjustly, but by reason of injustice.


CALLICLES: Very true.


SOCRATES: And he who removes injustice can be in no danger of being

treated unjustly: he alone can safely leave the honorarium to his pupils, if he

be really able to make them good--am I not right? (Compare Protag.)


CALLICLES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then we have found the reason why there is no dishonour in a

man receiving pay who is called in to advise about building or any other art?


CALLICLES: Yes, we have found the reason.


SOCRATES: But when the point is, how a man may become best himself,

and best govern his family and state, then to say that you will give no advice

gratis is held to be dishonourable?


CALLICLES: True.


SOCRATES: And why? Because only such benefits call forth a desire to

requite them, and there is evidence that a benefit has been conferred when the

benefactor receives a return; otherwise not. Is this true?


CALLICLES: It is.


SOCRATES: Then to which service of the State do you invite me? determine

for me. Am I to be the physician of the State who will strive and struggle to

make  the  Athenians  as  good  as  possible;  or  am  I  to  be  the  servant  and

flatterer of the State? Speak out, my good friend, freely and fairly as you did

at first and ought to do again, and tell me your entire mind.


CALLICLES: I say then that you should be the servant of the State.


SOCRATES: The flatterer? well, sir, that is a noble invitation.CALLICLES: The Mysian, Socrates, or what you please. For if you refuse,

the consequences will be--


SOCRATES: Do not repeat the old story--that he who likes will kill me and

get my money; for then I shall have to repeat the old answer, that he will be a

bad man and will kill the good, and that the money will be of no use to him,

but that he will wrongly use that which he wrongly took, and if wrongly,

basely, and if basely, hurtfully.


CALLICLES: How confident you are, Socrates, that you will never come to

harm! you seem to think that you are living in another country, and can never

be brought into a court of justice, as you very likely may be brought by some

miserable and mean person.


SOCRATES: Then I must indeed be a fool, Callicles, if I do not know that in

the Athenian State any man may suffer anything. And if I am brought to trial

and incur the dangers of which you speak, he will be a villain who brings me

to trial--of that I am very sure, for no good man would accuse the innocent.

Nor shall I be surprised if I am put to death. Shall I tell you why I anticipate

this?


CALLICLES: By all means.


SOCRATES: I think that I am the only or almost the only Athenian living

who practises the true art of politics; I am the only politician of my time.

Now, seeing that when I speak my words are not uttered with any view of

gaining  favour,  and  that  I  look  to  what  is  best  and  not  to  what  is  most

pleasant, having no mind to use those arts and graces which you recommend,

I shall have nothing to say in the justice court. And you might argue with me,

as I was arguing with Polus:--I shall be tried just as a physician would be

tried in a court of little boys at the indictment of the cook. What would he

reply under such circumstances, if some one were to accuse him, saying, 'O

my boys, many evil things has this man done to you: he is the death of you,

especially of the younger ones among you, cutting and burning and starving

and suffocating you, until you know not what to do; he gives you the bitterest

potions, and compels you to hunger and thirst. How unlike the variety of

meats and sweets on which I feasted you!' What do you suppose that thephysician  would  be  able  to  reply  when  he  found  himself  in  such  a

predicament? If he told the truth he could only say, 'All these evil things, my

boys, I did for your health,' and then would there not just be a clamour among

a jury like that? How they would cry out!


CALLICLES: I dare say.


SOCRATES: Would he not be utterly at a loss for a reply?


CALLICLES: He certainly would.


SOCRATES: And I too shall be treated in the same way, as I well know, if I

am brought before the court. For I shall not be able to rehearse to the people

the pleasures which I have procured for them, and which, although I am not

disposed to envy either the procurers or enjoyers of them, are deemed by

them to be benefits and advantages. And if any one says that I corrupt young

men, and perplex their minds, or that I speak evil of old men, and use bitter

words towards them, whether in private or public, it is useless for me to

reply, as I truly might:--'All this I do for the sake of justice, and with a view

to your interest, my judges, and to nothing else.' And therefore there is no

saying what may happen to me.


CALLICLES: And do you think, Socrates, that a man who is thus defenceless

is in a good position?


SOCRATES: Yes, Callicles, if he have that defence, which as you have often

acknowledged he should have--if he be his own defence, and have never said

or done anything wrong, either in respect of gods or men; and this has been

repeatedly acknowledged by us to be the best sort of defence. And if any one

could convict me of inability to defend myself or others after this sort, I

should blush for shame, whether I was convicted before many, or before a

few, or by myself alone; and if I died from want of ability to do so, that

would indeed grieve me. But if I died because I have no powers of flattery or

rhetoric, I am very sure that you would not find me repining at death. For no

man who is not an utter fool and coward is afraid of death itself, but he is

afraid of doing wrong. For to go to the world below having one's soul full of

injustice is the last and worst of all evils. And in proof of what I say, if youhave no objection, I should like to tell you a story.


CALLICLES: Very well, proceed; and then we shall have done.


SOCRATES: Listen, then, as story-tellers say, to a very pretty tale, which I

dare say that you may be disposed to regard as a fable only, but which, as I

believe, is a true tale, for I mean to speak the truth. Homer tells us (Il.), how

Zeus and Poseidon and Pluto divided the empire which they inherited from

their father. Now in the days of Cronos there existed a law respecting the

destiny of man, which has always been, and still continues to be in Heaven,--

that he who has lived all his life in justice and holiness shall go, when he is

dead, to the Islands of the Blessed, and dwell there in perfect happiness out of

the reach of evil; but that he who has lived unjustly and impiously shall go to

the house of vengeance and punishment, which is called Tartarus. And in the

time of Cronos, and even quite lately in the reign of Zeus, the judgment was

given on the very day on which the men were to die; the judges were alive,

and the men were alive; and the consequence was that the judgments were

not well given. Then Pluto and the authorities from the Islands of the Blessed

came to Zeus, and said that the souls found their way to the wrong places.

Zeus said: 'I shall put a stop to this; the judgments are not well given, because

the persons who are judged have their clothes on, for they are alive; and there

are many who, having evil souls, are apparelled in fair bodies, or encased in

wealth or rank, and, when the day of judgment arrives, numerous witnesses

come forward and testify on their behalf that they have lived righteously. The

judges are awed by them, and they themselves too have their clothes on when

judging; their eyes and ears and their whole bodies are interposed as a veil

before their own souls. All this is a hindrance to them; there are the clothes of

the judges and the clothes of the judged.--What is to be done? I will tell you:-

-In the first place, I will deprive men of the foreknowledge of death, which

they possess at present: this power which they have Prometheus has already

received my orders to take from them: in the second place, they shall be

entirely stripped before they are judged, for they shall be judged when they

are dead; and the judge too shall be naked, that is to say, dead--he with his

naked soul shall pierce into the other naked souls; and they shall die suddenly

and be deprived of all their kindred, and leave their brave attire strewn upon

the earth--conducted in this manner, the judgment will be just. I knew all

about  the  matter  before  any  of  you,  and  therefore  I  have  made  my  sonsjudges;  two  from  Asia,  Minos  and  Rhadamanthus,  and  one  from  Europe,

Aeacus. And these, when they are dead, shall give judgment in the meadow

at the parting of the ways, whence the two roads lead, one to the Islands of

the Blessed, and the other to Tartarus. Rhadamanthus shall judge those who

come from Asia, and Aeacus those who come from Europe. And to Minos I

shall give the primacy, and he shall hold a court of appeal, in case either of

the  two  others  are  in  any  doubt:--then  the  judgment  respecting  the  last

journey of men will be as just as possible.'


From this tale, Callicles, which I have heard and believe, I draw the following

inferences:--Death, if I am right, is in the first place the separation from one

another  of  two  things,  soul  and  body;  nothing  else.  And  after  they  are

separated they retain their several natures, as in life; the body keeps the same

habit, and the results of treatment or accident are distinctly visible in it: for

example, he who by nature or training or both, was a tall man while he was

alive, will remain as he was, after he is dead; and the fat man will remain fat;

and so on; and the dead man, who in life had a fancy to have flowing hair,

will have flowing hair. And if he was marked with the whip and had the

prints of the scourge, or of wounds in him when he was alive, you might see

the same in the dead body; and if his limbs were broken or misshapen when

he was alive, the same appearance would be visible in the dead. And in a

word,  whatever  was  the  habit  of  the  body  during  life  would  be

distinguishable after death, either perfectly, or in a great measure and for a

certain  time.  And  I  should  imagine  that  this  is  equally  true  of  the  soul,

Callicles; when a man is stripped of the body, all the natural or acquired

affections of the soul are laid open to view.-- And when they come to the

judge, as those from Asia come to Rhadamanthus, he places them near him

and inspects them quite impartially, not knowing whose the soul is: perhaps

he may lay hands on the soul of the great king, or of some other king or

potentate, who has no soundness in him, but his soul is marked with the whip,

and is full of the prints and scars of perjuries and crimes with which each

action has stained him, and he is all crooked with falsehood and imposture,

and  has  no  straightness,  because  he  has  lived  without  truth.  Him

Rhadamanthus  beholds,  full  of  all  deformity  and  disproportion,  which  is

caused by licence and luxury and insolence and incontinence, and despatches

him  ignominiously  to  his  prison,  and  there  he  undergoes  the  punishment

which he deserves.Now the proper office of punishment is twofold: he who is rightly punished

ought either to become better and profit by it, or he ought to be made an

example  to  his  fellows,  that  they  may  see  what  he  suffers,  and  fear  and

become better. Those who are improved when they are punished by gods and

men, are those whose sins are curable; and they are improved, as in this

world so also in another, by pain and suffering; for there is no other way in

which they can be delivered from their evil. But they who have been guilty of

the  worst  crimes,  and  are  incurable  by  reason  of  their  crimes,  are  made

examples; for, as they are incurable, the time has passed at which they can

receive any benefit. They get no good themselves, but others get good when

they behold them enduring for ever the most terrible and painful and fearful

sufferings as the penalty of their sins--there they are, hanging up as examples,

in  the  prison-house  of  the  world  below,  a  spectacle  and  a  warning  to  all

unrighteous men who come thither. And among them, as I confidently affirm,

will be found Archelaus, if Polus truly reports of him, and any other tyrant

who is like him. Of these fearful examples, most, as I believe, are taken from

the class of tyrants and kings and potentates and public men, for they are the

authors  of  the  greatest  and  most  impious  crimes,  because  they  have  the

power. And Homer witnesses to the truth of this; for they are always kings

and potentates whom he has described as suffering everlasting punishment in

the world below: such were Tantalus and Sisyphus and Tityus. But no one

ever described Thersites, or any private person who was a villain, as suffering

everlasting punishment, or as incurable. For to commit the worst crimes, as I

am inclined to think, was not in his power, and he was happier than those

who had the power. No, Callicles, the very bad men come from the class of

those who have power (compare Republic). And yet in that very class there

may arise good men, and worthy of all admiration they are, for where there is

great power to do wrong, to live and to die justly is a hard thing, and greatly

to be praised, and few there are who attain to this. Such good and true men,

however, there have been, and will be again, at Athens and in other states,

who  have  fulfilled  their  trust  righteously;  and  there  is  one  who  is  quite

famous all over Hellas, Aristeides, the son of Lysimachus. But, in general,

great men are also bad, my friend.


As I was saying, Rhadamanthus, when he gets a soul of the bad kind, knows

nothing about him, neither who he is, nor who his parents are; he knows only

that he has got hold of a villain; and seeing this, he stamps him as curable orincurable, and sends him away to Tartarus, whither he goes and receives his

proper recompense. Or, again, he looks with admiration on the soul of some

just one who has lived in holiness and truth; he may have been a private man

or not; and I should say, Callicles, that he is most likely to have been a

philosopher who has done his own work, and not troubled himself with the

doings of other men in his lifetime; him Rhadamanthus sends to the Islands

of  the  Blessed.  Aeacus  does  the  same;  and  they  both  have  sceptres,  and

judge; but Minos alone has a golden sceptre and is seated looking on, as

Odysseus in Homer declares that he saw him:


'Holding a sceptre of gold, and giving laws to the dead.'


Now I, Callicles, am persuaded of the truth of these things, and I consider

how I shall present my soul whole and undefiled before the judge in that day.

Renouncing the honours at which the world aims, I desire only to know the

truth, and to live as well as I can, and, when I die, to die as well as I can.

And, to the utmost of my power, I exhort all other men to do the same. And,

in return for your exhortation of me, I exhort you also to take part in the great

combat, which is the combat of life, and greater than every other earthly

conflict. And I retort your reproach of me, and say, that you will not be able

to help yourself when the day of trial and judgment, of which I was speaking,

comes upon you; you will go before the judge, the son of Aegina, and, when

he has got you in his grip and is carrying you off, you will gape and your

head will swim round, just as mine would in the courts of this world, and

very likely some one will shamefully box you on the ears, and put upon you

any sort of insult.


Perhaps this may appear to you to be only an old wife's tale, which you will

contemn. And there might be reason in your contemning such tales, if by

searching we could find out anything better or truer: but now you see that you

and Polus and Gorgias, who are the three wisest of the Greeks of our day, are

not  able  to  show  that  we  ought  to  live  any  life  which  does  not  profit  in

another  world  as  well  as  in  this.  And  of  all  that  has  been  said,  nothing

remains unshaken but the saying, that to do injustice is more to be avoided

than to suffer injustice, and that the reality and not the appearance of virtue is

to be followed above all things, as well in public as in private life; and that

when any one has been wrong in anything, he is to be chastised, and that thenext best thing to a man being just is that he should become just, and be

chastised and punished; also that he should avoid all flattery of himself as

well as of others, of the few or of the many: and rhetoric and any other art

should be used by him, and all his actions should be done always, with a view

to justice.


Follow me then, and I will lead you where you will be happy in life and after

death, as the argument shows. And never mind if some one despises you as a

fool, and insults you, if he has a mind; let him strike you, by Zeus, and do

you be of good cheer, and do not mind the insulting blow, for you will never

come to any harm in the practice of virtue, if you are a really good and true

man. When we have practised virtue together, we will apply ourselves to

politics, if that seems desirable, or we will advise about whatever else may

seem good to us, for we shall be better able to judge then. In our present

condition we ought not to give ourselves airs, for even on the most important

subjects we are always changing our minds; so utterly stupid are we! Let us,

then, take the argument as our guide, which has revealed to us that the best

way of life is to practise justice and every virtue in life and death. This way

let us go; and in this exhort all men to follow, not in the way to which you

trust and in which you exhort me to follow you; for that way, Callicles, is

nothing worth.


THE END                            Ion Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    Beginning of IonIntroduction to Plato's Ion


  The Ion is the shortest, or nearly the shortest, of all the writings which

bear  the  name  of  Plato,  and  is  not  authenticated  by  any  early  external

testimony.  The  grace  and  beauty  of  this  little  work  supply  the  only,  and

perhaps  a  sufficient,  proof  of  its  genuineness.  The  plan  is  simple;  the

dramatic  interest  consists  entirely  in  the  contrast  between  the  irony  of

Socrates and the transparent vanity and childlike enthusiasm of the rhapsode

Ion. The theme of the Dialogue may possibly have been suggested by the

passage of Xenophon's Memorabilia in which the rhapsodists are described

by Euthydemus as 'very precise about the exact words of Homer, but very

idiotic themselves.' (Compare Aristotle, Met.)


  Ion  the  rhapsode  has  just  come  to  Athens;  he  has  been  exhibiting  in

Epidaurus  at  the  festival  of  Asclepius,  and  is  intending  to  exhibit  at  the

festival of the Panathenaea. Socrates admires and envies the rhapsode's art;

for he is always well dressed and in good company--in the company of good

poets and of Homer, who is the prince of them. In the course of conversation

the admission is elicited from Ion that his skill is restricted to Homer, and that

he  knows  nothing  of  inferior  poets,  such  as  Hesiod  and  Archilochus;--he

brightens up and is wide awake when Homer is being recited, but is apt to go

to sleep at the recitations of any other poet. 'And yet, surely, he who knows

the superior ought to know the inferior also;--he who can judge of the good

speaker is able to judge of the bad. And poetry is a whole; and he who judges

of poetry by rules of art ought to be able to judge of all poetry.' This is

confirmed by the analogy of sculpture, painting, flute-playing, and the other

arts. The argument is at last brought home to the mind of Ion, who asks how

this  contradiction  is  to  be  solved.  The  solution  given  by  Socrates  is  as

follows:--


  The rhapsode is not guided by rules of art, but is an inspired person who

derives a mysterious power from the poet; and the poet, in like manner, is

inspired by the God. The poets and their interpreters may be compared to a

chain of magnetic rings suspended from one another, and from a magnet. The

magnet  is  the  Muse,  and  the  ring  which  immediately  follows  is  the  poethimself;  from  him  are  suspended  other  poets;  there  is  also  a  chain  of

rhapsodes and actors, who also hang from the Muses, but are let down at the

side;  and  the  last  ring  of  all  is  the  spectator.  The  poet  is  the  inspired

interpreter of the God, and this is the reason why some poets, like Homer, are

restricted to a single theme, or, like Tynnichus, are famous for a single poem;

and the rhapsode is the inspired interpreter of the poet, and for a similar

reason some rhapsodes, like Ion, are the interpreters of single poets.


  Ion is delighted at the notion of being inspired, and acknowledges that he

is beside himself when he is performing;--his eyes rain tears and his hair

stands on end. Socrates is of opinion that a man must be mad who behaves in

this  way  at  a  festival  when  he  is  surrounded  by  his  friends  and  there  is

nothing to trouble him. Ion is confident that Socrates would never think him

mad  if  he  could  only  hear  his  embellishments  of  Homer.  Socrates  asks

whether he can speak well about everything in Homer. 'Yes, indeed he can.'

'What about things of which he has no knowledge?' Ion answers that he can

interpret anything in Homer. But, rejoins Socrates, when Homer speaks of the

arts, as for example, of chariot-driving, or of medicine, or of prophecy, or of

navigation--will he, or will the charioteer or physician or prophet or pilot be

the better judge? Ion is compelled to admit that every man will judge of his

own particular art better than the rhapsode. He still maintains, however, that

he understands the art of the general as well as any one. 'Then why in this city

of Athens, in which men of merit are always being sought after, is he not at

once  appointed  a  general?'  Ion  replies  that  he  is  a  foreigner,  and  the

Athenians and Spartans will not appoint a foreigner to be their general. 'No,

that is not the real reason; there are many examples to the contrary. But Ion

has long been playing tricks with the argument; like Proteus, he transforms

himself  into  a  variety  of  shapes,  and  is  at  last  about  to  run  away  in  the

disguise of a general. Would he rather be regarded as inspired or dishonest?'

Ion, who has no suspicion of the irony of Socrates, eagerly embraces the

alternative of inspiration.


  The Ion, like the other earlier Platonic Dialogues, is a mixture of jest and

earnest, in which no definite result is obtained, but some Socratic or Platonic

truths are allowed dimly to appear.


  The elements of a true theory of poetry are contained in the notion thatthe poet is inspired. Genius is often said to be unconscious, or spontaneous,

or a gift of nature: that 'genius is akin to madness' is a popular aphorism of

modern  times.  The  greatest  strength  is  observed  to  have  an  element  of

limitation. Sense or passion are too much for the 'dry light' of intelligence

which mingles with them and becomes discoloured by them. Imagination is

often at war with reason and fact. The concentration of the mind on a single

object,  or  on  a  single  aspect  of  human  nature,  overpowers  the  orderly

perception of the whole. Yet the feelings too bring truths home to the minds

of many who in the way of reason would be incapable of understanding them.

Reflections of this kind may have been passing before Plato's mind when he

describes the poet as inspired, or when, as in the Apology, he speaks of poets

as the worst critics of their own writings--anybody taken at random from the

crowd is a better interpreter of them than they are of themselves. They are

sacred persons, 'winged and holy things' who have a touch of madness in

their composition (Phaedr.), and should be treated with every sort of respect

(Republic), but not allowed to live in a well-ordered state. Like the Statesmen

in the Meno, they have a divine instinct, but they are narrow and confused;

they do not attain to the clearness of ideas, or to the knowledge of poetry or

of any other art as a whole.


  In the Protagoras the ancient poets are recognized by Protagoras himself

as the original sophists; and this family resemblance may be traced in the Ion.

The rhapsode belongs to the realm of imitation and of opinion: he professes

to have all knowledge, which is derived by him from Homer, just as the

sophist professes to have all wisdom, which is contained in his art of rhetoric.

Even more than the sophist he is incapable of appreciating the commonest

logical distinctions; he cannot explain the nature of his own art; his great

memory contrasts with his inability to follow the steps of the argument. And

in his highest moments of inspiration he has an eye to his own gains.


  The old quarrel between philosophy and poetry, which in the Republic

leads to their final separation, is already working in the mind of Plato, and is

embodied by him in the contrast between Socrates and Ion. Yet here, as in the

Republic,  Socrates  shows  a  sympathy  with  the  poetic  nature.  Also,  the

manner  in  which  Ion  is  affected  by  his  own  recitations  affords  a  lively

illustration  of  the  power  which,  in  the  Republic,  Socrates  attributes  to

dramatic performances over the mind of the performer. His allusion to hisembellishments of Homer, in which he declares himself to have surpassed

Metrodorus of Lampsacus and Stesimbrotus of Thasos, seems to show that,

like  them,  he  belonged  to  the  allegorical  school  of  interpreters.  The

circumstance  that  nothing  more  is  known  of  him  may  be  adduced  in

confirmation  of  the  argument  that  this  truly  Platonic  little  work  is  not  a

forgery of later times.Ion


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettPersons of the Dialogue: SOCRATES, ION


SOCRATES: Welcome, Ion. Are you from your native city of Ephesus?


ION:  No,  Socrates;  but  from  Epidaurus,  where  I  attended  the  festival  of

Asclepius.


SOCRATES:  And  do  the  Epidaurians  have  contests  of  rhapsodes  at  the

festival?


ION: O yes; and of all sorts of musical performers.


SOCRATES: And were you one of the competitors- and did you succeed?


ION: I obtained the first prize of all, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Well done; and I hope that you will do the same for us at the

Panathenaea.


ION: And I will, please heaven.


SOCRATES: I often envy the profession of a rhapsode, Ion; for you have

always to wear fine clothes, and to look as beautiful as you can is a part of

your art. Then, again, you are obliged to be continually in the company of

many good poets; and especially of Homer, who is the best and most divine

of them; and to understand him, and not merely learn his words by rote, is a

thing greatly to be envied. And no man can be a rhapsode who does not

understand the meaning of the poet. For the rhapsode ought to interpret the

mind of the poet to his hearers, but how can he interpret him well unless he

knows what he means? All this is greatly to be envied.


ION: Very true, Socrates; interpretation has certainly been the most laborious

part of my art; and I believe myself able to speak about Homer better than

any man; and that neither Metrodorus of Lampsacus, nor Stesimbrotus of

Thasos, nor Glaucon, nor any one else who ever was, had as good ideas about

Homer as I have, or as many.SOCRATES: I am glad to hear you say so, Ion; I see that you will not refuse

to acquaint me with them.


ION:  Certainly,  Socrates;  and  you  really  ought  to  hear  how  exquisitely  I

render Homer. I think that the Homeridae should give me a golden crown.


SOCRATES: I shall take an opportunity of hearing your embellishments of

him at some other time. But just now I should like to ask you a question:

Does your art extend to Hesiod and Archilochus, or to Homer only?


ION: To Homer only; he is in himself quite enough.


SOCRATES: Are there any things about which Homer and Hesiod agree?


ION: Yes; in my opinion there are a good many.


SOCRATES: And can you interpret better what Homer says, or what Hesiod

says, about these matters in which they agree?


ION: I can interpret them equally well, Socrates, where they agree.


SOCRATES:  But  what  about  matters  in  which  they  do  not  agree?-  for

example, about divination, of which both Homer and Hesiod have something

to say-


ION: Very true:


SOCRATES: Would you or a good prophet be a better interpreter of what

these two poets say about divination, not only when they agree, but when

they disagree?


ION: A prophet.


SOCRATES: And if you were a prophet, would you be able to interpret them

when they disagree as well as when they agree?


ION: Clearly.SOCRATES: But how did you come to have this skill about Homer only, and

not about Hesiod or the other poets? Does not Homer speak of the same

themes which all other poets handle? Is not war his great argument? and does

he not speak of human society and of intercourse of men, good and bad,

skilled and unskilled, and of the gods conversing with one another and with

mankind, and about what happens in heaven and in the world below, and the

generations of gods and heroes? Are not these the themes of which Homer

sings?


ION: Very true, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And do not the other poets sing of the same?


ION: Yes, Socrates; but not in the same way as Homer.


SOCRATES: What, in a worse way?


ION: Yes, in a far worse.


SOCRATES: And Homer in a better way?


ION: He is incomparably better.


SOCRATES:  And  yet  surely,  my  dear  friend  Ion,  in  a  discussion  about

arithmetic, where many people are speaking, and one speaks better than the

rest, there is somebody who can judge which of them is the good speaker?


ION: Yes.


SOCRATES: And he who judges of the good will be the same as he who

judges of the bad speakers?


ION: The same.


SOCRATES: And he will be the arithmetician?


ION: Yes.SOCRATES:  Well,  and  in  discussions  about  the  wholesomeness  of  food,

when many persons are speaking, and one speaks better than the rest, will he

who  recognizes  the  better  speaker  be  a  different  person  from  him  who

recognizes the worse, or the same?


ION: Clearly the same.


SOCRATES: And who is he, and what is his name?


ION: The physician.


SOCRATES: And speaking generally, in all discussions in which the subject

is the same and many men are speaking, will not he who knows the good

know the bad speaker also? For if he does not know the bad, neither will he

know the good when the same topic is being discussed.


ION: True.


SOCRATES: Is not the same person skilful in both?


ION: Yes.


SOCRATES: And you say that Homer and the other poets, such as Hesiod

and Archilochus, speak of the same things, although not in the same way; but

the one speaks well and the other not so well?


ION: Yes; and I am right in saying so.


SOCRATES: And if you knew the good speaker, you would also know the

inferior speakers to be inferior?


ION: That is true.


SOCRATES: Then, my dear friend, can I be mistaken in saying that Ion is

equally skilled in Homer and in other poets, since he himself acknowledges

that the same person will be a good judge of all those who speak of the same

things; and that almost all poets do speak of the same things?ION:  Why  then,  Socrates,  do  I  lose  attention  and  go  to  sleep  and  have

absolutely no ideas of the least value, when any one speaks of any other poet;

but when Homer is mentioned, I wake up at once and am all attention and

have plenty to say?


SOCRATES: The reason, my friend, is obvious. No one can fail to see that

you speak of Homer without any art or knowledge. If you were able to speak

of him by rules of art, you would have been able to speak of all other poets;

for poetry is a whole.


ION: Yes.


SOCRATES: And when any one acquires any other art as a whole, the same

may be said of them. Would you like me to explain my meaning, Ion?


ION: Yes, indeed, Socrates; I very much wish that you would: for I love to

hear you wise men talk.


SOCRATES: O that we were wise, Ion, and that you could truly call us so;

but you rhapsodes and actors, and the poets whose verses you sing, are wise;

whereas I am a common man, who only speak the truth. For consider what a

very commonplace and trivial thing is this which I have said- a thing which

any man might say: that when a man has acquired a knowledge of a whole

art, the enquiry into good and bad is one and the same. Let us consider this

matter; is not the art of painting a whole?


ION: Yes.


SOCRATES: And there are and have been many painters good and bad?


ION: Yes.


SOCRATES: And did you ever know any one who was skilful in pointing out

the  excellences  and  defects  of  Polygnotus  the  son  of  Aglaophon,  but

incapable of criticizing other painters; and when the work of any other painter

was produced, went to sleep and was at a loss, and had no ideas; but when he

had to give his opinion about Polygnotus, or whoever the painter might be,and about him only, woke up and was attentive and had plenty to say?


ION: No indeed, I have never known such a person.


SOCRATES: Or did you ever know of any one in sculpture, who was skilful

in expounding the merits of Daedalus the son of Metion, or of Epeius the son

of Panopeus, or of Theodorus the Samian, or of any individual sculptor; but

when the works of sculptors in general were produced, was at a loss and went

to sleep and had nothing to say?


ION: No indeed; no more than the other.


SOCRATES: And if I am not mistaken, you never met with any one among

flute-players or harp- players or singers to the harp or rhapsodes who was

able  to  discourse  of  Olympus  or  Thamyras  or  Orpheus,  or  Phemius  the

rhapsode  of  Ithaca,  but  was  at  a  loss  when  he  came  to  speak  of  Ion  of

Ephesus, and had no notion of his merits or defects?


ION: I cannot deny what you say, Socrates. Nevertheless I am conscious in

my own self, and the world agrees with me in thinking that I do speak better

and have more to say about Homer than any other man. But I do not speak

equally well about others- tell me the reason of this.


SOCRATES: I perceive, Ion; and I will proceed to explain to you what I

imagine to be the reason of this. The gift which you possess of speaking

excellently about Homer is not an art, but, as I was just saying, an inspiration;

there  is  a  divinity  moving  you,  like  that  contained  in  the  stone  which

Euripides  calls  a  magnet,  but  which  is  commonly  known  as  the  stone  of

Heraclea. This stone not only attracts iron rings, but also imparts to them a

similar power of attracting other rings; and sometimes you may see a number

of pieces of iron and rings suspended from one another so as to form quite a

long chain: and all of them derive their power of suspension from the original

stone. In like manner the Muse first of all inspires men herself; and from

these inspired persons a chain of other persons is suspended, who take the

inspiration. For all good poets, epic as well as lyric, compose their beautiful

poems not by art, but because they are inspired and possessed. And as the

Corybantian revellers when they dance are not in their right mind, so the lyricpoets are not in their right mind when they are composing their beautiful

strains:  but  when  falling  under  the  power  of  music  and  metre  they  are

inspired and possessed; like Bacchic maidens who draw milk and honey from

the rivers when they are under the influence of Dionysus but not when they

are in their right mind. And the soul of the lyric poet does the same, as they

themselves say; for they tell us that they bring songs from honeyed fountains,

culling them out of the gardens and dells of the Muses; they, like the bees,

winging their way from flower to flower. And this is true. For the poet is a

light and winged and holy thing, and there is no invention in him until he has

been inspired and is out of his senses, and the mind is no longer in him: when

he has not attained to this state, he is powerless and is unable to utter his

oracles.


Many are the noble words in which poets speak concerning the actions of

men; but like yourself when speaking about Homer, they do not speak of

them by any rules of art: they are simply inspired to utter that to which the

Muse impels them, and that only; and when inspired, one of them will make

dithyrambs, another hymns of praise, another choral strains, another epic or

iambic verses- and he who is good at one is not good any other kind of verse:

for not by art does the poet sing, but by power divine. Had he learned by

rules of art, he would have known how to speak not of one theme only, but of

all; and therefore God takes away the minds of poets, and uses them as his

ministers, as he also uses diviners and holy prophets, in order that we who

hear them may know them to be speaking not of themselves who utter these

priceless words in a state of unconsciousness, but that God himself is the

speaker, and that through them he is conversing with us. And Tynnichus the

Chalcidian affords a striking instance of what I am saying: he wrote nothing

that any one would care to remember but the famous paean which; in every

one's mouth, one of the finest poems ever written, simply an invention of the

Muses, as he himself says. For in this way, the God would seem to indicate to

us and not allow us to doubt that these beautiful poems are not human, or the

work of man, but divine and the work of God; and that the poets are only the

interpreters of the Gods by whom they are severally possessed. Was not this

the lesson which the God intended to teach when by the mouth of the worst

of poets he sang the best of songs? Am I not right, Ion?


ION: Yes, indeed, Socrates, I feel that you are; for your words touch my soul,and I am persuaded that good poets by a divine inspiration interpret the things

of the Gods to us.


SOCRATES: And you rhapsodists are the interpreters of the poets?


ION: There again you are right.


SOCRATES: Then you are the interpreters of interpreters?


ION: Precisely.


SOCRATES: I wish you would frankly tell me, Ion, what I am going to ask

of  you:  When  you  produce  the  greatest  effect  upon  the  audience  in  the

recitation  of  some  striking  passage,  such  as  the  apparition  of  Odysseus

leaping forth on the floor, recognized by the suitors and casting his arrows at

his feet, or the description of Achilles rushing at Hector, or the sorrows of

Andromache, Hecuba, or Priam,- are you in your right mind? Are you not

carried  out  of  yourself,  and  does  not  your  soul  in  an  ecstasy  seem  to  be

among the persons or places of which you are speaking, whether they are in

Ithaca or in Troy or whatever may be the scene of the poem?


ION: That proof strikes home to me, Socrates. For I must frankly confess that

at the tale of pity, my eyes are filled with tears, and when I speak of horrors,

my hair stands on end and my heart throbs.


SOCRATES: Well, Ion, and what are we to say of a man who at a sacrifice or

festival, when he is dressed in holiday attire and has golden crowns upon his

head, of which nobody has robbed him, appears sweeping or panic-stricken in

the presence of more than twenty thousand friendly faces, when there is no

one despoiling or wronging him;- is he in his right mind or is he not?


ION: No indeed, Socrates, I must say that, strictly speaking, he is not in his

right mind.


SOCRATES: And are you aware that you produce similar effects on most

spectators?


ION: Only too well; for I look down upon them from the stage, and beholdthe  various  emotions  of  pity,  wonder,  sternness,  stamped  upon  their

countenances when I am speaking: and I am obliged to give my very best

attention to them; for if I make them cry I myself shall laugh, and if I make

them laugh I myself shall cry when the time of payment arrives.


SOCRATES: Do you know that the spectator is the last of the rings which, as

I am saying, receive the power of the original magnet from one another? The

rhapsode  like  yourself  and  the  actor  are  intermediate  links,  and  the  poet

himself is the first of them. Through all these the God sways the souls of men

in  any  direction  which  he  pleases,  and  makes  one  man  hang  down  from

another. Thus there is a vast chain of dancers and masters and undermasters

of choruses, who are suspended, as if from the stone, at the side of the rings

which  hang  down  from  the  Muse.  And  every  poet  has  some  Muse  from

whom he is suspended, and by whom he is said to be possessed, which is

nearly the same thing; for he is taken hold of. And from these first rings,

which  are  the  poets,  depend  others,  some  deriving  their  inspiration  from

Orpheus, others from Musaeus; but the greater number are possessed and

held by Homer. Of whom, Ion, you are one, and are possessed by Homer; and

when any one repeats the words of another poet you go to sleep, and know

not what to say; but when any one recites a strain of Homer you wake up in a

moment, and your soul leaps within you, and you have plenty to say; for not

by art or knowledge about Homer do you say what you say, but by divine

inspiration and by possession; just as the Corybantian revellers too have a

quick  perception  of  that  strain  only  which  is  appropriated  to  the  God  by

whom they are possessed, and have plenty of dances and words for that, but

take  no  heed  of  any  other.  And  you,  Ion,  when  the  name  of  Homer  is

mentioned have plenty to say, and have nothing to say of others. You ask,

"Why is this?" The answer is that you praise Homer not by art but by divine

inspiration.


ION: That is good, Socrates; and yet I doubt whether you will ever have

eloquence enough to persuade me that I praise Homer only when I am mad

and possessed; and if you could hear me speak of him I am sure you would

never think this to be the case.


SOCRATES: I should like very much to hear you, but not until you have

answered a question which I have to ask. On what part of Homer do youspeak well?- not surely about every part.


ION: There is no part, Socrates, about which I do not speak well of that I can

assure you.


SOCRATES:  Surely  not  about  things  in  Homer  of  which  you  have  no

knowledge?


ION: And what is there in Homer of which I have no knowledge?


SOCRATES: Why, does not Homer speak in many passages about arts? For

example, about driving; if I can only remember the lines I will repeat them.


ION: I remember, and will repeat them.


SOCRATES: Tell me then, what Nestor says to Antilochus, his son, where he

bids him be careful of the turn at the horse-race in honour of Patroclus.


ION: He says:


Bend gently in the polished chariot to the left of them, and urge the horse on

the right hand with whip and voice; and slacken the rein. And when you are

at the goal, let the left horse draw near, yet so that the nave of the well-

wrought wheel may not even seem to touch the extremity; and avoid catching

the stone.


SOCRATES: Enough. Now, Ion, will the charioteer or the physician be the

better judge of the propriety of these lines?


ION: The charioteer, clearly.


SOCRATES: And will the reason be that this is his art, or will there be any

other reason?


ION: No, that will be the reason.


SOCRATES: And every art is appointed by God to have knowledge of a

certain work; for that which we know by the art of the pilot we do not knowby the art of medicine?


ION: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: Nor do we know by the art of the carpenter that which we

know by the art of medicine?


ION: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: And this is true of all the arts;- that which we know with one

art we do not know with the other? But let me ask a prior question: You

admit that there are differences of arts?


ION: Yes.


SOCRATES: You would argue, as I should, that when one art is of one kind

of knowledge and another of another, they are different?


ION: Yes.


SOCRATES: Yes, surely; for if the subject of knowledge were the same,

there would be no meaning in saying that the arts were different,- if they both

gave the same knowledge. For example, I know that here are five fingers, and

you  know  the  same.  And  if  I  were  to  ask  whether  I  and  you  became

acquainted with this fact by the help of the same art of arithmetic, you would

acknowledge that we did?


ION: Yes.


SOCRATES: Tell me, then, what I was intending to ask you- whether this

holds universally? Must the same art have the same subject of knowledge,

and different arts other subjects of knowledge?


ION: That is my opinion, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Then he who has no knowledge of a particular art will have no

right judgment of the sayings and doings of that art?ION: Very true.


SOCRATES: Then which will be a better judge of the lines which you were

reciting from Homer, you or the charioteer?


ION: The charioteer.


SOCRATES: Why, yes, because you are a rhapsode and not a charioteer.


ION: Yes.


SOCRATES:  And  the  art  of  the  rhapsode  is  different  from  that  of  the

charioteer?


ION: Yes.


SOCRATES: And if a different knowledge, then a knowledge of different

matters?


ION: True.


SOCRATES: You know the passage in which Hecamede, the concubine of

Nestor, is described as giving to the wounded Machaon a posset, as he says,


Made with Pramnian wine; and she grated cheese of goat's milk with a grater

of bronze, and at his side placed an onion which gives a relish to drink. Now

would you say that the art of the rhapsode or the art of medicine was better

able to judge of the propriety of these lines?


ION: The art of medicine.


SOCRATES: And when Homer says,


And she descended into the deep like a leaden plummet, which, set in the

horn of ox that ranges in the fields, rushes along carrying death among the

ravenous fishes,- will the art of the fisherman or of the rhapsode be better

able to judge whether these lines are rightly expressed or not?ION: Clearly, Socrates, the art of the fisherman.


SOCRATES: Come now, suppose that you were to say to me: "Since you,

Socrates,  are  able  to  assign  different  passages  in  Homer  to  their

corresponding arts, I wish that you would tell me what are the passages of

which the excellence ought to be judged by the prophet and prophetic art";

and you will see how readily and truly I shall answer you. For there are many

such passages, particularly in the Odyssey; as, for example, the passage in

which  Theoclymenus  the  prophet  of  the  house  of  Melampus  says  to  the

suitors:-


Wretched men! what is happening to you? Your heads and your faces and

your limbs underneath are shrouded in night; and the voice of lamentation

bursts forth, and your cheeks are wet with tears. And the vestibule is full, and

the court is full, of ghosts descending into the darkness of Erebus, and the sun

has perished out of heaven, and an evil mist is spread abroad.


And there are many such passages in the Iliad also; as for example in the

description of the battle near the rampart, where he says:-


As they were eager to pass the ditch, there came to them an omen: a soaring

eagle, holding back the people on the left, bore a huge bloody dragon in his

talons, still living and panting; nor had he yet resigned the strife, for he bent

back and smote the bird which carried him on the breast by the neck, and he

in pain let him fall from him to the ground into the midst of the multitude.

And the eagle, with a cry, was borne afar on the wings of the wind.


These are the sort of things which I should say that the prophet ought to

consider and determine.


ION: And you are quite right, Socrates, in saying so.


SOCRATES: Yes, Ion, and you are right also. And as I have selected from

the  Iliad  and  Odyssey  for  you  passages  which  describe  the  office  of  the

prophet and the physician and the fisherman, do you, who know Homer so

much  better  than  I  do,  Ion,  select  for  me  passages  which  relate  to  the

rhapsode and the rhapsode's art, and which the rhapsode ought to examineand judge of better than other men.


ION: All passages, I should say, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Not all, Ion, surely. Have you already forgotten what you were

saying? A rhapsode ought to have a better memory.


ION: Why, what am I forgetting?


SOCRATES: Do you not remember that you declared the art of the rhapsode

to be different from the art of the charioteer?


ION: Yes, I remember.


SOCRATES:  And  you  admitted  that  being  different  they  would  have

different subjects of knowledge?


ION: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then upon your own showing the rhapsode, and the art of the

rhapsode, will not know everything?


ION: I should exclude certain things, Socrates.


SOCRATES:  You  mean  to  say  that  you  would  exclude  pretty  much  the

subjects of the other arts. As he does not know all of them, which of them

will he know?


ION: He will know what a man and what a woman ought to say, and what a

freeman and what a slave ought to say, and what a ruler and what a subject.


SOCRATES: Do you mean that a rhapsode will know better than the pilot

what the ruler of a sea-tossed vessel ought to say?


ION: No; the pilot will know best.


SOCRATES: Or will the rhapsode know better than the physician what the

ruler of a sick man ought to say?ION: He will not.


SOCRATES: But he will know what a slave ought to say?


ION: Yes.


SOCRATES: Suppose the slave to be a cowherd; the rhapsode will know

better than the cowherd what he ought to say in order to soothe the infuriated

cows?


ION: No, he will not.


SOCRATES: But he will know what a spinning-woman ought to say about

the working of wool?


ION: No.


SOCRATES: At any rate he will know what a general ought to say when

exhorting his soldiers?


ION: Yes, that is the sort of thing which the rhapsode will be sure to know.


SOCRATES: Well, but is the art of the rhapsode the art of the general?


ION: I am sure that I should know what a general ought to say.


SOCRATES: Why, yes, Ion, because you may possibly have a knowledge of

the art of the general as well as of the rhapsode; and you may also have a

knowledge of horsemanship as well as of the lyre: and then you would know

when horses were well or ill managed. But suppose I were to ask you: By the

help of which art, Ion, do you know whether horses are well managed, by

your skill as a horseman or as a performer on the lyre- what would you

answer?


ION: I should reply, by my skill as a horseman.


SOCRATES: And if you judged of performers on the lyre, you would admit

that you judged of them as a performer on the lyre, and not as a horseman?ION: Yes.


SOCRATES: And in judging of the general's art, do you judge of it as a

general or a rhapsode?


ION: To me there appears to be no difference between them.


SOCRATES: What do you mean? Do you mean to say that the art of the

rhapsode and of the general is the same?


ION: Yes, one and the same.


SOCRATES: Then he who is a good rhapsode is also a good general?


ION: Certainly, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And he who is a good general is also a good rhapsode?


ION: No; I do not say that.


SOCRATES: But you do say that he who is a good rhapsode is also a good

general.


ION: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And you are the best of Hellenic rhapsodes?


ION: Far the best, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And are you the best general, Ion?


ION: To be sure, Socrates; and Homer was my master.


SOCRATES: But then, Ion, what in the name of goodness can be the reason

why you, who are the best of generals as well as the best of rhapsodes in all

Hellas, go about as a rhapsode when you might be a general? Do you think

that the Hellenes want a rhapsode with his golden crown, and do not want a

general?ION: Why, Socrates, the reason is, that my countrymen, the Ephesians, are

the servants and soldiers of Athens, and do not need a general; and you and

Sparta are not likely to have me, for you think that you have enough generals

of your own.


SOCRATES: My good Ion, did you never hear of Apollodorus of Cyzicus?


ION: Who may he be?


SOCRATES:  One  who,  though  a  foreigner,  has  often  been  chosen  their

general  by  the  Athenians:  and  there  is  Phanosthenes  of  Andros,  and

Heraclides of Clazomenae, whom they have also appointed to the command

of their armies and to other offices, although aliens, after they had shown

their merit. And will they not choose Ion the Ephesian to be their general, and

honour him, if he prove himself worthy? Were not the Ephesians originally

Athenians, and Ephesus is no mean city? But, indeed, Ion, if you are correct

in saying that by art and knowledge you are able to praise Homer, you do not

deal fairly with me, and after all your professions of knowing many, glorious

things about Homer, and promises that you would exhibit them, you are only

a deceiver, and so far from exhibiting the art of which you are a master, will

not, even after my repeated entreaties, explain to me the nature of it. You

have literally as many forms as Proteus; and now you go all manner of ways,

twisting and turning, and, like Proteus, become all manner of people at once,

and at last slip away from me in the disguise of a general, in order that you

may escape exhibiting your Homeric lore. And if you have art, then, as I was

saying, in falsifying your promise that you would exhibit Homer, you are not

dealing fairly with me. But if, as I believe, you have no art, but speak all

these  beautiful  words  about  Homer  unconsciously  under  his  inspiring

influence, then I acquit you of dishonesty, and shall only say that you are

inspired. Which do you prefer to be thought, dishonest or inspired?


ION: There is a great difference, Socrates, between the two alternatives; and

inspiration is by far the nobler.


SOCRATES: Then, Ion, I shall assume the nobler alternative; and attribute to

you in your praises of Homer inspiration, and not art.THE END                          Laches Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    Beginning of LachesIntroduction to Plato's Laches or, Courage


    Lysimachus, the son of Aristides the Just, and Melesias, the son of the

elder Thucydides, two aged men who live together, are desirous of educating

their sons in the best manner. Their own education, as often happens with the

sons  of  great  men,  has  been  neglected;  and  they  are  resolved  that  their

children shall have more care taken of them, than they received themselves at

the hands of their fathers.


  At their request, Nicias and Laches have accompanied them to see a man

named  Stesilaus  fighting  in  heavy  armour.  The  two  fathers  ask  the  two

generals what they think of this exhibition, and whether they would advise

that their sons should acquire the accomplishment. Nicias and Laches are

quite willing to give their opinion; but they suggest that Socrates should be

invited to take part in the consultation. He is a stranger to Lysimachus, but is

afterwards recognised as the son of his old friend Sophroniscus, with whom

he never had a difference to the hour of his death. Socrates is also known to

Nicias,  to  whom  he  had  introduced  the  excellent  Damon,  musician  and

sophist, as a tutor for his son, and to Laches, who had witnessed his heroic

behaviour at the battle of Delium (compare Symp.).


  Socrates, as he is younger than either Nicias or Laches, prefers to wait

until they have delivered their opinions, which they give in a characteristic

manner. Nicias, the tactician, is very much in favour of the new art, which he

describes as the gymnastics of war--useful when the ranks are formed, and

still more useful when they are broken; creating a general interest in military

studies,  and  greatly  adding  to  the  appearance  of  the  soldier  in  the  field.

Laches, the blunt warrior, is of opinion that such an art is not knowledge, and

cannot be of any value, because the Lacedaemonians, those great masters of

arms, neglect it. His own experience in actual service has taught him that

these pretenders are useless and ridiculous. This man Stesilaus has been seen

by  him  on  board  ship  making  a  very  sorry  exhibition  of  himself.  The

possession of the art will make the coward rash, and subject the courageous,

if he chance to make a slip, to invidious remarks. And now let Socrates be

taken into counsel. As they differ he must decide.  Socrates would rather not decide the question by a plurality of votes: in

such a serious matter as the education of a friend's children, he would consult

the  one  skilled  person  who  has  had  masters,  and  has  works  to  show  as

evidences of his skill. This is not himself; for he has never been able to pay

the sophists for instructing him, and has never had the wit to do or discover

anything. But Nicias and Laches are older and richer than he is: they have

had teachers, and perhaps have made discoveries; and he would have trusted

them entirely, if they had not been diametrically opposed.


    Lysimachus here proposes to resign the argument into the hands of the

younger  part  of  the  company,  as  he  is  old,  and  has  a  bad  memory.  He

earnestly requests Socrates to remain;--in this showing, as Nicias says, how

little he knows the man, who will certainly not go away until he has cross-

examined the company about their past lives. Nicias has often submitted to

this process; and Laches is quite willing to learn from Socrates, because his

actions, in the true Dorian mode, correspond to his words.


  Socrates proceeds: We might ask who are our teachers? But a better and

more  thorough  way  of  examining  the  question  will  be  to  ask,  'What  is

Virtue?'--or  rather,  to  restrict  the  enquiry  to  that  part  of  virtue  which  is

concerned with the use of weapons--'What is Courage?' Laches thinks that he

knows this: (1) 'He is courageous who remains at his post.' But some nations

fight flying, after the manner of Aeneas in Homer; or as the heavy-armed

Spartans also did at the battle of Plataea. (2) Socrates wants a more general

definition, not only of military courage, but of courage of all sorts, tried both

amid  pleasures  and  pains.  Laches  replies  that  this  universal  courage  is

endurance. But courage is a good thing, and mere endurance may be hurtful

and injurious. Therefore (3) the element of intelligence must be added. But

then again unintelligent endurance may often be more courageous than the

intelligent, the bad than the good. How is this contradiction to be solved?

Socrates and Laches are not set 'to the Dorian mode' of words and actions; for

their words are all confusion, although their actions are courageous. Still they

must 'endure' in an argument about endurance. Laches is very willing, and is

quite sure that he knows what courage is, if he could only tell.


  Nicias is now appealed to; and in reply he offers a definition which he has

heard from Socrates himself, to the effect that (1) 'Courage is intelligence.'Laches  derides  this;  and  Socrates  enquires,  'What  sort  of  intelligence?'  to

which Nicias replies, 'Intelligence of things terrible.' 'But every man knows

the things to be dreaded in his own art.' 'No they do not. They may predict

results, but cannot tell whether they are really terrible; only the courageous

man can tell that.' Laches draws the inference that the courageous man is

either a soothsayer or a god.


  Again,  (2)  in  Nicias'  way  of  speaking,  the  term  'courageous'  must  be

denied to animals or children, because they do not know the danger. Against

this inversion of the ordinary use of language Laches reclaims, but is in some

degree mollified by a compliment to his own courage. Still, he does not like

to see an Athenian statesman and general descending to sophistries of this

sort.  Socrates  resumes  the  argument.  Courage  has  been  defined  to  be

intelligence or knowledge of the terrible; and courage is not all virtue, but

only  one  of  the  virtues.  The  terrible  is  in  the  future,  and  therefore  the

knowledge of the terrible is a knowledge of the future. But there can be no

knowledge of future good or evil separated from a knowledge of the good

and evil of the past or present; that is to say, of all good and evil. Courage,

therefore, is the knowledge of good and evil generally. But he who has the

knowledge of good and evil generally, must not only have courage, but also

temperance, justice, and every other virtue. Thus, a single virtue would be the

same as all virtues (compare Protagoras). And after all the two generals, and

Socrates, the hero of Delium, are still in ignorance of the nature of courage.

They must go to school again, boys, old men and all.


  Some points of resemblance, and some points of difference, appear in the

Laches  when  compared  with  the  Charmides  and  Lysis.  There  is  less  of

poetical and simple beauty, and more of dramatic interest and power. They

are  richer  in  the  externals  of  the  scene;  the  Laches  has  more  play  and

development of character. In the Lysis and Charmides the youths are the

central  figures,  and  frequent  allusions  are  made  to  the  place  of  meeting,

which is a palaestra. Here the place of meeting, which is also a palaestra, is

quite forgotten, and the boys play a subordinate part. The seance is of old and

elder men, of whom Socrates is the youngest.


  First is the aged Lysimachus, who may be compared with Cephalus in the

Republic, and, like him, withdraws from the argument. Melesias, who is onlyhis shadow, also subsides into silence. Both of them, by their own confession,

have  been  ill-educated,  as  is  further  shown  by  the  circumstance  that

Lysimachus,  the  friend  of  Sophroniscus,  has  never  heard  of  the  fame  of

Socrates, his son; they belong to different circles. In the Meno their want of

education in all but the arts of riding and wrestling is adduced as a proof that

virtue  cannot  be  taught.  The  recognition  of  Socrates  by  Lysimachus  is

extremely graceful; and his military exploits naturally connect him with the

two generals, of whom one has witnessed them. The characters of Nicias and

Laches are indicated by their opinions on the exhibition of the man fighting

in heavy armour. The more enlightened Nicias is quite ready to accept the

new art, which Laches treats with ridicule, seeming to think that this, or any

other  military  question,  may  be  settled  by  asking,  'What  do  the

Lacedaemonians  say?'  The  one  is  the  thoughtful  general,  willing  to  avail

himself of any discovery in the art of war (Aristoph. Aves); the other is the

practical  man,  who  relies  on  his  own  experience,  and  is  the  enemy  of

innovation; he can act but cannot speak, and is apt to lose his temper. It is to

be noted that one of them is supposed to be a hearer of Socrates; the other is

only acquainted with his actions. Laches is the admirer of the Dorian mode;

and into his mouth the remark is put that there are some persons who, having

never been taught, are better than those who have. Like a novice in the art of

disputation, he is delighted with the hits of Socrates; and is disposed to be

angry with the refinements of Nicias.


  In the discussion of the main thesis of the Dialogue--'What is Courage?'

the antagonism of the two characters is still more clearly brought out; and in

this,  as  in  the  preliminary  question,  the  truth  is  parted  between  them.

Gradually, and not without difficulty, Laches is made to pass on from the

more popular to the more philosophical; it has never occurred to him that

there was any other courage than that of the soldier; and only by an effort of

the mind can he frame a general notion at all. No sooner has this general

notion been formed than it evanesces before the dialectic of Socrates; and

Nicias appears from the other side with the Socratic doctrine, that courage is

knowledge. This is explained to mean knowledge of things terrible in the

future. But Socrates denies that the knowledge of the future is separable from

that of the past and present; in other words, true knowledge is not that of the

soothsayer but of the philosopher. And all knowledge will thus be equivalent

to all virtue--a position which elsewhere Socrates is not unwilling to admit,but which will not assist us in distinguishing the nature of courage. In this

part  of  the  Dialogue  the  contrast  between  the  mode  of  cross-examination

which is practised by Laches and by Socrates, and also the manner in which

the definition of Laches is made to approximate to that of Nicias, are worthy

of attention.


  Thus,  with  some  intimation  of  the  connexion  and  unity  of  virtue  and

knowledge, we arrive at no distinct result. The two aspects of courage are

never harmonized. The knowledge which in the Protagoras is explained as

the faculty of estimating pleasures and pains is here lost in an unmeaning and

transcendental  conception.  Yet  several  true  intimations  of  the  nature  of

courage are allowed to appear: (1) That courage is moral as well as physical:

(2) That true courage is inseparable from knowledge, and yet (3) is based on

a natural instinct. Laches exhibits one aspect of courage; Nicias the other.

The perfect image and harmony of both is only realized in Socrates himself.


  The  Dialogue  offers  one  among  many  examples  of  the  freedom  with

which Plato treats facts. For the scene must be supposed to have occurred

between B.C. 424, the year of the battle of Delium, and B.C. 418, the year of

the battle of Mantinea, at which Laches fell. But if Socrates was more than

seventy years of age at his trial in 399 (see Apology), he could not have been

a young man at any time after the battle of Delium.Laches


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettPersons of the Dialogue: LYSIMACHUS, son of Aristides, MELESIAS,

son of Thucydides, THEIR SONS, NICIAS, LACHES, SOCRATES


LYSIMACHUS: You have seen the exhibition of the man fighting in armour,

Nicias and Laches, but we did not tell you at the time the reason why my

friend Melesias and I asked you to go with us and see him. I think that we

may as well confess what this was, for we certainly ought not to have any

reserve with you. The reason was, that we were intending to ask your advice.

Some laugh at the very notion of advising others, and when they are asked

will not say what they think. They guess at the wishes of the person who asks

them, and answer according to his, and not according to their own, opinion.

But as we know that you are good judges, and will say exactly what you

think, we have taken you into our counsels. The matter about which I am

making all this preface is as follows: Melesias and I have two sons; that is his

son, and he is named Thucydides, after his grandfather; and this is mine, who

is also called after his grandfather, Aristides. Now, we are resolved to take

the greatest care of the youths, and not to let them run about as they like,

which is too often the way with the young, when they are no longer children,

but to begin at once and do the utmost that we can for them. And knowing

you to have sons of your own, we thought that you were most likely to have

attended to their training and improvement, and, if perchance you have not

attended to them, we may remind you that you ought to have done so, and

would invite you to assist us in the fulfilment of a common duty. I will tell

you, Nicias and Laches, even at the risk of being tedious, how we came to

think of this. Melesias and I live together, and our sons live with us; and now,

as I was saying at first, we are going to confess to you. Both of us often talk

to the lads about the many noble deeds which our own fathers did in war and

peace--in the management of the allies, and in the administration of the city;

but neither of us has any deeds of his own which he can show. The truth is

that we are ashamed of this contrast being seen by them, and we blame our

fathers for letting us be spoiled in the days of our youth, while they were

occupied with the concerns of others; and we urge all this upon the lads,

pointing  out  to  them  that  they  will  not  grow  up  to  honour  if  they  are

rebellious and take no pains about themselves; but that if they take pains they

may, perhaps, become worthy of the names which they bear. They, on their

part, promise to comply with our wishes; and our care is to discover whatstudies  or  pursuits  are  likely  to  be  most  improving  to  them.  Some  one

commended to us the art of fighting in armour, which he thought an excellent

accomplishment for a young man to learn; and he praised the man whose

exhibition you have seen, and told us to go and see him. And we determined

that we would go, and get you to accompany us; and we were intending at the

same time, if you did not object, to take counsel with you about the education

of our sons. That is the matter which we wanted to talk over with you; and we

hope that you will give us your opinion about this art of fighting in armour,

and about any other studies or pursuits which may or may not be desirable for

a young man to learn. Please to say whether you agree to our proposal.


NICIAS: As far as I am concerned, Lysimachus and Melesias, I applaud your

purpose, and will gladly assist you; and I believe that you, Laches, will be

equally glad.


LACHES:  Certainly,  Nicias;  and  I  quite  approve  of  the  remark  which

Lysimachus made about his own father and the father of Melesias, and which

is applicable, not only to them, but to us, and to every one who is occupied

with public affairs. As he says, such persons are too apt to be negligent and

careless of their own children and their private concerns. There is much truth

in that remark of yours, Lysimachus. But why, instead of consulting us, do

you not consult our friend Socrates about the education of the youths? He is

of the same deme with you, and is always passing his time in places where

the youth have any noble study or pursuit, such as you are enquiring after.


LYSIMACHUS: Why, Laches, has Socrates ever attended to matters of this

sort?


LACHES: Certainly, Lysimachus.


NICIAS: That I have the means of knowing as well as Laches; for quite lately

he supplied me with a teacher of music for my sons,--Damon, the disciple of

Agathocles, who is a most accomplished man in every way, as well as a

musician, and a companion of inestimable value for young men at their age.


LYSIMACHUS:  Those  who  have  reached  my  time  of  life,  Socrates  and

Nicias and Laches, fall out of acquaintance with the young, because they aregenerally  detained  at  home  by  old  age;  but  you,  O  son  of  Sophroniscus,

should let your fellow demesman have the benefit of any advice which you

are able to give. Moreover I have a claim upon you as an old friend of your

father; for I and he were always companions and friends, and to the hour of

his death there never was a difference between us; and now it comes back to

me, at the mention of your name, that I have heard these lads talking to one

another  at  home,  and  often  speaking  of  Socrates  in  terms  of  the  highest

praise; but I have never thought to ask them whether the son of Sophroniscus

was the person whom they meant. Tell me, my boys, whether this is the

Socrates of whom you have often spoken?


SON: Certainly, father, this is he.


LYSIMACHUS: I am delighted to hear, Socrates, that you maintain the name

of your father, who was a most excellent man; and I further rejoice at the

prospect of our family ties being renewed.


LACHES:  Indeed,  Lysimachus,  you  ought  not  to  give  him  up;  for  I  can

assure you that I have seen him maintaining, not only his father's, but also his

country's name. He was my companion in the retreat from Delium, and I can

tell you that if others had only been like him, the honour of our country

would have been upheld, and the great defeat would never have occurred.


LYSIMACHUS: That is very high praise which is accorded to you, Socrates,

by faithful witnesses and for actions like those which they praise. Let me tell

you the pleasure which I feel in hearing of your fame; and I hope that you

will regard me as one of your warmest friends. You ought to have visited us

long  ago,  and  made  yourself  at  home  with  us;  but  now,  from  this  day

forward, as we have at last found one another out, do as I say--come and

make acquaintance with me, and with these young men, that I may continue

your friend, as I was your father's. I shall expect you to do so, and shall

venture at some future time to remind you of your duty. But what say you of

the  matter  of  which  we  were  beginning  to  speak--the  art  of  fighting  in

armour?  Is  that  a  practice  in  which  the  lads  may  be  advantageously

instructed?


SOCRATES: I will endeavour to advise you, Lysimachus, as far as I can inthis matter, and also in every way will comply with your wishes; but as I am

younger and not so experienced, I think that I ought certainly to hear first

what my elders have to say, and to learn of them, and if I have anything to

add,  then  I  may  venture  to  give  my  opinion  to  them  as  well  as  to  you.

Suppose, Nicias, that one or other of you begin.


NICIAS:  I  have  no  objection,  Socrates;  and  my  opinion  is  that  the

acquirement  of  this  art  is  in  many  ways  useful  to  young  men.  It  is  an

advantage to them that among the favourite amusements of their leisure hours

they should have one which tends to improve and not to injure their bodily

health. No gymnastics could be better or harder exercise; and this, and the art

of riding, are of all arts most befitting to a freeman; for they only who are

thus trained in the use of arms are the athletes of our military profession,

trained in that on which the conflict turns. Moreover in actual battle, when

you have to fight in a line with a number of others, such an acquirement will

be of some use, and will be of the greatest whenever the ranks are broken and

you have to fight singly, either in pursuit, when you are attacking some one

who is defending himself, or in flight, when you have to defend yourself

against an assailant. Certainly he who possessed the art could not meet with

any harm at the hands of a single person, or perhaps of several; and in any

case he would have a great advantage. Further, this sort of skill inclines a

man to the love of other noble lessons; for every man who has learned how to

fight in armour will desire to learn the proper arrangement of an army, which

is the sequel of the lesson: and when he has learned this, and his ambition is

once fired, he will go on to learn the complete art of the general. There is no

difficulty in seeing that the knowledge and practice of other military arts will

be honourable and valuable to a man; and this lesson may be the beginning of

them. Let me add a further advantage, which is by no means a slight one,--

that  this  science  will  make  any  man  a  great  deal  more  valiant  and  self-

possessed in the field. And I will not disdain to mention, what by some may

be thought to be a small matter;--he will make a better appearance at the right

time; that is to say, at the time when his appearance will strike terror into his

enemies. My opinion then, Lysimachus, is, as I say, that the youths should be

instructed in this art, and for the reasons which I have given. But Laches may

take a different view; and I shall be very glad to hear what he has to say.


LACHES: I should not like to maintain, Nicias, that any kind of knowledge isnot to be learned; for all knowledge appears to be a good: and if, as Nicias

and as the teachers of the art affirm, this use of arms is really a species of

knowledge, then it ought to be learned; but if not, and if those who profess to

teach it are deceivers only; or if it be knowledge, but not of a valuable sort,

then what is the use of learning it? I say this, because I think that if it had

been  really  valuable,  the  Lacedaemonians,  whose  whole  life  is  passed  in

finding out and practising the arts which give them an advantage over other

nations in war, would have discovered this one. And even if they had not, still

these professors of the art would certainly not have failed to discover that of

all  the  Hellenes  the  Lacedaemonians  have  the  greatest  interest  in  such

matters, and that a master of the art who was honoured among them would be

sure to make his fortune among other nations, just as a tragic poet would who

is honoured among ourselves; which is the reason why he who fancies that he

can write a tragedy does not go about itinerating in the neighbouring states,

but rushes hither straight, and exhibits at Athens; and this is natural. Whereas

I  perceive  that  these  fighters  in  armour  regard  Lacedaemon  as  a  sacred

inviolable territory, which they do not touch with the point of their foot; but

they make a circuit of the neighbouring states, and would rather exhibit to

any  others  than  to  the  Spartans;  and  particularly  to  those  who  would

themselves acknowledge that they are by no means firstrate in the arts of war.

Further, Lysimachus, I have encountered a good many of these gentlemen in

actual service, and have taken their measure, which I can give you at once;

for none of these masters of fence have ever been distinguished in war,--there

has been a sort of fatality about them; while in all other arts the men of note

have been always those who have practised the art, they appear to be a most

unfortunate  exception.  For  example,  this  very  Stesilaus,  whom  you  and  I

have  just  witnessed  exhibiting  in  all  that  crowd  and  making  such  great

professions of his powers, I have seen at another time making, in sober truth,

an involuntary exhibition of himself, which was a far better spectacle. He was

a marine on board a ship which struck a transport vessel, and was armed with

a weapon, half spear, half scythe; the singularity of this weapon was worthy

of the singularity of the man. To make a long story short, I will only tell you

what happened to this notable invention of the scythe spear. He was fighting,

and the scythe was caught in the rigging of the other ship, and stuck fast; and

he tugged, but was unable to get his weapon free. The two ships were passing

one another. He first ran along his own ship holding on to the spear; but as

the other ship passed by and drew him after as he was holding on, he let thespear slip through his hand until he retained only the end of the handle. The

people in the transport clapped their hands, and laughed at his ridiculous

figure; and when some one threw a stone, which fell on the deck at his feet,

and he quitted his hold of the scythe-spear, the crew of his own trireme also

burst  out  laughing;  they  could  not  refrain  when  they  beheld  the  weapon

waving in the air, suspended from the transport. Now I do not deny that there

may  be  something  in  such  an  art,  as  Nicias  asserts,  but  I  tell  you  my

experience;  and,  as  I  said  at  first,  whether  this  be  an  art  of  which  the

advantage is so slight, or not an art at all, but only an imposition, in either

case such an acquirement is not worth having. For my opinion is, that if the

professor of this art be a coward, he will be likely to become rash, and his

character will be only more notorious; or if he be brave, and fail ever so little,

other men will be on the watch, and he will be greatly traduced; for there is a

jealousy of such pretenders; and unless a man be pre-eminent in valour, he

cannot help being ridiculous, if he says that he has this sort of skill. Such is

my judgment, Lysimachus, of the desirableness of this art; but, as I said at

first, ask Socrates, and do not let him go until he has given you his opinion of

the matter.


LYSIMACHUS: I am going to ask this favour of you, Socrates; as is the

more necessary because the two councillors disagree, and some one is in a

manner  still  needed  who  will  decide  between  them.  Had  they  agreed,  no

arbiter  would  have  been  required.  But  as  Laches  has  voted  one  way  and

Nicias another, I should like to hear with which of our two friends you agree.


SOCRATES: What, Lysimachus, are you going to accept the opinion of the

majority?


LYSIMACHUS: Why, yes, Socrates; what else am I to do?


SOCRATES: And would you do so too, Melesias? If you were deliberating

about the gymnastic training of your son, would you follow the advice of the

majority of us, or the opinion of the one who had been trained and exercised

under a skilful master?


MELESIAS: The latter, Socrates; as would surely be reasonable.SOCRATES: His one vote would be worth more than the vote of all us four?


MELESIAS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And for this reason, as I imagine,--because a good decision is

based on knowledge and not on numbers?


MELESIAS: To be sure.


SOCRATES: Must we not then first of all ask, whether there is any one of us

who has knowledge of that about which we are deliberating? If there is, let us

take his advice, though he be one only, and not mind the rest; if there is not,

let  us  seek  further  counsel.  Is  this  a  slight  matter  about  which  you  and

Lysimachus  are  deliberating?  Are  you  not  risking  the  greatest  of  your

possessions? For children are your riches; and upon their turning out well or

ill depends the whole order of their father's house.


MELESIAS: That is true.


SOCRATES: Great care, then, is required in this matter?


MELESIAS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Suppose, as I was just now saying, that we were considering, or

wanting to consider, who was the best trainer. Should we not select him who

knew and had practised the art, and had the best teachers?


MELESIAS: I think that we should.


SOCRATES: But would there not arise a prior question about the nature of

the art of which we want to find the masters?


MELESIAS: I do not understand.


SOCRATES: Let me try to make my meaning plainer then. I do not think that

we have as yet decided what that is about which we are consulting, when we

ask which of us is or is not skilled in the art, and has or has not had a teacher

of the art.NICIAS: Why, Socrates, is not the question whether young men ought or

ought not to learn the art of fighting in armour?


SOCRATES: Yes, Nicias; but there is also a prior question, which I may

illustrate in this way: When a person considers about applying a medicine to

the eyes, would you say that he is consulting about the medicine or about the

eyes?


NICIAS: About the eyes.


SOCRATES: And when he considers whether he shall set a bridle on a horse

and at what time, he is thinking of the horse and not of the bridle?


NICIAS: True.


SOCRATES: And in a word, when he considers anything for the sake of

another thing, he thinks of the end and not of the means?


NICIAS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And when you call in an adviser, you should see whether he

too is skilful in the accomplishment of the end which you have in view?


NICIAS: Most true.


SOCRATES: And at present we have in view some knowledge, of which the

end is the soul of youth?


NICIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And we are enquiring, Which of us is skilful or successful in

the treatment of the soul, and which of us has had good teachers?


LACHES: Well but, Socrates; did you never observe that some persons, who

have had no teachers, are more skilful than those who have, in some things?


SOCRATES: Yes, Laches, I have observed that; but you would not be very

willing to trust them if they only professed to be masters of their art, unlessthey could show some proof of their skill or excellence in one or more works.


LACHES: That is true.


SOCRATES:  And  therefore,  Laches  and  Nicias,  as  Lysimachus  and

Melesias, in their anxiety to improve the minds of their sons, have asked our

advice about them, we too should tell them who our teachers were, if we say

that we have had any, and prove them to be in the first place men of merit

and experienced trainers of the minds of youth and also to have been really

our teachers. Or if any of us says that he has no teacher, but that he has works

of his own to show; then he should point out to them what Athenians or

strangers, bond or free, he is generally acknowledged to have improved. But

if he can show neither teachers nor works, then he should tell them to look

out for others; and not run the risk of spoiling the children of friends, and

thereby  incurring  the  most  formidable  accusation  which  can  be  brought

against any one by those nearest to him. As for myself, Lysimachus and

Melesias, I am the first to confess that I have never had a teacher of the art of

virtue; although I have always from my earliest youth desired to have one.

But I am too poor to give money to the Sophists, who are the only professors

of moral improvement; and to this day I have never been able to discover the

art myself, though I should not be surprised if Nicias or Laches may have

discovered  or  learned  it;  for  they  are  far  wealthier  than  I  am,  and  may

therefore have learnt of others. And they are older too; so that they have had

more time to make the discovery. And I really believe that they are able to

educate a man; for unless they had been confident in their own knowledge,

they  would  never  have  spoken  thus  decidedly  of  the  pursuits  which  are

advantageous or hurtful to a young man. I repose confidence in both of them;

but I am surprised to find that they differ from one another. And therefore,

Lysimachus, as Laches suggested that you should detain me, and not let me

go until I answered, I in turn earnestly beseech and advise you to detain

Laches  and  Nicias,  and  question  them.  I  would  have  you  say  to  them:

Socrates avers that he has no knowledge of the matter--he is unable to decide

which of you speaks truly; neither discoverer nor student is he of anything of

the kind. But you, Laches and Nicias, should each of you tell us who is the

most skilful educator whom you have ever known; and whether you invented

the art yourselves, or learned of another; and if you learned, who were your

respective teachers, and who were their brothers in the art; and then, if youare too much occupied in politics to teach us yourselves, let us go to them,

and present them with gifts, or make interest with them, or both, in the hope

that they may be induced to take charge of our children and of yours; and

then they will not grow up inferior, and disgrace their ancestors. But if you

are yourselves original discoverers in that field, give us some proof of your

skill. Who are they who, having been inferior persons, have become under

your care good and noble? For if this is your first attempt at education, there

is a danger that you may be trying the experiment, not on the 'vile corpus' of a

Carian slave, but on your own sons, or the sons of your friend, and, as the

proverb says, 'break the large vessel in learning to make pots.' Tell us then,

what  qualities  you  claim  or  do  not  claim.  Make  them  tell  you  that,

Lysimachus, and do not let them off.


LYSIMACHUS: I very much approve of the words of Socrates, my friends;

but you, Nicias and Laches, must determine whether you will be questioned,

and give an explanation about matters of this sort. Assuredly, I and Melesias

would be greatly pleased to hear you answer the questions which Socrates

asks, if you will: for I began by saying that we took you into our counsels

because we thought that you would have attended to the subject, especially as

you have children who, like our own, are nearly of an age to be educated.

Well, then, if you have no objection, suppose that you take Socrates into

partnership; and do you and he ask and answer one another's questions: for,

as  he  has  well  said,  we  are  deliberating  about  the  most  important  of  our

concerns. I hope that you will see fit to comply with our request.


NICIAS: I see very clearly, Lysimachus, that you have only known Socrates'

father, and have no acquaintance with Socrates himself: at least, you can only

have known him when he was a child, and may have met him among his

fellow-wardsmen, in company with his father, at a sacrifice, or at some other

gathering. You clearly show that you have never known him since he arrived

at manhood.


LYSIMACHUS: Why do you say that, Nicias?


NICIAS:  Because  you  seem  not  to  be  aware  that  any  one  who  has  an

intellectual affinity to Socrates and enters into conversation with him is liable

to be drawn into an argument; and whatever subject he may start, he will becontinually carried round and round by him, until at last he finds that he has

to give an account both of his present and past life; and when he is once

entangled,  Socrates  will  not  let  him  go  until  he  has  completely  and

thoroughly sifted him. Now I am used to his ways; and I know that he will

certainly do as I say, and also that I myself shall be the sufferer; for I am fond

of his conversation, Lysimachus. And I think that there is no harm in being

reminded of any wrong thing which we are, or have been, doing: he who does

not fly from reproof will be sure to take more heed of his after-life; as Solon

says, he will wish and desire to be learning so long as he lives, and will not

think that old age of itself brings wisdom. To me, to be cross-examined by

Socrates  is  neither  unusual  nor  unpleasant;  indeed,  I  knew  all  along  that

where  Socrates  was,  the  argument  would  soon  pass  from  our  sons  to

ourselves;  and  therefore,  I  say  that  for  my  part,  I  am  quite  willing  to

discourse with Socrates in his own manner; but you had better ask our friend

Laches what his feeling may be.


LACHES: I have but one feeling, Nicias, or (shall I say?) two feelings, about

discussions. Some would think that I am a lover, and to others I may seem to

be a hater of discourse; for when I hear a man discoursing of virtue, or of any

sort of wisdom, who is a true man and worthy of his theme, I am delighted

beyond  measure:  and  I  compare  the  man  and  his  words,  and  note  the

harmony and correspondence of them. And such an one I deem to be the true

musician, attuned to a fairer harmony than that of the lyre, or any pleasant

instrument of music; for truly he has in his own life a harmony of words and

deeds arranged, not in the Ionian, or in the Phrygian mode, nor yet in the

Lydian, but in the true Hellenic mode, which is the Dorian, and no other.

Such an one makes me merry with the sound of his voice; and when I hear

him I am thought to be a lover of discourse; so eager am I in drinking in his

words. But a man whose actions do not agree with his words is an annoyance

to me; and the better he speaks the more I hate him, and then I seem to be a

hater of discourse. As to Socrates, I have no knowledge of his words, but of

old, as would seem, I have had experience of his deeds; and his deeds show

that free and noble sentiments are natural to him. And if his words accord,

then I am of one mind with him, and shall be delighted to be interrogated by a

man such as he is, and shall not be annoyed at having to learn of him: for I

too agree with Solon, 'that I would fain grow old, learning many things.' But I

must be allowed to add 'of the good only.' Socrates must be willing to allowthat he is a good teacher, or I shall be a dull and uncongenial pupil: but that

the teacher is younger, or not as yet in repute--anything of that sort is of no

account with me. And therefore, Socrates, I give you notice that you may

teach and confute me as much as ever you like, and also learn of me anything

which I know. So high is the opinion which I have entertained of you ever

since the day on which you were my companion in danger, and gave a proof

of  your  valour  such  as  only  the  man  of  merit  can  give.  Therefore,  say

whatever you like, and do not mind about the difference of our ages.


SOCRATES: I cannot say that either of you show any reluctance to take

counsel and advise with me.


LYSIMACHUS: But this is our proper business; and yours as well as ours,

for I reckon you as one of us. Please then to take my place, and find out from

Nicias and Laches what we want to know, for the sake of the youths, and talk

and consult with them: for I am old, and my memory is bad; and I do not

remember the questions which I am going to ask, or the answers to them; and

if there is any interruption I am quite lost. I will therefore beg of you to carry

on the proposed discussion by your selves; and I will listen, and Melesias and

I will act upon your conclusions.


SOCRATES:  Let  us,  Nicias  and  Laches,  comply  with  the  request  of

Lysimachus and Melesias. There will be no harm in asking ourselves the

question which was first proposed to us: 'Who have been our own instructors

in this sort of training, and whom have we made better?' But the other mode

of carrying on the enquiry will bring us equally to the same point, and will be

more like proceeding from first principles. For if we knew that the addition of

something  would  improve  some  other  thing,  and  were  able  to  make  the

addition, then, clearly, we must know how that about which we are advising

may be best and most easily attained. Perhaps you do not understand what I

mean. Then let me make my meaning plainer in this way. Suppose we knew

that the addition of sight makes better the eyes which possess this gift, and

also were able to impart sight to the eyes, then, clearly, we should know the

nature of sight, and should be able to advise how this gift of sight may be best

and  most  easily  attained;  but  if  we  knew  neither  what  sight  is,  nor  what

hearing is, we should not be very good medical advisers about the eyes or the

ears, or about the best mode of giving sight and hearing to them.LACHES: That is true, Socrates.


SOCRATES:  And  are  not  our  two  friends,  Laches,  at  this  very  moment

inviting us to consider in what way the gift of virtue may be imparted to their

sons for the improvement of their minds?


LACHES: Very true.


SOCRATES: Then must we not first know the nature of virtue? For how can

we advise any one about the best mode of attaining something of which we

are wholly ignorant?


LACHES: I do not think that we can, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Then, Laches, we may presume that we know the nature of

virtue?


LACHES: Yes.


SOCRATES: And that which we know we must surely be able to tell?


LACHES: Certainly.


SOCRATES: I would not have us begin, my friend, with enquiring about the

whole of virtue; for that may be more than we can accomplish; let us first

consider whether we have a sufficient knowledge of a part; the enquiry will

thus probably be made easier to us.


LACHES: Let us do as you say, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Then which of the parts of virtue shall we select? Must we not

select that to which the art of fighting in armour is supposed to conduce? And

is not that generally thought to be courage?


LACHES: Yes, certainly.


SOCRATES: Then, Laches, suppose that we first set about determining the

nature of courage, and in the second place proceed to enquire how the youngmen may attain this quality by the help of studies and pursuits. Tell me, if

you can, what is courage.


LACHES: Indeed, Socrates, I see no difficulty in answering; he is a man of

courage who does not run away, but remains at his post and fights against the

enemy; there can be no mistake about that.


SOCRATES: Very good, Laches; and yet I fear that I did not express myself

clearly; and therefore you have answered not the question which I intended to

ask, but another.


LACHES: What do you mean, Socrates?


SOCRATES: I will endeavour to explain; you would call a man courageous

who remains at his post, and fights with the enemy?


LACHES: Certainly I should.


SOCRATES: And so should I; but what would you say of another man, who

fights flying, instead of remaining?


LACHES: How flying?


SOCRATES:  Why,  as  the  Scythians  are  said  to  fight,  flying  as  well  as

pursuing; and as Homer says in praise of the horses of Aeneas, that they

knew 'how to pursue, and fly quickly hither and thither'; and he passes an

encomium on Aeneas himself, as having a knowledge of fear or flight, and

calls him 'an author of fear or flight.'


LACHES: Yes, Socrates, and there Homer is right: for he was speaking of

chariots, as you were speaking of the Scythian cavalry, who have that way of

fighting; but the heavy-armed Greek fights, as I say, remaining in his rank.


SOCRATES:  And  yet,  Laches,  you  must  except  the  Lacedaemonians  at

Plataea, who, when they came upon the light shields of the Persians, are said

not to have been willing to stand and fight, and to have fled; but when the

ranks of the Persians were broken, they turned upon them like cavalry, and

won the battle of Plataea.LACHES: That is true.


SOCRATES:  That  was  my  meaning  when  I  said  that  I  was  to  blame  in

having put my question badly, and that this was the reason of your answering

badly. For I meant to ask you not only about the courage of heavy-armed

soldiers, but about the courage of cavalry and every other style of soldier; and

not only who are courageous in war, but who are courageous in perils by sea,

and who in disease, or in poverty, or again in politics, are courageous; and

not only who are courageous against pain or fear, but mighty to contend

against desires and pleasures, either fixed in their rank or turning upon their

enemy. There is this sort of courage--is there not, Laches?


LACHES: Certainly, Socrates.


SOCRATES:  And  all  these  are  courageous,  but  some  have  courage  in

pleasures, and some in pains: some in desires, and some in fears, and some

are cowards under the same conditions, as I should imagine.


LACHES: Very true.


SOCRATES: Now I was asking about courage and cowardice in general.

And I will begin with courage, and once more ask, What is that common

quality, which is the same in all these cases, and which is called courage? Do

you now understand what I mean?


LACHES: Not over well.


SOCRATES: I mean this: As I might ask what is that quality which is called

quickness, and which is found in running, in playing the lyre, in speaking, in

learning, and in many other similar actions, or rather which we possess in

nearly every action that is worth mentioning of arms, legs, mouth, voice,

mind;--would you not apply the term quickness to all of them?


LACHES: Quite true.


SOCRATES: And suppose I were to be asked by some one: What is that

common  quality,  Socrates,  which,  in  all  these  uses  of  the  word,  you  callquickness? I should say the quality which accomplishes much in a little time-

-whether in running, speaking, or in any other sort of action.


LACHES: You would be quite correct.


SOCRATES: And now, Laches, do you try and tell me in like manner, What

is that common quality which is called courage, and which includes all the

various uses of the term when applied both to pleasure and pain, and in all the

cases to which I was just now referring?


LACHES: I should say that courage is a sort of endurance of the soul, if I am

to speak of the universal nature which pervades them all.


SOCRATES: But that is what we must do if we are to answer the question.

And yet I cannot say that every kind of endurance is, in my opinion, to be

deemed courage. Hear my reason: I am sure, Laches, that you would consider

courage to be a very noble quality.


LACHES: Most noble, certainly.


SOCRATES: And you would say that a wise endurance is also good and

noble?


LACHES: Very noble.


SOCRATES: But what would you say of a foolish endurance? Is not that, on

the other hand, to be regarded as evil and hurtful?


LACHES: True.


SOCRATES: And is anything noble which is evil and hurtful?


LACHES: I ought not to say that, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Then you would not admit that sort of endurance to be courage-

- for it is not noble, but courage is noble?


LACHES: You are right.SOCRATES: Then, according to you, only the wise endurance is courage?


LACHES: True.


SOCRATES: But as to the epithet 'wise,'--wise in what? In all things small as

well  as  great?  For  example,  if  a  man  shows  the  quality  of  endurance  in

spending his money wisely, knowing that by spending he will acquire more

in the end, do you call him courageous?


LACHES: Assuredly not.


SOCRATES: Or, for example, if a man is a physician, and his son, or some

patient  of  his,  has  inflammation  of  the  lungs,  and  begs  that  he  may  be

allowed to eat or drink something, and the other is firm and refuses; is that

courage?


LACHES: No; that is not courage at all, any more than the last.


SOCRATES: Again, take the case of one who endures in war, and is willing

to fight, and wisely calculates and knows that others will help him, and that

there will be fewer and inferior men against him than there are with him; and

suppose that he has also advantages of position; would you say of such a one

who endures with all this wisdom and preparation, that he, or some man in

the opposing army who is in the opposite circumstances to these and yet

endures and remains at his post, is the braver?


LACHES: I should say that the latter, Socrates, was the braver.


SOCRATES: But, surely, this is a foolish endurance in comparison with the

other?


LACHES: That is true.


SOCRATES: Then you would say that he who in an engagement of cavalry

endures, having the knowledge of horsemanship, is not so courageous as he

who endures, having no such knowledge?


LACHES: So I should say.SOCRATES: And he who endures, having a knowledge of the use of the

sling, or the bow, or of any other art, is not so courageous as he who endures,

not having such a knowledge?


LACHES: True.


SOCRATES: And he who descends into a well, and dives, and holds out in

this or any similar action, having no knowledge of diving, or the like, is, as

you would say, more courageous than those who have this knowledge?


LACHES: Why, Socrates, what else can a man say?


SOCRATES: Nothing, if that be what he thinks.


LACHES: But that is what I do think.


SOCRATES: And yet men who thus run risks and endure are foolish, Laches,

in comparison of those who do the same things, having the skill to do them.


LACHES: That is true.


SOCRATES: But foolish boldness and endurance appeared before to be base

and hurtful to us.


LACHES: Quite true.


SOCRATES: Whereas courage was acknowledged to be a noble quality.


LACHES: True.


SOCRATES:  And  now  on  the  contrary  we  are  saying  that  the  foolish

endurance, which was before held in dishonour, is courage.


LACHES: Very true.


SOCRATES: And are we right in saying so?


LACHES: Indeed, Socrates, I am sure that we are not right.SOCRATES: Then according to your statement, you and I, Laches, are not

attuned to the Dorian mode, which is a harmony of words and deeds; for our

deeds are not in accordance with our words. Any one would say that we had

courage who saw us in action, but not, I imagine, he who heard us talking

about courage just now.


LACHES: That is most true.


SOCRATES: And is this condition of ours satisfactory?


LACHES: Quite the reverse.


SOCRATES: Suppose, however, that we admit the principle of which we are

speaking to a certain extent.


LACHES: To what extent and what principle do you mean?


SOCRATES: The principle of endurance. We too must endure and persevere

in the enquiry, and then courage will not laugh at our faint-heartedness in

searching for courage; which after all may, very likely, be endurance.


LACHES:  I  am  ready  to  go  on,  Socrates;  and  yet  I  am  unused  to

investigations of this sort. But the spirit of controversy has been aroused in

me by what has been said; and I am really grieved at being thus unable to

express my meaning. For I fancy that I do know the nature of courage; but,

somehow or other, she has slipped away from me, and I cannot get hold of

her and tell her nature.


SOCRATES: But, my dear friend, should not the good sportsman follow the

track, and not be lazy?


LACHES: Certainly, he should.


SOCRATES: And shall we invite Nicias to join us? he may be better at the

sport than we are. What do you say?


LACHES: I should like that.SOCRATES: Come then, Nicias, and do what you can to help your friends,

who are tossing on the waves of argument, and at the last gasp: you see our

extremity, and may save us and also settle your own opinion, if you will tell

us what you think about courage.


NICIAS: I have been thinking, Socrates, that you and Laches are not defining

courage in the right way; for you have forgotten an excellent saying which I

have heard from your own lips.


SOCRATES: What is it, Nicias?


NICIAS: I have often heard you say that 'Every man is good in that in which

he is wise, and bad in that in which he is unwise.'


SOCRATES: That is certainly true, Nicias.


NICIAS: And therefore if the brave man is good, he is also wise.


SOCRATES: Do you hear him, Laches?


LACHES: Yes, I hear him, but I do not very well understand him.


SOCRATES: I think that I understand him; and he appears to me to mean

that courage is a sort of wisdom.


LACHES: What can he possibly mean, Socrates?


SOCRATES: That is a question which you must ask of himself.


LACHES: Yes.


SOCRATES: Tell him then, Nicias, what you mean by this wisdom; for you

surely do not mean the wisdom which plays the flute?


NICIAS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: Nor the wisdom which plays the lyre?NICIAS: No.


SOCRATES: But what is this knowledge then, and of what?


LACHES: I think that you put the question to him very well, Socrates; and I

would like him to say what is the nature of this knowledge or wisdom.


NICIAS: I mean to say, Laches, that courage is the knowledge of that which

inspires fear or confidence in war, or in anything.


LACHES: How strangely he is talking, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Why do you say so, Laches?


LACHES: Why, surely courage is one thing, and wisdom another.


SOCRATES: That is just what Nicias denies.


LACHES: Yes, that is what he denies; but he is so silly.


SOCRATES: Suppose that we instruct instead of abusing him?


NICIAS: Laches does not want to instruct me, Socrates; but having been

proved to be talking nonsense himself, he wants to prove that I have been

doing the same.


LACHES:  Very  true,  Nicias;  and  you  are  talking  nonsense,  as  I  shall

endeavour to show. Let me ask you a question: Do not physicians know the

dangers of disease? or do the courageous know them? or are the physicians

the same as the courageous?


NICIAS: Not at all.


LACHES:  No  more  than  the  husbandmen  who  know  the  dangers  of

husbandry, or than other craftsmen, who have a knowledge of that which

inspires them with fear or confidence in their own arts, and yet they are not

courageous a whit the more for that.SOCRATES:  What  is  Laches  saying,  Nicias?  He  appears  to  be  saying

something of importance.


NICIAS: Yes, he is saying something, but it is not true.


SOCRATES: How so?


NICIAS: Why, because he does not see that the physician's knowledge only

extends to the nature of health and disease: he can tell the sick man no more

than this. Do you imagine, Laches, that the physician knows whether health

or disease is the more terrible to a man? Had not many a man better never get

up from a sick bed? I should like to know whether you think that life is

always better than death. May not death often be the better of the two?


LACHES: Yes certainly so in my opinion.


NICIAS: And do you think that the same things are terrible to those who had

better die, and to those who had better live?


LACHES: Certainly not.


NICIAS: And do you suppose that the physician or any other artist knows

this, or any one indeed, except he who is skilled in the grounds of fear and

hope? And him I call the courageous.


SOCRATES: Do you understand his meaning, Laches?


LACHES: Yes; I suppose that, in his way of speaking, the soothsayers are

courageous. For who but one of them can know to whom to die or to live is

better? And yet Nicias, would you allow that you are yourself a soothsayer,

or are you neither a soothsayer nor courageous?


NICIAS: What! do you mean to say that the soothsayer ought to know the

grounds of hope or fear?


LACHES: Indeed I do: who but he?


NICIAS: Much rather I should say he of whom I speak; for the soothsayerought  to  know  only  the  signs  of  things  that  are  about  to  come  to  pass,

whether death or disease, or loss of property, or victory, or defeat in war, or

in any sort of contest; but to whom the suffering or not suffering of these

things will be for the best, can no more be decided by the soothsayer than by

one who is no soothsayer.


LACHES: I cannot understand what Nicias would be at, Socrates; for he

represents the courageous man as neither a soothsayer, nor a physician, nor in

any other character, unless he means to say that he is a god. My opinion is

that he does not like honestly to confess that he is talking nonsense, but that

he shuffles up and down in order to conceal the difficulty into which he has

got himself. You and I, Socrates, might have practised a similar shuffle just

now, if we had only wanted to avoid the appearance of inconsistency. And if

we had been arguing in a court of law there might have been reason in so

doing; but why should a man deck himself out with vain words at a meeting

of friends such as this?


SOCRATES: I quite agree with you, Laches, that he should not. But perhaps

Nicias is serious, and not merely talking for the sake of talking. Let us ask

him just to explain what he means, and if he has reason on his side we will

agree with him; if not, we will instruct him.


LACHES: Do you, Socrates, if you like, ask him: I think that I have asked

enough.


SOCRATES: I do not see why I should not; and my question will do for both

of us.


LACHES: Very good.


SOCRATES: Then tell me, Nicias, or rather tell us, for Laches and I are

partners  in  the  argument:  Do  you  mean  to  affirm  that  courage  is  the

knowledge of the grounds of hope and fear?


NICIAS: I do.


SOCRATES: And not every man has this knowledge; the physician and thesoothsayer have it not; and they will not be courageous unless they acquire it-

-that is what you were saying?


NICIAS: I was.


SOCRATES: Then this is certainly not a thing which every pig would know,

as the proverb says, and therefore he could not be courageous.


NICIAS: I think not.


SOCRATES:  Clearly  not,  Nicias;  not  even  such  a  big  pig  as  the

Crommyonian sow would be called by you courageous. And this I say not as

a joke, but because I think that he who assents to your doctrine, that courage

is the knowledge of the grounds of fear and hope, cannot allow that any wild

beast is courageous, unless he admits that a lion, or a leopard, or perhaps a

boar, or any other animal, has such a degree of wisdom that he knows things

which but a few human beings ever know by reason of their difficulty. He

who takes your view of courage must affirm that a lion, and a stag, and a bull,

and a monkey, have equally little pretensions to courage.


LACHES: Capital, Socrates; by the gods, that is truly good. And I hope,

Nicias, that you will tell us whether these animals, which we all admit to be

courageous,  are  really  wiser  than  mankind;  or  whether  you  will  have  the

boldness, in the face of universal opinion, to deny their courage.


NICIAS: Why, Laches, I do not call animals or any other things which have

no fear of dangers, because they are ignorant of them, courageous, but only

fearless  and  senseless.  Do  you  imagine  that  I  should  call  little  children

courageous,  which  fear  no  dangers  because  they  know  none?  There  is  a

difference, to my way of thinking, between fearlessness and courage. I am of

opinion that thoughtful courage is a quality possessed by very few, but that

rashness and boldness, and fearlessness, which has no forethought, are very

common qualities possessed by many men, many women, many children,

many animals. And you, and men in general, call by the term 'courageous'

actions which I call rash;--my courageous actions are wise actions.


LACHES: Behold, Socrates, how admirably, as he thinks, he dresses himselfout in words, while seeking to deprive of the honour of courage those whom

all the world acknowledges to be courageous.


NICIAS: Not so, Laches, but do not be alarmed; for I am quite willing to say

of you and also of Lamachus, and of many other Athenians, that you are

courageous and therefore wise.


LACHES: I could answer that; but I would not have you cast in my teeth that

I am a haughty Aexonian.


SOCRATES: Do not answer him, Laches; I rather fancy that you are not

aware of the source from which his wisdom is derived. He has got all this

from my friend Damon, and Damon is always with Prodicus, who, of all the

Sophists, is considered to be the best puller to pieces of words of this sort.


LACHES: Yes, Socrates; and the examination of such niceties is a much

more suitable employment for a Sophist than for a great statesman whom the

city chooses to preside over her.


SOCRATES: Yes, my sweet friend, but a great statesman is likely to have a

great  intelligence.  And  I  think  that  the  view  which  is  implied  in  Nicias'

definition of courage is worthy of examination.


LACHES: Then examine for yourself, Socrates.


SOCRATES:  That  is  what  I  am  going  to  do,  my  dear  friend.  Do  not,

however, suppose I shall let you out of the partnership; for I shall expect you

to apply your mind, and join with me in the consideration of the question.


LACHES: I will if you think that I ought.


SOCRATES: Yes, I do; but I must beg of you, Nicias, to begin again. You

remember that we originally considered courage to be a part of virtue.


NICIAS: Very true.


SOCRATES: And you yourself said that it was a part; and there were many

other parts, all of which taken together are called virtue.NICIAS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Do you agree with me about the parts? For I say that justice,

temperance, and the like, are all of them parts of virtue as well as courage.

Would you not say the same?


NICIAS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Well then, so far we are agreed. And now let us proceed a step,

and try to arrive at a similar agreement about the fearful and the hopeful: I do

not want you to be thinking one thing and myself another. Let me then tell

you my own opinion, and if I am wrong you shall set me right: in my opinion

the terrible and the hopeful are the things which do or do not create fear, and

fear is not of the present, nor of the past, but is of future and expected evil.

Do you not agree to that, Laches?


LACHES: Yes, Socrates, entirely.


SOCRATES: That is my view, Nicias; the terrible things, as I should say, are

the evils which are future; and the hopeful are the good or not evil things

which are future. Do you or do you not agree with me?


NICIAS: I agree.


SOCRATES: And the knowledge of these things you call courage?


NICIAS: Precisely.


SOCRATES: And now let me see whether you agree with Laches and myself

as to a third point.


NICIAS: What is that?


SOCRATES: I will tell you. He and I have a notion that there is not one

knowledge or science of the past, another of the present, a third of what is

likely to be best and what will be best in the future; but that of all three there

is one science only: for example, there is one science of medicine which is

concerned with the inspection of health equally in all times, present, past, and