future; and one science of husbandry in like manner, which is concerned with

the productions of the earth in all times. As to the art of the general, you

yourselves will be my witnesses that he has an excellent foreknowledge of

the future, and that he claims to be the master and not the servant of the

soothsayer, because he knows better what is happening or is likely to happen

in war: and accordingly the law places the soothsayer under the general, and

not the general under the soothsayer. Am I not correct in saying so, Laches?


LACHES: Quite correct.


SOCRATES: And do you, Nicias, also acknowledge that the same science

has understanding of the same things, whether future, present, or past?


NICIAS: Yes, indeed Socrates; that is my opinion.


SOCRATES: And courage, my friend, is, as you say, a knowledge of the

fearful and of the hopeful?


NICIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  And  the  fearful,  and  the  hopeful,  are  admitted  to  be  future

goods and future evils?


NICIAS: True.


SOCRATES: And the same science has to do with the same things in the

future or at any time?


NICIAS: That is true.


SOCRATES: Then courage is not the science which is concerned with the

fearful and hopeful, for they are future only; courage, like the other sciences,

is concerned not only with good and evil of the future, but of the present and

past, and of any time?


NICIAS: That, as I suppose, is true.


SOCRATES: Then the answer which you have given, Nicias, includes only athird  part  of  courage;  but  our  question  extended  to  the  whole  nature  of

courage: and according to your view, that is, according to your present view,

courage is not only the knowledge of the hopeful and the fearful, but seems to

include nearly every good and evil without reference to time. What do you

say to that alteration in your statement?


NICIAS: I agree, Socrates.


SOCRATES: But then, my dear friend, if a man knew all good and evil, and

how they are, and have been, and will be produced, would he not be perfect,

and wanting in no virtue, whether justice, or temperance, or holiness? He

would possess them all, and he would know which were dangers and which

were not, and guard against them whether they were supernatural or natural;

and he would provide the good, as he would know how to deal both with

gods or men.


NICIAS: I think, Socrates, that there is a great deal of truth in what you say.


SOCRATES: But then, Nicias, courage, according to this new definition of

yours, instead of being a part of virtue only, will be all virtue?


NICIAS: It would seem so.


SOCRATES: But we were saying that courage is one of the parts of virtue?


NICIAS: Yes, that was what we were saying.


SOCRATES: And that is in contradiction with our present view?


NICIAS: That appears to be the case.


SOCRATES: Then, Nicias, we have not discovered what courage is.


NICIAS: We have not.


LACHES: And yet, friend Nicias, I imagined that you would have made the

discovery, when you were so contemptuous of the answers which I made to

Socrates. I had very great hopes that you would have been enlightened by thewisdom of Damon.


NICIAS: I perceive, Laches, that you think nothing of having displayed your

ignorance of the nature of courage, but you look only to see whether I have

not made a similar display; and if we are both equally ignorant of the things

which a man who is good for anything should know, that, I suppose, will be

of no consequence. You certainly appear to me very like the rest of the world,

looking at your neighbour and not at yourself. I am of opinion that enough

has been said on the subject which we have been discussing; and if anything

has been imperfectly said, that may be hereafter corrected by the help of

Damon, whom you think to laugh down, although you have never seen him,

and with the help of others. And when I am satisfied myself, I will freely

impart my satisfaction to you, for I think that you are very much in want of

knowledge.


LACHES: You are a philosopher, Nicias; of that I am aware: nevertheless I

would  recommend  Lysimachus  and  Melesias  not  to  take  you  and  me  as

advisers about the education of their children; but, as I said at first, they

should ask Socrates and not let him off; if my own sons were old enough, I

would have asked him myself.


NICIAS: To that I quite agree, if Socrates is willing to take them under his

charge. I should not wish for any one else to be the tutor of Niceratus. But I

observe that when I mention the matter to him he recommends to me some

other tutor and refuses himself. Perhaps he may be more ready to listen to

you, Lysimachus.


LYSIMACHUS: He ought, Nicias: for certainly I would do things for him

which I would not do for many others. What do you say, Socrates--will you

comply? And are you ready to give assistance in the improvement of the

youths?


SOCRATES: Indeed, Lysimachus, I should be very wrong in refusing to aid

in the improvement of anybody. And if I had shown in this conversation that

I had a knowledge which Nicias and Laches have not, then I admit that you

would be right in inviting me to perform this duty; but as we are all in the

same perplexity, why should one of us be preferred to another? I certainlythink that no one should; and under these circumstances, let me offer you a

piece of advice (and this need not go further than ourselves). I maintain, my

friends, that every one of us should seek out the best teacher whom he can

find, first for ourselves, who are greatly in need of one, and then for the

youth, regardless of expense or anything. But I cannot advise that we remain

as we are. And if any one laughs at us for going to school at our age, I would

quote to them the authority of Homer, who says, that


'Modesty is not good for a needy man.'


Let us then, regardless of what may be said of us, make the education of the

youths our own education.


LYSIMACHUS: I like your proposal, Socrates; and as I am the oldest, I am

also the most eager to go to school with the boys. Let me beg a favour of you:

Come  to  my  house  to-morrow  at  dawn,  and  we  will  advise  about  these

matters. For the present, let us make an end of the conversation.


SOCRATES: I will come to you to-morrow, Lysimachus, as you propose,

God willing.


THE END                            Laws Table of Contents




    Introduction and Analysis

    Preamble

    BOOK I

    BOOK II

    BOOK III

    BOOK IV

    BOOK V

    BOOK VI

    BOOK VII

    BOOK VIII

    BOOK IX

    BOOK X

    BOOK XI

    BOOK XIIIntroduction and Analysis of Plato's Laws


  The  genuineness  of  the  Laws  is  sufficiently  proved  (1)  by  more  than

twenty citations of them in the writings of Aristotle, who was residing at

Athens during the last twenty years of the life of Plato, and who, having left it

after his death (B.C. 347), returned thither twelve years later (B.C. 335); (2)

by the allusion of Isocrates


  (Oratio ad Philippum missa, p.84: To men tais paneguresin enochlein kai

pros apantas legein tous sunprechontas en autais pros oudena legein estin, all

omoios  oi  toioutoi  ton  logon  (sc.  speeches  in  the  assembly)  akuroi

tugchanousin  ontes  tois  nomois  kai  tais  politeiais  tais  upo  ton  sophiston

gegrammenais.)


  --writing 346 B.C., a year after the death of Plato, and probably not more

than three or four years after the composition of the Laws--who speaks of the

Laws and Republics written by philosophers (upo ton sophiston); (3) by the

reference (Athen.) of the comic poet Alexis, a younger contemporary of Plato

(fl. B.C 356-306), to the enactment about prices, which occurs in Laws xi.,

viz that the same goods should not be offered at two prices on the same day


  (Ou gegone kreitton nomothetes tou plousiou Aristonikou tithesi gar nuni

nomon,  ton  ichthuopolon  ostis  an  polon  tini  ichthun  upotimesas  apodot

elattonos  es  eipe  times,  eis  to  desmoterion  euthus  apagesthai  touton,  ina

dedoikotes  tes  axias  agaposin,  e  tes  esperas  saprous  apantas  apopherosin

oikade.


    Meineke,  Frag.  Com.  Graec.);  (4)  by  the  unanimous  voice  of  later

antiquity  and  the  absence  of  any  suspicion  among  ancient  writers  worth

speaking of to the contrary; for it is not said of Philippus of Opus that he

composed any part of the Laws, but only that he copied them out of the

waxen tablets, and was thought by some to have written the Epinomis (Diog.

Laert.) That the longest and one of the best writings bearing the name of

Plato  should  be  a  forgery,  even  if  its  genuineness  were  unsupported  by

external testimony, would be a singular phenomenon in ancient literature; and

although the critical worth of the consensus of late writers is generally not tobe compared with the express testimony of contemporaries, yet a somewhat

greater  value  may  be  attributed  to  their  consent  in  the  present  instance,

because  the  admission  of  the  Laws  is  combined  with  doubts  about  the

Epinomis, a spurious writing, which is a kind of epilogue to the larger work

probably of a much later date. This shows that the reception of the Laws was

not altogether undiscriminating.


  The suspicion which has attached to the Laws of Plato in the judgment of

some modern writers appears to rest partly (1) on differences in the style and

form of the work, and (2) on differences of thought and opinion which they

observe  in  them.  Their  suspicion  is  increased  by  the  fact  that  these

differences are accompanied by resemblances as striking to passages in other

Platonic writings. They are sensible of a want of point in the dialogue and a

general  inferiority  in  the  ideas,  plan,  manners,  and  style.  They  miss  the

poetical  flow,  the  dramatic  verisimilitude,  the  life  and  variety  of  the

characters, the dialectic subtlety, the Attic purity, the luminous order, the

exquisite  urbanity;  instead  of  which  they  find  tautology,  obscurity,  self-

sufficiency, sermonizing, rhetorical declamation, pedantry, egotism, uncouth

forms of sentences, and peculiarities in the use of words and idioms. They are

unable  to  discover  any  unity  in  the  patched,  irregular  structure.  The

speculative element both in government and education is superseded by a

narrow economical or religious vein. The grace and cheerfulness of Athenian

life have disappeared; and a spirit of moroseness and religious intolerance has

taken their place. The charm of youth is no longer there; the mannerism of

age makes itself unpleasantly felt. The connection is often imperfect; and

there is a want of arrangement, exhibited especially in the enumeration of the

laws towards the end of the work. The Laws are full of flaws and repetitions.

The Greek is in places very ungrammatical and intractable. A cynical levity is

displayed in some passages, and a tone of disappointment and lamentation

over human things in others. The critics seem also to observe in them bad

imitations of thoughts which are better expressed in Plato's other writings.

Lastly, they wonder how the mind which conceived the Republic could have

left the Critias, Hermocrates, and Philosophus incomplete or unwritten, and

have devoted the last years of life to the Laws.


  The  questions  which  have  been  thus  indirectly  suggested  may  be

considered by us under five or six heads: I, the characters; II, the plan; III, thestyle;  IV,  the  imitations  of  other  writings  of  Plato;  V;  the  more  general

relation of the Laws to the Republic and the other dialogues; and VI, to the

existing Athenian and Spartan states.


  I.  Already  in  the  Philebus  the  distinctive  character  of  Socrates  has

disappeared; and in the Timaeus, Sophist, and Statesman his function of chief

speaker is handed over to the Pythagorean philosopher Timaeus, and to the

Eleatic Stranger, at whose feet he sits, and is silent. More and more Plato

seems  to  have  felt  in  his  later  writings  that  the  character  and  method  of

Socrates were no longer suited to be the vehicle of his own philosophy. He is

no longer interrogative but dogmatic; not 'a hesitating enquirer,' but one who

speaks with the authority of a legislator. Even in the Republic we have seen

that  the  argument  which  is  carried  on  by  Socrates  in  the  old  style  with

Thrasymachus in the first book, soon passes into the form of exposition. In

the Laws he is nowhere mentioned. Yet so completely in the tradition of

antiquity is Socrates identified with Plato, that in the criticism of the Laws

which we find in the so-called Politics of Aristotle he is supposed by the

writer still to be playing his part of the chief speaker (compare Pol.).


  The Laws are discussed by three representatives of Athens, Crete, and

Sparta.  The  Athenian,  as  might  be  expected,  is  the  protagonist  or  chief

speaker, while the second place is assigned to the Cretan, who, as one of the

leaders of a new colony, has a special interest in the conversation. At least

four-fifths of the answers are put into his mouth. The Spartan is every inch a

soldier,  a  man  of  few  words  himself,  better  at  deeds  than  words.  The

Athenian talks to the two others, although they are his equals in age, in the

style of a master discoursing to his scholars; he frequently praises himself; he

entertains  a  very  poor  opinion  of  the  understanding  of  his  companions.

Certainly the boastfulness and rudeness of the Laws is the reverse of the

refined irony and courtesy which characterize the earlier dialogues. We are

no  longer  in  such  good  company  as  in  the  Phaedrus  and  Symposium.

Manners are lost sight of in the earnestness of the speakers, and dogmatic

assertions take the place of poetical fancies.


  The scene is laid in Crete, and the conversation is held in the course of a

walk from Cnosus to the cave and temple of Zeus, which takes place on one

of the longest and hottest days of the year. The companions start at dawn, andarrive at the point in their conversation which terminates the fourth book,

about noon. The God to whose temple they are going is the lawgiver of Crete,

and this may be supposed to be the very cave at which he gave his oracles to

Minos. But the externals of the scene, which are briefly and inartistically

described, soon disappear, and we plunge abruptly into the subject of the

dialogue. We are reminded by contrast of the higher art of the Phaedrus, in

which  the  summer's  day,  and  the  cool  stream,  and  the  chirping  of  the

grasshoppers, and the fragrance of the agnus castus, and the legends of the

place are present to the imagination throughout the discourse.


  The typical Athenian apologizes for the tendency of his countrymen 'to

spin a long discussion out of slender materials,' and in a similar spirit the

Lacedaemonian  Megillus  apologizes  for  the  Spartan  brevity  (compare

Thucydid.),  acknowledging  at  the  same  time  that  there  may  be  occasions

when long discourses are necessary. The family of Megillus is the proxenus

of Athens at Sparta; and he pays a beautiful compliment to the Athenian,

significant  of  the  character  of  the  work,  which,  though  borrowing  many

elements  from  Sparta,  is  also  pervaded  by  an  Athenian  spirit.  A  good

Athenian, he says, is more than ordinarily good, because he is inspired by

nature and not manufactured by law. The love of listening which is attributed

to the Timocrat in the Republic is also exhibited in him. The Athenian on his

side has a pleasure in speaking to the Lacedaemonian of the struggle in which

their ancestors were jointly engaged against the Persians. A connexion with

Athens is likewise intimated by the Cretan Cleinias. He is the relative of

Epimenides,  whom,  by  an  anachronism  of  a  century,--perhaps  arising  as

Zeller suggests (Plat. Stud.) out of a confusion of the visit of Epimenides and

Diotima (Symp.),--he describes as coming to Athens, not after the attempt of

Cylon, but ten years before the Persian war. The Cretan and Lacedaemonian

hardly  contribute  at  all  to  the  argument  of  which  the  Athenian  is  the

expounder; they only supply information when asked about the institutions of

their respective countries. A kind of simplicity or stupidity is ascribed to

them.  At  first,  they  are  dissatisfied  with  the  free  criticisms  which  the

Athenian passes upon the laws of Minos and Lycurgus, but they acquiesce in

his greater experience and knowledge of the world. They admit that there can

be no objection to the enquiry; for in the spirit of the legislator himself, they

are discussing his laws when there are no young men present to listen. They

are unwilling to allow that the Spartan and Cretan lawgivers can have beenmistaken in honouring courage as the first part of virtue, and are puzzled at

hearing for the first time that 'Goods are only evil to the evil.' Several times

they are on the point of quarrelling, and by an effort learn to restrain their

natural feeling (compare Shakespeare, Henry V, act iii. sc. 2). In Book vii.,

the Lacedaemonian expresses a momentary irritation at the accusation which

the  Athenian  brings  against  the  Spartan  institutions,  of  encouraging

licentiousness  in  their  women,  but  he  is  reminded  by  the  Cretan  that  the

permission to criticize them freely has been given, and cannot be retracted.

His  only  criterion  of  truth  is  the  authority  of  the  Spartan  lawgiver;  he  is

'interested,' in the novel speculations of the Athenian, but inclines to prefer

the ordinances of Lycurgus.


  The three interlocutors all of them speak in the character of old men,

which forms a pleasant bond of union between them. They have the feelings

of  old  age  about  youth,  about  the  state,  about  human  things  in  general.

Nothing in life seems to be of much importance to them; they are spectators

rather than actors, and men in general appear to the Athenian speaker to be

the playthings of the Gods and of circumstances. Still they have a fatherly

care of the young, and are deeply impressed by sentiments of religion. They

would give confidence to the aged by an increasing use of wine, which, as

they get older, is to unloose their tongues and make them sing. The prospect

of the existence of the soul after death is constantly present to them; though

they  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  the  cheerful  hope  and  resignation  which

animates Socrates in the Phaedo or Cephalus in the Republic. Plato appears to

be expressing his own feelings in remarks of this sort. For at the time of

writing the first book of the Laws he was at least seventy-four years of age, if

we suppose him to allude to the victory of the Syracusans under Dionysius

the  Younger  over  the  Locrians,  which  occurred  in  the  year  356.  Such  a

sadness was the natural effect of declining years and failing powers, which

make men ask, 'After all, what profit is there in life?' They feel that their

work is beginning to be over, and are ready to say, 'All the world is a stage;'

or, in the actual words of Plato, 'Let us play as good plays as we can,' though

'we must be sometimes serious, which is not agreeable, but necessary.' These

are feelings which have crossed the minds of reflective persons in all ages,

and there is no reason to connect the Laws any more than other parts of

Plato's writings with the very uncertain narrative of his life, or to imagine that

this  melancholy  tone  is  attributable  to  disappointment  at  having  failed  toconvert a Sicilian tyrant into a philosopher.


  II. The plan of the Laws is more irregular and has less connexion than any

other of the writings of Plato. As Aristotle says in the Politics, 'The greater

part consists of laws'; in Books v, vi, xi, xii the dialogue almost entirely

disappears. Large portions of them are rather the materials for a work than a

finished composition which may rank with the other Platonic dialogues. To

use his own image, 'Some stones are regularly inserted in the building; others

are lying on the ground ready for use.' There is probably truth in the tradition

that the Laws were not published until after the death of Plato. We can easily

believe that he has left imperfections, which would have been removed if he

had lived a few years longer. The arrangement might have been improved;

the  connexion  of  the  argument  might  have  been  made  plainer,  and  the

sentences more accurately framed. Something also may be attributed to the

feebleness of old age. Even a rough sketch of the Phaedrus or Symposium

would  have  had  a  very  different  look.  There  is,  however,  an  interest  in

possessing one writing of Plato which is in the process of creation.


  We must endeavour to find a thread of order which will carry us through

this comparative disorder. The first four books are described by Plato himself

as the preface or preamble. Having arrived at the conclusion that each law

should have a preamble, the lucky thought occurs to him at the end of the

fourth book that the preceding discourse is the preamble of the whole. This

preamble or introduction may be abridged as follows:--


  The institutions of Sparta and Crete are admitted by the Lacedaemonian

and Cretan to have one aim only: they were intended by the legislator to

inspire courage in war. To this the Athenian objects that the true lawgiver

should frame his laws with a view to all the virtues and not to one only.

Better is he who has temperance as well as courage, than he who has courage

only; better is he who is faithful in civil broils, than he who is a good soldier

only. Better, too, is peace than war; the reconciliation than the defeat of an

enemy. And he who would attain all virtue should be trained amid pleasures

as  well  as  pains.  Hence  there  should  be  convivial  intercourse  among  the

citizens, and a man's temperance should be tested in his cups, as we test his

courage amid dangers. He should have a fear of the right sort, as well as a

courage of the right sort.  At  the  beginning  of  the  second  book  the  subject  of  pleasure  leads  to

education, which in the early years of life is wholly a discipline imparted by

the  means  of  pleasure  and  pain.  The  discipline  of  pleasure  is  implanted

chiefly by the practice of the song and the dance. Of these the forms should

be fixed, and not allowed to depend on the fickle breath of the multitude.

There will be choruses of boys, girls, and grown-up persons, and all will be

heard repeating the same strain, that 'virtue is happiness.' One of them will

give the law to the rest; this will be the chorus of aged minstrels, who will

sing the most beautiful and the most useful of songs. They will require a little

wine, to mellow the austerity of age, and make them amenable to the laws.


  After having laid down as the first principle of politics, that peace, and

not war, is the true aim of the legislator, and briefly discussed music and

festive intercourse, at the commencement of the third book Plato makes a

digression, in which he speaks of the origin of society. He describes, first of

all, the family; secondly, the patriarchal stage, which is an aggregation of

families;  thirdly,  the  founding  of  regular  cities,  like  Ilium;  fourthly,  the

establishment  of  a  military  and  political  system,  like  that  of  Sparta,  with

which  he  identifies  Argos  and  Messene,  dating  from  the  return  of  the

Heraclidae. But the aims of states should be good, or else, like the prayer of

Theseus, they may be ruinous to themselves. This was the case in two out of

three of the Heracleid kingdoms. They did not understand that the powers in

a state should be balanced. The balance of powers saved Sparta, while the

excess of tyranny in Persia and the excess of liberty at Athens have been the

ruin of both...This discourse on politics is suddenly discovered to have an

immediate practical use; for Cleinias the Cretan is about to give laws to a new

colony.


  At  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  book,  after  enquiring  into  the

circumstances and situation of the colony, the Athenian proceeds to make

further reflections. Chance, and God, and the skill of the legislator, all co-

operate in the formation of states. And the most favourable condition for the

foundation of a new one is when the government is in the hands of a virtuous

tyrant who has the good fortune to be the contemporary of a great legislator.

But a virtuous tyrant is a contradiction in terms; we can at best only hope to

have magistrates who are the servants of reason and the law. This leads to the

enquiry, what is to be the polity of our new state. And the answer is, that weare to fear God, and honour our parents, and to cultivate virtue and justice;

these are to be our first principles. Laws must be definite, and we should

create in the citizens a predisposition to obey them. The legislator will teach

as  well  as  command;  and  with  this  view  he  will  prefix  preambles  to  his

principal laws.


  The fifth book commences in a sort of dithyramb with another and higher

preamble about the honour due to the soul, whence are deduced the duties of

a man to his parents and his friends, to the suppliant and stranger. He should

be true and just, free from envy and excess of all sorts, forgiving to crimes

which are not incurable and are partly involuntary; and he should have a true

taste. The noblest life has the greatest pleasures and the fewest pains...Having

finished the preamble, and touched on some other preliminary considerations,

we proceed to the Laws, beginning with the constitution of the state. This is

not the best or ideal state, having all things common, but only the second-

best, in which the land and houses are to be distributed among 5040 citizens

divided into four classes. There is to be no gold or silver among them, and

they are to have moderate wealth, and to respect number and numerical order

in all things.


  In  the  first  part  of  the  sixth  book,  Plato  completes  his  sketch  of  the

constitution by the appointment of officers. He explains the manner in which

guardians  of  the  law,  generals,  priests,  wardens  of  town  and  country,

ministers of education, and other magistrates are to be appointed; and also in

what way courts of appeal are to be constituted, and omissions in the law to

be supplied. Next--and at this point the Laws strictly speaking begin--there

follow  enactments  respecting  marriage  and  the  procreation  of  children,

respecting property in slaves as well as of other kinds, respecting houses,

married life, common tables for men and women. The question of age in

marriage suggests the consideration of a similar question about the time for

holding offices, and for military service, which had been previously omitted.


    Resuming  the  order  of  the  discussion,  which  was  indicated  in  the

previous  book,  from  marriage  and  birth  we  proceed  to  education  in  the

seventh book. Education is to begin at or rather before birth; to be continued

for a time by mothers and nurses under the supervision of the state; finally, to

comprehend music and gymnastics. Under music is included reading, writing,playing on the lyre, arithmetic, geometry, and a knowledge of astronomy

sufficient to preserve the minds of the citizens from impiety in after- life.

Gymnastics are to be practised chiefly with a view to their use in war. The

discussion of education, which was lightly touched upon in Book ii, is here

completed.


  The  eighth  book  contains  regulations  for  civil  life,  beginning  with

festivals,  games,  and  contests,  military  exercises  and  the  like.  On  such

occasions Plato seems to see young men and maidens meeting together, and

hence  he  is  led  into  discussing  the  relations  of  the  sexes,  the  evil

consequences  which  arise  out  of  the  indulgence  of  the  passions,  and  the

remedies for them. Then he proceeds to speak of agriculture, of arts and

trades, of buying and selling, and of foreign commerce.


  The  remaining  books  of  the  Laws,  ix-xii,  are  chiefly  concerned  with

criminal  offences.  In  the  first  class  are  placed  offences  against  the  Gods,

especially sacrilege or robbery of temples: next follow offences against the

state,--conspiracy, treason, theft. The mention of thefts suggests a distinction

between  voluntary  and  involuntary,  curable  and  incurable  offences.

Proceeding  to  the  greater  crime  of  homicide,  Plato  distinguishes  between

mere  homicide,  manslaughter,  which  is  partly  voluntary  and  partly

involuntary, and murder, which arises from avarice, ambition, fear. He also

enumerates murders by kindred, murders by slaves, wounds with or without

intent to kill, wounds inflicted in anger, crimes of or against slaves, insults to

parents. To these, various modes of purification or degrees of punishment are

assigned, and the terrors of another world are also invoked against them.


  At the beginning of Book x, all acts of violence, including sacrilege, are

summed up in a single law. The law is preceded by an admonition, in which

the offenders are informed that no one ever did an unholy act or said an

unlawful word while he retained his belief in the existence of the Gods; but

either he denied their existence, or he believed that they took no care of man,

or that they might be turned from their course by sacrifices and prayers. The

remainder of the book is devoted to the refutation of these three classes of

unbelievers, and concludes with the means to be taken for their reformation,

and the announcement of their punishments if they continue obstinate and

impenitent.  The eleventh book is taken up with laws and with admonitions relating to

individuals, which follow one another without any exact order. There are

laws concerning deposits and the finding of treasure; concerning slaves and

freedmen;  concerning  retail  trade,  bequests,  divorces,  enchantments,

poisonings, magical arts, and the like. In the twelfth book the same subjects

are continued. Laws are passed concerning violations of military discipline,

concerning the high office of the examiners and their burial; concerning oaths

and the violation of them, and the punishments of those who neglect their

duties as citizens. Foreign travel is then discussed, and the permission to be

accorded to citizens of journeying in foreign parts; the strangers who may

come to visit the city are also spoken of, and the manner in which they are to

be received. Laws are added respecting sureties, searches for property, right

of possession by prescription, abduction of witnesses, theatrical competition,

waging  of  private  warfare,  and  bribery  in  offices.  Rules  are  laid  down

respecting taxation, respecting economy in sacred rites, respecting judges,

their duties and sentences, and respecting sepulchral places and ceremonies.

Here  the  Laws  end.  Lastly,  a  Nocturnal  Council  is  instituted  for  the

preservation of the state, consisting of older and younger members, who are

to exhibit in their lives that virtue which is the basis of the state, to know the

one in many, and to be educated in divine and every other kind of knowledge

which will enable them to fulfil their office.


  III. The style of the Laws differs in several important respects from that

of the other dialogues of Plato: (1) in the want of character, power, and lively

illustration; (2) in the frequency of mannerisms (compare Introduction to the

Philebus); (3) in the form and rhythm of the sentences; (4) in the use of

words.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  passages  (5)  which  are

characterized  by  a  sort  of  ethical  grandeur;  and  (6)  in  which,  perhaps,  a

greater insight into human nature, and a greater reach of practical wisdom is

shown, than in any other of Plato's writings.


  1. The discourse of the three old men is described by themselves as an old

man's game of play. Yet there is little of the liveliness of a game in their

mode of treating the subject. They do not throw the ball to and fro, but two

out  of  the  three  are  listeners  to  the  third,  who  is  constantly  asserting  his

superior  wisdom  and  opportunities  of  knowledge,  and  apologizing  (not

without reason) for his own want of clearness of speech. He will 'carry themover the stream;' he will answer for them when the argument is beyond their

comprehension; he is afraid of their ignorance of mathematics, and thinks

that gymnastic is likely to be more intelligible to them;--he has repeated his

words several times, and yet they cannot understand him. The subject did not

properly take the form of dialogue, and also the literary vigour of Plato had

passed away. The old men speak as they might be expected to speak, and in

this there is a touch of dramatic truth. Plato has given the Laws that form or

want of form which indicates the failure of natural power. There is no regular

plan--none of that consciousness of what has preceded and what is to follow,

which makes a perfect style,--but there are several attempts at a plan; the

argument  is  'pulled  up,'  and  frequent  explanations  are  offered  why  a

particular topic was introduced.


  The  fictions  of  the  Laws  have  no  longer  the  verisimilitude  which  is

characteristic of the Phaedrus and the Timaeus, or even of the Statesman. We

can hardly suppose that an educated Athenian would have placed the visit of

Epimenides to Athens ten years before the Persian war, or have imagined that

a  war  with  Messene  prevented  the  Lacedaemonians  from  coming  to  the

rescue of Hellas. The narrative of the origin of the Dorian institutions, which

are said to have been due to a fear of the growing power of the Assyrians, is a

plausible invention, which may be compared with the tale of the island of

Atlantis  and  the  poem  of  Solon,  but  is  not  accredited  by  similar  arts  of

deception.  The  other  statement  that  the  Dorians  were  Achaean  exiles

assembled  by  Dorieus,  and  the  assertion  that  Troy  was  included  in  the

Assyrian Empire, have some foundation (compare for the latter point, Diod.

Sicul.). Nor is there anywhere in the Laws that lively enargeia, that vivid

mise  en  scene,  which  is  as  characteristic  of  Plato  as  of  some  modern

novelists.


  The old men are afraid of the ridicule which 'will fall on their heads more

than enough,' and they do not often indulge in a joke. In one of the few which

occur, the book of the Laws, if left incomplete, is compared to a monster

wandering about without a head. But we no longer breathe the atmosphere of

humour which pervades the Symposium and the Euthydemus, in which we

pass  within  a  few  sentences  from  the  broadest  Aristophanic  joke  to  the

subtlest  refinement  of  wit  and  fancy;  instead  of  this,  in  the  Laws  an

impression of baldness and feebleness is often left upon our minds. Some ofthe most amusing descriptions, as, for example, of children roaring for the

first three years of life; or of the Athenians walking into the country with

fighting-cocks under their arms; or of the slave doctor who knocks about his

patients finely; and the gentleman doctor who courteously persuades them; or

of the way of keeping order in the theatre, 'by a hint from a stick,' are narrated

with a commonplace gravity; but where we find this sort of dry humour we

shall not be far wrong in thinking that the writer intended to make us laugh.

The seriousness of age takes the place of the jollity of youth. Life should

have holidays and festivals; yet we rebuke ourselves when we laugh, and take

our pleasures sadly. The irony of the earlier dialogues, of which some traces

occur in the tenth book, is replaced by a severity which hardly condescends

to  regard  human  things.  'Let  us  say,  if  you  please,  that  man  is  of  some

account, but I was speaking of him in comparison with God.'


  The imagery and illustrations are poor in themselves, and are not assisted

by the surrounding phraseology. We have seen how in the Republic, and in

the earlier dialogues, figures of speech such as 'the wave,' 'the drone,' 'the

chase,' 'the bride,' appear and reappear at intervals. Notes are struck which are

repeated from time to time, as in a strain of music. There is none of this

subtle art in the Laws. The illustrations, such as the two kinds of doctors, 'the

three kinds of funerals,' the fear potion, the puppet, the painter leaving a

successor to restore his picture, the 'person stopping to consider where three

ways meet,' the 'old laws about water of which he will not divert the course,'

can hardly be said to do much credit to Plato's invention. The citations from

the poets have lost that fanciful character which gave them their charm in the

earlier dialogues. We are tired of images taken from the arts of navigation, or

archery, or weaving, or painting, or medicine, or music. Yet the comparisons

of life to a tragedy, or of the working of mind to the revolution of the self-

moved, or of the aged parent to the image of a God dwelling in the house, or

the reflection that 'man is made to be the plaything of God, and that this

rightly considered is the best of him,' have great beauty.


  2. The clumsiness of the style is exhibited in frequent mannerisms and

repetitions. The perfection of the Platonic dialogue consists in the accuracy

with  which  the  question  and  answer  are  fitted  into  one  another,  and  the

regularity with which the steps of the argument succeed one another. This

finish of style is no longer discernible in the Laws. There is a want of varietyin the answers; nothing can be drawn out of the respondents but 'Yes' or 'No,'

'True,' 'To be sure,' etc.; the insipid forms, 'What do you mean?' 'To what are

you  referring?'  are  constantly  returning.  Again  and  again  the  speaker  is

charged, or charges himself, with obscurity; and he repeats again and again

that he will explain his views more clearly. The process of thought which

should be latent in the mind of the writer appears on the surface. In several

passages the Athenian praises himself in the most unblushing manner, very

unlike the irony of the earlier dialogues, as when he declares that 'the laws are

a divine work given by some inspiration of the Gods,' and that 'youth should

commit  them  to  memory  instead  of  the  compositions  of  the  poets.'  The

prosopopoeia which is adopted by Plato in the Protagoras and other dialogues

is repeated until we grow weary of it. The legislator is always addressing the

speakers or the youth of the state, and the speakers are constantly making

addresses to the legislator. A tendency to a paradoxical manner of statement

is also observable. 'We must have drinking,' 'we must have a virtuous tyrant'--

this is too much for the duller wits of the Lacedaemonian and Cretan, who at

first start back in surprise. More than in any other writing of Plato the tone is

hortatory; the laws are sermons as well as laws; they are considered to have a

religious sanction, and to rest upon a religious sentiment in the mind of the

citizens. The words of the Athenian are attributed to the Lacedaemonian and

Cretan, who are supposed to have made them their own, after the manner of

the earlier dialogues. Resumptions of subjects which have been half disposed

of in a previous passage constantly occur: the arrangement has neither the

clearness of art nor the freedom of nature. Irrelevant remarks are made here

and there, or illustrations used which are not properly fitted in. The dialogue

is generally weak and laboured, and is in the later books fairly given up,

apparently, because unsuited to the subject of the work. The long speeches or

sermons of the Athenian, often extending over several pages, have never the

grace and harmony which are exhibited in the earlier dialogues. For Plato is

incapable  of  sustained  composition;  his  genius  is  dramatic  rather  than

oratorical; he can converse, but he cannot make a speech. Even the Timaeus,

which is one of his most finished works, is full of abrupt transitions. There is

the  same  kind  of  difference  between  the  dialogue  and  the  continuous

discourse of Plato as between the narrative and speeches of Thucydides.


  3. The perfection of style is variety in unity, freedom, ease, clearness, the

power of saying anything, and of striking any note in the scale of humanfeelings  without  impropriety;  and  such  is  the  divine  gift  of  language

possessed by Plato in the Symposium and Phaedrus. From this there are many

fallings-off in the Laws: first, in the structure of the sentences, which are

rhythmical and monotonous,--the formal and sophistical manner of the age is

superseding  the  natural  genius  of  Plato:  secondly,  many  of  them  are  of

enormous length, and the latter end often forgets the beginning of them,--they

seem never to have received the second thoughts of the author; either the

emphasis is wrongly placed, or there is a want of point in a clause; or an

absolute case occurs which is not properly separated from the rest of the

sentence;  or  words  are  aggregated  in  a  manner  which  fails  to  show  their

relation  to  one  another;  or  the  connecting  particles  are  omitted  at  the

beginning  of  sentences;  the  uses  of  the  relative  and  antecedent  are  more

indistinct,  the  changes  of  person  and  number  more  frequent,  examples  of

pleonasm,  tautology,  and  periphrasis,  antitheses  of  positive  and  negative,

false emphasis, and other affectations, are more numerous than in the other

writings of Plato; there is also a more common and sometimes unmeaning

use  of  qualifying  formulae,  os  epos  eipein,  kata  dunamin,  and  of  double

expressions,  pante  pantos,  oudame  oudamos,  opos  kai  ope--these  are  too

numerous to be attributed to errors in the text; again, there is an over-curious

adjustment of verb and participle, noun and epithet, and other artificial forms

of  cadence  and  expression  take  the  place  of  natural  variety:  thirdly,  the

absence of metaphorical language is remarkable--the style is not devoid of

ornament, but the ornament is of a debased rhetorical kind, patched on to

instead of growing out of the subject; there is a great command of words, and

a  laboured  use  of  them;  forced  attempts  at  metaphor  occur  in  several

passages,--e.g.  parocheteuein  logois;  ta  men  os  tithemena  ta  d  os

paratithemena; oinos kolazomenos upo nephontos eterou theou; the plays on

the  word  nomos  =  nou  dianome,  ode  etara:  fourthly,  there  is  a  foolish

extravagance  of  language  in  other  passages,--'the  swinish  ignorance  of

arithmetic;'  'the  justice  and  suitableness  of  the  discourse  on  laws;'  over-

emphasis; 'best of Greeks,' said of all the Greeks, and the like: fifthly, poor

and  insipid  illustrations  are  also  common:  sixthly,  we  may  observe  an

excessive  use  of  climax  and  hyperbole,  aischron  legein  chre  pros  autous

doulon te kai doulen kai paida kai ei pos oion te olen ten oikian: dokei touto

to epitedeuma kata phusin tas peri ta aphrodisia edonas ou monon anthropon

alla kai therion diephtharkenai.  4. The peculiarities in the use of words which occur in the Laws have

been collected by Zeller (Platonische Studien) and Stallbaum (Legg.): first, in

the  use  of  nouns,  such  as  allodemia,  apeniautesis,  glukuthumia,  diatheter,

thrasuxenia,  koros,  megalonoia,  paidourgia:  secondly,  in  the  use  of

adjectives, such as aistor, biodotes, echthodopos, eitheos, chronios, and of

adverbs, such as aniditi, anatei, nepoivei: thirdly, in the use of verbs, such as

athurein, aissein (aixeien eipein), euthemoneisthai, parapodizesthai, sebein,

temelein,  tetan.  These  words  however,  as  Stallbaum  remarks,  are  formed

according  to  analogy,  and  nearly  all  of  them  have  the  support  of  some

poetical or other authority.


  Zeller and Stallbaum have also collected forms of words in the Laws,

differing from the forms of the same words which occur in other places: e.g.

blabos  for  blabe,  abios  for  abiotos,  acharistos  for  acharis,  douleios  for

doulikos,  paidelos  for  paidikos,  exagrio  for  exagriaino,  ileoumai  for

ilaskomai, and the Ionic word sophronistus, meaning 'correction.' Zeller has

noted a fondness for substantives ending in -ma and -sis, such as georgema,

diapauma, epithumema, zemioma, komodema, omilema; blapsis, loidoresis,

paraggelsis, and others; also a use of substantives in the plural, which are

commonly found only in the singular, maniai, atheotetes, phthonoi, phoboi,

phuseis; also, a peculiar use of prepositions in composition, as in eneirgo,

apoblapto, dianomotheteo, dieiretai, dieulabeisthai, and other words; also, a

frequent occurrence of the Ionic datives plural in -aisi and -oisi, perhaps used

for the sake of giving an ancient or archaic effect.


  To these peculiarities of words he has added a list of peculiar expressions

and constructions. Among the most characteristic are the following: athuta

pallakon  spermata;  amorphoi  edrai;  osa  axiomata  pros  archontas;  oi  kata

polin kairoi; muthos, used in several places of 'the discourse about laws;' and

connected with this the frequent use of paramuthion and paramutheisthai in

the  general  sense  of  'address,'  'addressing';  aimulos  eros;  ataphoi  praxeis;

muthos  akephalos;  ethos  euthuporon.  He  remarks  also  on  the  frequent

employment of the abstract for the concrete; e.g. uperesia for uperetai, phugai

for  phugades,  mechanai  in  the  sense  of  'contrivers,'  douleia  for  douloi,

basileiai  for  basileis,  mainomena  kedeumata  for  ganaika  mainomenen;  e

chreia ton paidon in the sense of 'indigent children,' and paidon ikanotes; to

ethos tes apeirias for e eiothuia apeiria; kuparitton upse te kai kalle thaumasiafor kuparittoi mala upselai kai kalai. He further notes some curious uses of

the  genitive  case,  e.g.  philias  omologiai,  maniai  orges,  laimargiai  edones,

cheimonon  anupodesiai,  anosioi  plegon  tolmai;  and  of  the  dative,  omiliai

echthrois,  nomothesiai,  anosioi  plegon  tolmai;  and  of  the  dative  omiliai

echthrois,  nomothesiai  epitropois;  and  also  some  rather  uncommon

periphrases,  thremmata  Neilou,  xuggennetor  teknon  for  alochos,  Mouses

lexis  for  poiesis,  zographon  paides,  anthropon  spermata  and  the  like;  the

fondness for particles of limitation, especially tis and ge, sun tisi charisi, tois

ge dunamenois and the like; the pleonastic use of tanun, of os, of os eros

eipein, of ekastote; and the periphrastic use of the preposition peri. Lastly, he

observes  the  tendency  to  hyperbata  or  transpositions  of  words,  and  to

rhythmical uniformity as well as grammatical irregularity in the structure of

the sentences.


  For nearly all the expressions which are adduced by Zeller as arguments

against the genuineness of the Laws, Stallbaum finds some sort of authority.

There is no real ground for doubting that the work was written by Plato,

merely because several words occur in it which are not found in his other

writings. An imitator may preserve the usual phraseology of a writer better

than he would himself. But, on the other hand, the fact that authorities may be

quoted in support of most of these uses of words, does not show that the

diction is not peculiar. Several of them seem to be poetical or dialectical, and

exhibit an attempt to enlarge the limits of Greek prose by the introduction of

Homeric and tragic expressions. Most of them do not appear to have retained

any  hold  on  the  later  language  of  Greece.  Like  several  experiments  in

language of the writers of the Elizabethan age, they were afterwards lost; and

though occasionally found in Plutarch and imitators of Plato, they have not

been accepted by Aristotle or passed into the common dialect of Greece.


  5. Unequal as the Laws are in style, they contain a few passages which

are very grand and noble. For example, the address to the poets: 'Best of

strangers, we also are poets of the best and noblest tragedy; for our whole

state is an imitation of the best and noblest life, which we affirm to be indeed

the very truth of tragedy.' Or again, the sight of young men and maidens in

friendly intercourse with one another, suggesting the dangers to which youth

is  liable  from  the  violence  of  passion;  or  the  eloquent  denunciation  of

unnatural lusts in the same passage; or the charming thought that the bestlegislator 'orders war for the sake of peace and not peace for the sake of war;'

or the pleasant allusion, 'O Athenian--inhabitant of Attica, I will not say, for

you seem to me worthy to be named after the Goddess Athene because you

go back to first principles;' or the pithy saying, 'Many a victory has been and

will be suicidal to the victors, but education is never suicidal;' or the fine

expression that 'the walls of a city should be allowed to sleep in the earth, and

that we should not attempt to disinter them;' or the remark that 'God is the

measure of all things in a sense far higher than any man can be;' or that 'a

man should be from the first a partaker of the truth, that he may live a true

man as long as possible;' or the principle repeatedly laid down, that 'the sins

of the fathers are not to be visited on the children;' or the description of the

funeral rites of those priestly sages who depart in innocence; or the noble

sentiment, that we should do more justice to slaves than to equals; or the

curious observation, founded, perhaps, on his own experience, that there are a

few 'divine men in every state however corrupt, whose conversation is of

inestimable value;' or the acute remark, that public opinion is to be respected,

because the judgments of mankind about virtue are better than their practice;

or the deep religious and also modern feeling which pervades the tenth book

(whatever may be thought of the arguments); the sense of the duty of living

as a part of a whole, and in dependence on the will of God, who takes care of

the least things as well as the greatest; and the picture of parents praying for

their children--not as we may say, slightly altering the words of Plato, as if

there were no truth or reality in the Gentile religions, but as if there were the

greatest--are very striking to us. We must remember that the Laws, unlike the

Republic, do not exhibit an ideal state, but are supposed to be on the level of

human  motives  and  feelings;  they  are  also  on  the  level  of  the  popular

religion, though elevated and purified: hence there is an attempt made to

show that the pleasant is also just. But, on the other hand, the priority of the

soul to the body, and of God to the soul, is always insisted upon as the true

incentive  to  virtue;  especially  with  great  force  and  eloquence  at  the

commencement of Book v. And the work of legislation is carried back to the

first principles of morals.


  6. No other writing of Plato shows so profound an insight into the world

and into human nature as the Laws. That 'cities will never cease from ill until

they are better governed,' is the text of the Laws as well as of the Statesman

and Republic. The principle that the balance of power preserves states; thereflection that no one ever passed his whole life in disbelief of the Gods; the

remark that the characters of men are best seen in convivial intercourse; the

observation  that  the  people  must  be  allowed  to  share  not  only  in  the

government, but in the administration of justice; the desire to make laws, not

with  a  view  to  courage  only,  but  to  all  virtue;  the  clear  perception  that

education  begins  with  birth,  or  even,  as  he  would  say,  before  birth;  the

attempt  to  purify  religion;  the  modern  reflections,  that  punishment  is  not

vindictive,  and  that  limits  must  be  set  to  the  power  of  bequest;  the

impossibility of undeceiving the victims of quacks and jugglers; the provision

for water, and for other requirements of health, and for concealing the bodies

of the dead with as little hurt as possible to the living; above all, perhaps, the

distinct consciousness that under the actual circumstances of mankind the

ideal cannot be carried out, and yet may be a guiding principle--will appear to

us, if we remember that we are still in the dawn of politics, to show a great

depth of political wisdom.


  IV. The Laws of Plato contain numerous passages which closely resemble

other passages in his writings. And at first sight a suspicion arises that the

repetition shows the unequal hand of the imitator. For why should a writer

say over again, in a more imperfect form, what he had already said in his

most finished style and manner? And yet it may be urged on the other side

that an author whose original powers are beginning to decay will be very

liable  to  repeat  himself,  as  in  conversation,  so  in  books.  He  may  have

forgotten what he had written before; he may be unconscious of the decline

of his own powers. Hence arises a question of great interest, bearing on the

genuineness  of  ancient  writers.  Is  there  any  criterion  by  which  we  can

distinguish the genuine resemblance from the spurious, or, in other words, the

repetition of a thought or passage by an author himself from the appropriation

of it by another? The question has, perhaps, never been fully discussed; and,

though  a  real  one,  does  not  admit  of  a  precise  answer.  A  few  general

considerations on the subject may be offered:--


  (a) Is the difference such as might be expected to arise at different times

of life or under different circumstances?--There would be nothing surprising

in a writer, as he grew older, losing something of his own originality, and

falling more and more under the spirit of his age. 'What a genius I had when I

wrote that book!' was the pathetic exclamation of a famous English author,when in old age he chanced to take up one of his early works. There would be

nothing surprising again in his losing somewhat of his powers of expression,

and becoming less capable of framing language into a harmonious whole.

There would also be a strong presumption that if the variation of style was

uniform, it was attributable to some natural cause, and not to the arts of the

imitator. The inferiority might be the result of feebleness and of want of

activity of mind. But the natural weakness of a great author would commonly

be  different  from  the  artificial  weakness  of  an  imitator;  it  would  be

continuous  and  uniform.  The  latter  would  be  apt  to  fill  his  work  with

irregular patches, sometimes taken verbally from the writings of the author

whom he personated, but rarely acquiring his spirit. His imitation would be

obvious, irregular, superficial. The patches of purple would be easily detected

among his threadbare and tattered garments. He would rarely take the pains

to  put  the  same  thought  into  other  words.  There  were  many  forgeries  in

English literature which attained a considerable degree of success 50 or 100

years ago; but it is doubtful whether attempts such as these could now escape

detection, if there were any writings of the same author or of the same age to

be compared with them. And ancient forgers were much less skilful than

modern; they were far from being masters in the art of deception, and had

rarely any motive for being so.


  (b)  But,  secondly,  the  imitator  will  commonly  be  least  capable  of

understanding  or  imitating  that  part  of  a  great  writer  which  is  most

characteristic of him. In every man's writings there is something like himself

and unlike others, which gives individuality. To appreciate this latent quality

would require a kindred mind, and minute study and observation. There are a

class of similarities which may be called undesigned coincidences, which are

so remote as to be incapable of being borrowed from one another, and yet,

when they are compared, find a natural explanation in their being the work of

the same mind. The imitator might copy the turns of style--he might repeat

images or illustrations, but he could not enter into the inner circle of Platonic

philosophy. He would understand that part of it which became popular in the

next generation, as for example, the doctrine of ideas or of numbers: he might

approve of communism. But the higher flights of Plato about the science of

dialectic, or the unity of virtue, or a person who is above the law, would be

unintelligible to him.  (c) The argument from imitation assumes a different character when the

supposed imitations are associated with other passages having the impress of

original genius. The strength of the argument from undesigned coincidences

of style is much increased when they are found side by side with thoughts

and expressions which can only have come from a great original writer. The

great excellence, not only of the whole, but even of the parts of writings, is a

strong  proof  of  their  genuineness--for  although  the  great  writer  may  fall

below, the forger or imitator cannot rise much above himself. Whether we

can attribute the worst parts of a work to a forger and the best to a great

writer,--as for example, in the case of some of Shakespeare's plays,--depends

upon the probability that they have been interpolated, or have been the joint

work  of  two  writers;  and  this  can  only  be  established  either  by  express

evidence  or  by  a  comparison  of  other  writings  of  the  same  class.  If  the

interpolation  or  double  authorship  of  Greek  writings  in  the  time  of  Plato

could be shown to be common, then a question, perhaps insoluble, would

arise, not whether the whole, but whether parts of the Platonic dialogues are

genuine, and, if parts only, which parts. Hebrew prophecies and Homeric

poems and Laws of Manu may have grown together in early times, but there

is no reason to think that any of the dialogues of Plato is the result of a

similar process of accumulation. It is therefore rash to say with Oncken (Die

Staatslehre des Aristoteles) that the form in which Aristotle knew the Laws of

Plato must have been different from that in which they have come down to

us.


  It must be admitted that these principles are difficult of application. Yet a

criticism  may  be  worth  making  which  rests  only  on  probabilities  or

impressions. Great disputes will arise about the merits of different passages,

about what is truly characteristic and original or trivial and borrowed. Many

have thought the Laws to be one of the greatest of Platonic writings, while in

the judgment of Mr. Grote they hardly rise above the level of the forged

epistles. The manner in which a writer would or would not have written at a

particular time of life must be acknowledged to be a matter of conjecture. But

enough has been said to show that similarities of a certain kind, whether

criticism is able to detect them or not, may be such as must be attributed to an

original writer, and not to a mere imitator.


  (d) Applying these principles to the case of the Laws, we have now topoint out that they contain the class of refined or unconscious similarities

which are indicative of genuineness. The parallelisms are like the repetitions

of  favourite  thoughts  into  which  every  one  is  apt  to  fall  unawares  in

conversation or in writing. They are found in a work which contains many

beautiful and remarkable passages. We may therefore begin by claiming this

presumption  in  their  favour.  Such  undesigned  coincidences,  as  we  may

venture to call them, are the following. The conception of justice as the union

of temperance, wisdom, courage (Laws; Republic): the latent idea of dialectic

implied in the notion of dividing laws after the kinds of virtue (Laws); the

approval of the method of looking at one idea gathered from many things,

'than which a truer was never discovered by any man' (compare Republic): or

again  the  description  of  the  Laws  as  parents  (Laws;  Republic):  the

assumption  that  religion  has  been  already  settled  by  the  oracle  of  Delphi

(Laws; Republic), to which an appeal is also made in special cases (Laws):

the notion of the battle with self, a paradox for which Plato in a manner

apologizes both in the Laws and the Republic: the remark (Laws) that just

men, even when they are deformed in body, may still be perfectly beautiful in

respect  of  the  excellent  justice  of  their  minds  (compare  Republic):  the

argument that ideals are none the worse because they cannot be carried out

(Laws; Republic): the near approach to the idea of good in 'the principle

which is common to all the four virtues,' a truth which the guardians must be

compelled to recognize (Laws; compare Republic): or again the recognition

by reason of the right pleasure and pain, which had previously been matter of

habit (Laws; Republic): or the blasphemy of saying that the excellency of

music is to give pleasure (Laws; Republic): again the story of the Sidonian

Cadmus (Laws), which is a variation of the Phoenician tale of the earth-born

men (Republic): the comparison of philosophy to a yelping she- dog, both in

the Republic and in the Laws: the remark that no man can practise two trades

(Laws; Republic): or the advantage of the middle condition (Laws; Republic):

the  tendency  to  speak  of  principles  as  moulds  or  forms;  compare  the

ekmageia of song (Laws), and the tupoi of religion (Republic): or the remark

(Laws) that 'the relaxation of justice makes many cities out of one,' which

may  be  compared  with  the  Republic:  or  the  description  of  lawlessness

'creeping in little by little in the fashions of music and overturning all things,'-

-to us a paradox, but to Plato's mind a fixed idea, which is found in the Laws

as well as in the Republic: or the figure of the parts of the human body under

which the parts of the state are described (Laws; Republic): the apology fordelay  and  diffuseness,  which  occurs  not  unfrequently  in  the  Republic,  is

carried to an excess in the Laws (compare Theaet.): the remarkable thought

(Laws) that the soul of the sun is better than the sun, agrees with the relation

in which the idea of good stands to the sun in the Republic, and with the

substitution of mind for the idea of good in the Philebus: the passage about

the tragic poets (Laws) agrees generally with the treatment of them in the

Republic, but is more finely conceived, and worked out in a nobler spirit.

Some lesser similarities of thought and manner should not be omitted, such as

the mention of the thirty years' old students in the Republic, and the fifty

years' old choristers in the Laws; or the making of the citizens out of wax

(Laws)  compared  with  the  other  image  (Republic);  or  the  number  of  the

tyrant (729), which is NEARLY equal with the number of days and nights in

the year (730), compared with the 'slight correction' of the sacred number

5040, which is divisible by all the numbers from 1 to 12 except 11, and

divisible by 11, if two families be deducted; or once more, we may compare

the ignorance of solid geometry of which he complains in the Republic and

the  puzzle  about  fractions  with  the  difficulty  in  the  Laws  about

commensurable  and  incommensurable  quantities  --and  the  malicious

emphasis  on  the  word  gunaikeios  (Laws)  with  the  use  of  the  same  word

(Republic). These and similar passages tend to show that the author of the

Republic is also the author of the Laws. They are echoes of the same voice,

expressions of the same mind, coincidences too subtle to have been invented

by the ingenuity of any imitator. The force of the argument is increased, if we

remember that no passage in the Laws is exactly copied,--nowhere do five or

six  words  occur  together  which  are  found  together  elsewhere  in  Plato's

writings.


  In other dialogues of Plato, as well as in the Republic, there are to be

found parallels with the Laws. Such resemblances, as we might expect, occur

chiefly (but not exclusively) in the dialogues which, on other grounds, we

may suppose to be of later date. The punishment of evil is to be like evil men

(Laws), as he says also in the Theaetetus. Compare again the dependence of

tragedy and comedy on one another, of which he gives the reason in the

Laws--'For  serious  things  cannot  be  understood  without  laughable,  nor

opposites at all without opposites, if a man is really to have intelligence of

either'; here he puts forward the principle which is the groundwork of the

thesis of Socrates in the Symposium, 'that the genius of tragedy is the same asthat of comedy, and that the writer of comedy ought to be a writer of tragedy

also.' There is a truth and right which is above Law (Laws), as we learn also

from the Statesman. That men are the possession of the Gods (Laws), is a

reflection which likewise occurs in the Phaedo. The remark, whether serious

or ironical (Laws), that 'the sons of the Gods naturally believed in the Gods,

because they had the means of knowing about them,' is found in the Timaeus.

The reign of Cronos, who is the divine ruler (Laws), is a reminiscence of the

Statesman. It is remarkable that in the Sophist and Statesman (Soph.), Plato,

speaking in the character of the Eleatic Stranger, has already put on the old

man. The madness of the poets, again, is a favourite notion of Plato's, which

occurs also in the Laws, as well as in the Phaedrus, Ion, and elsewhere. There

are traces in the Laws of the same desire to base speculation upon history

which we find in the Critias. Once more, there is a striking parallel with the

paradox of the Gorgias, that 'if you do evil, it is better to be punished than to

be unpunished,' in the Laws: 'To live having all goods without justice and

virtue is the greatest of evils if life be immortal, but not so great if the bad

man lives but a short time.'


  The  point  to  be  considered  is  whether  these  are  the  kind  of  parallels

which would be the work of an imitator. Would a forger have had the wit to

select the most peculiar and characteristic thoughts of Plato; would he have

caught the spirit of his philosophy; would he, instead of openly borrowing,

have half concealed his favourite ideas; would he have formed them into a

whole such as the Laws; would he have given another the credit which he

might have obtained for himself; would he have remembered and made use

of other passages of the Platonic writings and have never deviated into the

phraseology of them? Without pressing such arguments as absolutely certain,

we must acknowledge that such a comparison affords a new ground of real

weight for believing the Laws to be a genuine writing of Plato.


  V. The relation of the Republic to the Laws is clearly set forth by Plato in

the Laws. The Republic is the best state, the Laws is the best possible under

the  existing  conditions  of  the  Greek  world.  The  Republic  is  the  ideal,  in

which no man calls anything his own, which may or may not have existed in

some remote clime, under the rule of some God, or son of a God (who can

say?), but is, at any rate, the pattern of all other states and the exemplar of

human  life.  The  Laws  distinctly  acknowledge  what  the  Republic  partlyadmits, that the ideal is inimitable by us, but that we should 'lift up our eyes

to the heavens' and try to regulate our lives according to the divine image.

The citizens are no longer to have wives and children in common, and are no

longer  to  be  under  the  government  of  philosophers.  But  the  spirit  of

communism or communion is to continue among them, though reverence for

the  sacredness  of  the  family,  and  respect  of  children  for  parents,  not

promiscuous hymeneals, are now the foundation of the state; the sexes are to

be as nearly on an equality as possible; they are to meet at common tables,

and to share warlike pursuits (if the women will consent), and to have a

common education. The legislator has taken the place of the philosopher, but

a council of elders is retained, who are to fulfil the duties of the legislator

when  he  has  passed  out  of  life.  The  addition  of  younger  persons  to  this

council  by  co-optation  is  an  improvement  on  the  governing  body  of  the

Republic. The scheme of education in the Laws is of a far lower kind than

that which Plato had conceived in the Republic. There he would have his

rulers trained in all knowledge meeting in the idea of good, of which the

different  branches  of  mathematical  science  are  but  the  hand-maidens  or

ministers; here he treats chiefly of popular education, stopping short with the

preliminary  sciences,--these  are  to  be  studied  partly  with  a  view  to  their

practical usefulness, which in the Republic he holds cheap, and even more

with a view to avoiding impiety, of which in the Republic he says nothing; he

touches very lightly on dialectic, which is still to be retained for the rulers.

Yet in the Laws there remain traces of the old educational ideas. He is still for

banishing  the  poets;  and  as  he  finds  the  works  of  prose  writers  equally

dangerous, he would substitute for them the study of his own laws. He insists

strongly on the importance of mathematics as an educational instrument. He

is no more reconciled to the Greek mythology than in the Republic, though

he would rather say nothing about it out of a reverence for antiquity; and he is

equally willing to have recourse to fictions, if they have a moral tendency.

His  thoughts  recur  to  a  golden  age  in  which  the  sanctity  of  oaths  was

respected and in which men living nearer the Gods were more disposed to

believe in them; but we must legislate for the world as it is, now that the old

beliefs  have  passed  away.  Though  he  is  no  longer  fired  with  dialectical

enthusiasm, he would compel the guardians to 'look at one idea gathered from

many things,' and to 'perceive the principle which is the same in all the four

virtues.' He still recognizes the enormous influence of music, in which every

youth is to be trained for three years; and he seems to attribute the existingdegeneracy of the Athenian state and the laxity of morals partly to musical

innovation, manifested in the unnatural divorce of the instrument and the

voice, of the rhythm from the words, and partly to the influence of the mob

who ruled at the theatres. He assimilates the education of the two sexes, as far

as possible, both in music and gymnastic, and, as in the Republic, he would

give to gymnastic a purely military character. In marriage, his object is still to

produce the finest children for the state. As in the Statesman, he would unite

in wedlock dissimilar natures-- the passionate with the dull, the courageous

with the gentle. And the virtuous tyrant of the Statesman, who has no place in

the Republic, again appears. In this, as in all his writings, he has the strongest

sense of the degeneracy and incapacity of the rulers of his own time.


  In the Laws, the philosophers, if not banished, like the poets, are at least

ignored; and religion takes the place of philosophy in the regulation of human

life. It must however be remembered that the religion of Plato is co-extensive

with morality, and is that purified religion and mythology of which he speaks

in the second book of the Republic. There is no real discrepancy in the two

works. In a practical treatise, he speaks of religion rather than of philosophy;

just as he appears to identify virtue with pleasure, and rather seeks to find the

common element of the virtues than to maintain his old paradoxical theses

that they are one, or that they are identical with knowledge. The dialectic and

the idea of good, which even Glaucon in the Republic could not understand,

would be out of place in a less ideal work. There may also be a change in his

own mind, the purely intellectual aspect of philosophy having a diminishing

interest to him in his old age.


  Some  confusion  occurs  in  the  passage  in  which  Plato  speaks  of  the

Republic, occasioned by his reference to a third state, which he proposes

(D.V.)  hereafter  to  expound.  Like  many  other  thoughts  in  the  Laws,  the

allusion is obscure from not being worked out. Aristotle (Polit.) speaks of a

state  which  is  neither  the  best  absolutely,  nor  the  best  under  existing

conditions, but an imaginary state, inferior to either, destitute, as he supposes,

of the necessaries of life--apparently such a beginning of primitive society as

is described in Laws iii. But it is not clear that by this the third state of Plato

is intended. It is possible that Plato may have meant by his third state an

historical sketch, bearing the same relation to the Laws which the unfinished

Critias would have borne to the Republic; or he may, perhaps, have intendedto  describe  a  state  more  nearly  approximating  than  the  Laws  to  existing

Greek states.


  The Statesman is a mere fragment when compared with the Laws, yet

combining a second interest of dialectic as well as politics, which is wanting

in the larger work. Several points of similarity and contrast may be observed

between them. In some respects the Statesman is even more ideal than the

Republic, looking back to a former state of paradisiacal life, in which the

Gods  ruled  over  mankind,  as  the  Republic  looks  forward  to  a  coming

kingdom of philosophers. Of this kingdom of Cronos there is also mention in

the Laws. Again, in the Statesman, the Eleatic Stranger rises above law to the

conception of the living voice of the lawgiver, who is able to provide for

individual cases. A similar thought is repeated in the Laws: 'If in the order of

nature, and by divine destiny, a man were able to apprehend the truth about

these things, he would have no need of laws to rule over him; for there is no

law or order above knowledge, nor can mind without impiety be deemed the

subject or slave of any, but rather the lord of all.' The union of opposite

natures, who form the warp and the woof of the political web, is a favourite

thought which occurs in both dialogues (Laws; Statesman).


  The Laws are confessedly a Second-best, an inferior Ideal, to which Plato

has recourse, when he finds that the city of Philosophers is no longer 'within

the horizon of practical politics.' But it is curious to observe that the higher

Ideal is always returning (compare Arist. Polit.), and that he is not much

nearer the actual fact, nor more on the level of ordinary life in the Laws than

in the Republic. It is also interesting to remark that the new Ideal is always

falling away, and that he hardly supposes the one to be more capable of being

realized than the other. Human beings are troublesome to manage; and the

legislator cannot adapt his enactments to the infinite variety of circumstances;

after  all  he  must  leave  the  administration  of  them  to  his  successors;  and

though he would have liked to make them as permanent as they are in Egypt,

he cannot escape from the necessity of change. At length Plato is obliged to

institute a Nocturnal Council which is supposed to retain the mind of the

legislator, and of which some of the members are even supposed to go abroad

and inspect the institutions of foreign countries, as a foundation for changes

in their own. The spirit of such changes, though avoiding the extravagance of

a popular assembly, being only so much change as the conservative temper ofold members is likely to allow, is nevertheless inconsistent with the fixedness

of Egypt which  Plato wishes to impress upon Hellenic institutions. He is

inconsistent with himself as the truth begins to dawn upon him that 'in the

execution  things  for  the  most  part  fall  short  of  our  conception  of  them'

(Republic).


  And is not this true of ideals of government in general? We are always

disappointed in them. Nothing great can be accomplished in the short space

of human life; wherefore also we look forward to another (Republic). As we

grow old, we are sensible that we have no power actively to pursue our ideals

any longer. We have had our opportunity and do not aspire to be more than

men:  we  have  received  our  'wages  and  are  going  home.'  Neither  do  we

despair of the future of mankind, because we have been able to do so little in

comparison of the whole. We look in vain for consistency either in men or

things. But we have seen enough of improvement in our own time to justify

us in the belief that the world is worth working for and that a good man's life

is not thrown away. Such reflections may help us to bring home to ourselves

by inward sympathy the language of Plato in the Laws, and to combine into

something like a whole his various and at first sight inconsistent utterances.


  VI. The Republic may be described as the Spartan constitution appended

to a government of philosophers. But in the Laws an Athenian element is also

introduced. Many enactments are taken from the Athenian; the four classes

are borrowed from the constitution of Cleisthenes, which Plato regards as the

best  form  of  Athenian  government,  and  the  guardians  of  the  law  bear  a

certain resemblance to the archons. In the constitution of the Laws nearly all

officers  are  elected  by  a  vote  more  or  less  popular  and  by  lot.  But  the

assembly only exists for the purposes of election, and has no legislative or

executive powers. The Nocturnal Council, which is the highest body in the

state, has several of the functions of the ancient Athenian Areopagus, after

which it appears to be modelled. Life is to wear, as at Athens, a joyous and

festive look; there are to be Bacchic choruses, and men of mature age are

encouraged in moderate potations. On the other hand, the common meals, the

public education, the crypteia are borrowed from Sparta and not from Athens,

and the superintendence of private life, which was to be practised by the

governors, has also its prototype in Sparta. The extravagant dislike which

Plato shows both to a naval power and to extreme democracy is the reverse ofAthenian.


  The  best-governed  Hellenic  states  traced  the  origin  of  their  laws  to

individual lawgivers. These were real persons, though we are uncertain how

far they originated or only modified the institutions which are ascribed to

them. But the lawgiver, though not a myth, was a fixed idea in the mind of

the Greek,--as fixed as the Trojan war or the earth-born Cadmus. 'This was

what Solon meant or said'--was the form in which the Athenian expressed his

own conception of right and justice, or argued a disputed point of law. And

the constant reference in the Laws of Plato to the lawgiver is altogether in

accordance with Greek modes of thinking and speaking.


  There is also, as in the Republic, a Pythagorean element. The highest

branch of education is arithmetic; to know the order of the heavenly bodies,

and  to  reconcile  the  apparent  contradiction  of  their  movements,  is  an

important part of religion; the lives of the citizens are to have a common

measure, as also their vessels and coins; the great blessing of the state is the

number 5040. Plato is deeply impressed by the antiquity of Egypt, and the

unchangeableness of her ancient forms of song and dance. And he is also

struck by the progress which the Egyptians had made in the mathematical

sciences--in comparison of them the Greeks appeared to him to be little better

than  swine.  Yet  he  censures  the  Egyptian  meanness  and  inhospitality  to

strangers. He has traced the growth of states from their rude beginnings in a

philosophical spirit; but of any life or growth of the Hellenic world in future

ages he is silent. He has made the reflection that past time is the maker of

states (Book iii.); but he does not argue from the past to the future, that the

process is always going on, or that the institutions of nations are relative to

their stage of civilization. If he could have stamped indelibly upon Hellenic

states the will of the legislator, he would have been satisfied. The utmost

which  he  expects  of  future  generations  is  that  they  should  supply  the

omissions,  or  correct  the  errors  which  younger  statesmen  detect  in  his

enactments. When institutions have been once subjected to this process of

criticism, he would have them fixed for ever.Laws


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettTHE PREAMBLE.


BOOK I. Strangers, let me ask a question of you--Was a God or a man the

author of your laws? 'A God, Stranger. In Crete, Zeus is said to have been the

author of them; in Sparta, as Megillus will tell you, Apollo.' You Cretans

believe, as Homer says, that Minos went every ninth year to converse with

his Olympian sire, and gave you laws which he brought from him. 'Yes; and

there was Rhadamanthus, his brother, who is reputed among us to have been

a most righteous judge.' That is a reputation worthy of the son of Zeus. And

as you and Megillus have been trained under these laws, I may ask you to

give  me  an  account  of  them.  We  can  talk  about  them  in  our  walk  from

Cnosus  to  the  cave  and  temple  of  Zeus.  I  am  told  that  the  distance  is

considerable,  but  probably  there  are  shady  places  under  the  trees,  where,

being no longer young, we may often rest and converse. 'Yes, Stranger, a

little onward there are beautiful groves of cypresses, and green meadows in

which we may repose.'


My first question is, Why has the law ordained that you should have common

meals, and practise gymnastics, and bear arms? 'My answer is, that all our

institutions are of a military character. We lead the life of the camp even in

time of peace, keeping up the organization of an army, and having meals in

common; and as our country, owing to its ruggedness, is ill- suited for heavy-

armed cavalry or infantry, our soldiers are archers, equipped with bows and

arrows. The legislator was under the idea that war was the natural state of all

mankind, and that peace is only a pretence; he thought that no possessions

had any value which were not secured against enemies.' And do you think

that superiority in war is the proper aim of government? 'Certainly I do, and

my Spartan friend will agree with me.' And are there wars, not only of state

against  state,  but  of  village  against  village,  of  family  against  family,  of

individual against individual? 'Yes.' And is a man his own enemy? 'There you

come to first principles, like a true votary of the goddess Athene; and this is

all the better, for you will the sooner recognize the truth of what I am saying--

that all men everywhere are the enemies of all, and each individual of every

other and of himself; and, further, that there is a victory and defeat--the best

and the worst--which each man sustains, not at the hands of another, but ofhimself.' And does this extend to states and villages as well as to individuals?

'Certainly; there is a better in them which conquers or is conquered by the

worse.' Whether the worse ever really conquers the better, is a question which

may  be  left  for  the  present;  but  your  meaning  is,  that  bad  citizens  do

sometimes  overcome  the  good,  and  that  the  state  is  then  conquered  by

herself, and that when they are defeated the state is victorious over herself.

Or, again, in a family there may be several brothers, and the bad may be a

majority; and when the bad majority conquer the good minority, the family

are worse than themselves. The use of the terms 'better or worse than himself

or themselves' may be doubtful, but about the thing meant there can be no

dispute. 'Very true.' Such a struggle might be determined by a judge. And

which will be the better judge--he who destroys the worse and lets the better

rule, or he who lets the better rule and makes the others voluntarily obey; or,

thirdly, he who destroys no one, but reconciles the two parties? 'The last,

clearly.' But the object of such a judge or legislator would not be war. 'True.'

And as there are two kinds of war, one without and one within a state, of

which the internal is by far the worse, will not the legislator chiefly direct his

attention to this latter? He will reconcile the contending factions, and unite

them against their external enemies. 'Certainly.' Every legislator will aim at

the greatest good, and the greatest good is not victory in war, whether civil or

external, but mutual peace and good-will, as in the body health is preferable

to the purgation of disease. He who makes war his object instead of peace, or

who pursues war except for the sake of peace, is not a true statesman. 'And

yet, Stranger, the laws both of Crete and Sparta aim entirely at war.' Perhaps

so; but do not let us quarrel about your legislators--let us be gentle; they were

in  earnest  quite  as  much  as  we  are,  and  we  must  try  to  discover  their

meaning.  The  poet  Tyrtaeus  (you  know  his  poems  in  Crete,  and  my

Lacedaemonian friend is only too familiar with them)--he was an Athenian

by birth, and a Spartan citizen:--'Well,' he says, 'I sing not, I care not about

any man, however rich or happy, unless he is brave in war.' Now I should

like, in the name of us all, to ask the poet a question. Oh Tyrtaeus, I would

say to him, we agree with you in praising those who excel in war, but which

kind of war do you mean?--that dreadful war which is termed civil, or the

milder  sort  which  is  waged  against  foreign  enemies?  You  say  that  you

abominate 'those who are not eager to taste their enemies' blood,' and you

seem  to  mean  chiefly  their  foreign  enemies.  'Certainly  he  does.'  But  we

contend that there are men better far than your heroes, Tyrtaeus, concerningwhom another poet, Theognis the Sicilian, says that 'in a civil broil they are

worth their weight in gold and silver.' For in a civil war, not only courage, but

justice and temperance and wisdom are required, and all virtue is better than a

part. The mercenary soldier is ready to die at his post; yet he is commonly a

violent, senseless creature. And the legislator, whether inspired or uninspired,

will  make  laws  with  a  view  to  the  highest  virtue;  and  this  is  not  brute

courage, but loyalty in the hour of danger. The virtue of Tyrtaeus, although

needful enough in his own time, is really of a fourth-rate description. 'You are

degrading our legislator to a very low level.' Nay, we degrade not him, but

ourselves, if we believe that the laws of Lycurgus and Minos had a view to

war only. A divine lawgiver would have had regard to all the different kinds

of virtue, and have arranged his laws in corresponding classes, and not in the

modern fashion, which only makes them after the want of them is felt,--about

inheritances and heiresses and assaults, and the like. As you truly said, virtue

is the business of the legislator; but you went wrong when you referred all

legislation to a part of virtue, and to an inferior part. For the object of laws,

whether the Cretan or any other, is to make men happy. Now happiness or

good is of two kinds--there are divine and there are human goods. He who

has the divine has the human added to him; but he who has lost the greater is

deprived of both. The lesser goods are health, beauty, strength, and, lastly,

wealth; not the blind God, Pluto, but one who has eyes to see and follow

wisdom. For mind or wisdom is the most divine of all goods; and next comes

temperance, and justice springs from the union of wisdom and temperance

with courage, which is the fourth or last. These four precede other goods, and

the legislator will arrange all his ordinances accordingly, the human going

back  to  the  divine,  and  the  divine  to  their  leader  mind.  There  will  be

enactments about marriage, about education, about all the states and feelings

and experiences of men and women, at every age, in weal and woe, in war

and peace; upon all the law will fix a stamp of praise and blame. There will

also be regulations about property and expenditure, about contracts, about

rewards and punishments, and finally about funeral rites and honours of the

dead. The lawgiver will appoint guardians to preside over these things; and

mind will harmonize his ordinances, and show them to be in agreement with

temperance and justice. Now I want to know whether the same principles are

observed in the laws of Lycurgus and Minos, or, as I should rather say, of

Apollo and Zeus. We must go through the virtues, beginning with courage,

and then we will show that what has preceded has relation to virtue.'I wish,' says the Lacedaemonian, 'that you, Stranger, would first criticize

Cleinias and the Cretan laws.' Yes, is the reply, and I will criticize you and

myself, as well as him. Tell me, Megillus, were not the common meals and

gymnastic training instituted by your legislator with a view to war? 'Yes; and

next in the order of importance comes hunting, and fourth the endurance of

pain in boxing contests, and in the beatings which are the punishment of

theft. There is, too, the so-called Crypteia or secret service, in which our

youth wander about the country night and day unattended, and even in winter

go unshod and have no beds to lie on. Moreover they wrestle and exercise

under  a  blazing  sun,  and  they  have  many  similar  customs.'  Well,  but  is

courage only a combat against fear and pain, and not against pleasure and

flattery? 'Against both, I should say.' And which is worse,--to be overcome

by pain, or by pleasure? 'The latter.' But did the lawgivers of Crete and Sparta

legislate for a courage which is lame of one leg,--able to meet the attacks of

pain but not those of pleasure, or for one which can meet both? 'For a courage

which can meet both, I should say.' But if so, where are the institutions which

train your citizens to be equally brave against pleasure and pain, and superior

to  enemies  within  as  well  as  without?  'We  confess  that  we  have  no

institutions worth mentioning which are of this character.' I am not surprised,

and will therefore only request forbearance on the part of us all, in case the

love  of  truth  should  lead  any  of  us  to  censure  the  laws  of  the  others.

Remember that I am more in the way of hearing criticisms of your laws than

you can be; for in well-ordered states like Crete and Sparta, although an old

man may sometimes speak of them in private to a ruler or elder, a similar

liberty is not allowed to the young. But now being alone we shall not offend

your  legislator  by  a  friendly  examination  of  his  laws.  'Take  any  freedom

which you like.'


My first observation is, that your lawgiver ordered you to endure hardships,

because he thought that those who had not this discipline would run away

from those who had. But he ought to have considered further, that those who

had never learned to resist pleasure would be equally at the mercy of those

who had, and these are often among the worst of mankind. Pleasure, like fear,

would overcome them and take away their courage and freedom. 'Perhaps;

but I must not be hasty in giving my assent.'


Next  as  to  temperance:  what  institutions  have  you  which  are  adapted  topromote temperance? 'There are the common meals and gymnastic exercises.'

These are partly good and partly bad, and, as in medicine, what is good at one

time and for one person, is bad at another time and for another person. Now

although gymnastics and common meals do good, they are also a cause of

evil in civil troubles, and they appear to encourage unnatural love, as has

been shown at Miletus, in Boeotia, and at Thurii. And the Cretans are said to

have invented the tale of Zeus and Ganymede in order to justify their evil

practices by the example of the God who was their lawgiver. Leaving the

story, we may observe that all law has to do with pleasure and pain; these are

two fountains which are ever flowing in human nature, and he who drinks of

them when and as much as he ought, is happy, and he who indulges in them

to excess, is miserable. 'You may be right, but I still incline to think that the

Lacedaemonian lawgiver did well in forbidding pleasure, if I may judge from

the result. For there is no drunken revelry in Sparta, and any one found in a

state of intoxication is severely punished; he is not excused as an Athenian

would be at Athens on account of a festival. I myself have seen the Athenians

drunk at the Dionysia--and at our colony, Tarentum, on a similar occasion, I

have  beheld  the  whole  city  in  a  state  of  intoxication.'  I  admit  that  these

festivals should be properly regulated. Yet I might reply, 'Yes, Spartans, that

is not your vice; but look at home and remember the licentiousness of your

women.' And to all such accusations every one of us may reply in turn:--

'Wonder  not,  Stranger;  there  are  different  customs  in  different  countries.'

Now this may be a sufficient answer; but we are speaking about the wisdom

of lawgivers and not about the customs of men. To return to the question of

drinking: shall we have total abstinence, as you have, or hard drinking, like

the Scythians and Thracians, or moderate potations like the Persians? 'Give

us arms, and we send all these nations flying before us.' My good friend, be

modest; victories and defeats often arise from unknown causes, and afford no

proof of the goodness or badness of institutions. The stronger overcomes the

weaker, as the Athenians have overcome the Ceans, or the Syracusans the

Locrians, who are, perhaps, the best governed state in that part of the world.

People are apt to praise or censure practices without enquiring into the nature

of them. This is the way with drink: one person brings many witnesses, who

sing the praises of wine; another declares that sober men defeat drunkards in

battle; and he again is refuted in turn. I should like to conduct the argument

on some other method; for if you regard numbers, there are two cities on one

side, and ten thousand on the other. 'I am ready to pursue any method whichis likely to lead us to the truth.' Let me put the matter thus: Somebody praises

the useful qualities of a goat; another has seen goats running about wild in a

garden, and blames a goat or any other animal which happens to be without a

keeper. 'How absurd!' Would a pilot who is sea- sick be a good pilot? 'No.' Or

a general who is sick and drunk with fear and ignorant of war a good general?

'A general of old women he ought to be.' But can any one form an estimate of

any society, which is intended to have a ruler, and which he only sees in an

unruly and lawless state? 'No.' There is a convivial form of society--is there

not?  'Yes.'  And  has  this  convivial  society  ever  been  rightly  ordered?  Of

course you Spartans and Cretans have never seen anything of the kind, but I

have had wide experience, and made many enquiries about such societies,

and have hardly ever found anything right or good in them. 'We acknowledge

our want of experience, and desire to learn of you.' Will you admit that in all

societies there must be a leader? 'Yes.' And in time of war he must be a man

of courage and absolutely devoid of fear, if this be possible? 'Certainly.' But

we are talking now of a general who shall preside at meetings of friends--and

as these have a tendency to be uproarious, they ought above all others to have

a governor. 'Very good.' He should be a sober man and a man of the world,

who will keep, make, and increase the peace of the society; a drunkard in

charge  of  drunkards  would  be  singularly  fortunate  if  he  avoided  doing  a

serious  mischief.  'Indeed  he  would.'  Suppose  a  person  to  censure  such

meetings--he may be right, but also he may have known them only in their

disorderly state, under a drunken master of the feast; and a drunken general

or  pilot  cannot  save  his  army  or  his  ships.  'True;  but  although  I  see  the

advantage of an army having a good general, I do not equally see the good of

a feast being well managed.' If you mean to ask what good accrues to the

state from the right training of a single youth or a single chorus, I should

reply, 'Not much'; but if you ask what is the good of education in general, I

answer, that education makes good men, and that good men act nobly and

overcome  their  enemies  in  battle.  Victory  is  often  suicidal  to  the  victors,

because it creates forgetfulness of education, but education itself is never

suicidal. 'You imply that the regulation of convivial meetings is a part of

education; how will you prove this?' I will tell you. But first let me offer a

word of apology. We Athenians are always thought to be fond of talking,

whereas  the  Lacedaemonian  is  celebrated  for  brevity,  and  the  Cretan  is

considered to be sagacious and reserved. Now I fear that I may be charged

with spinning a long discourse out of slender materials. For drinking cannotbe rightly ordered without correct principles of music, and music runs up into

education generally, and to discuss all these matters may be tedious; if you

like, therefore, we will pass on to another part of our subject. 'Are you aware,

Athenian,  that  our  family  is  your  proxenus  at  Sparta,  and  that  from  my

boyhood  I  have  regarded  Athens  as  a  second  country,  and  having  often

fought your battles in my youth, I have become attached to you, and love the

sound of the Attic dialect? The saying is true, that the best Athenians are

more than ordinarily good, because they are good by nature; therefore, be

assured that I shall be glad to hear you talk as much as you please.' 'I, too,'

adds Cleinias, 'have a tie which binds me to you. You know that Epimenides,

the Cretan prophet, came and offered sacrifices in your city by the command

of an oracle ten years before the Persian war. He told the Athenians that the

Persian host would not come for ten years, and would go away again, having

suffered  more  harm  than  they  had  inflicted.  Now  Epimenides  was  of  my

family,  and  when  he  visited  Athens  he  entered  into  friendship  with  your

forefathers.' I see that you are willing to listen, and I have the will to speak, if

I  had  only  the  ability.  But,  first,  I  must  define  the  nature  and  power  of

education, and by this road we will travel on to the God Dionysus. The man

who is to be good at anything must have early training; --the future builder

must play at building, and the husbandman at digging; the soldier must learn

to ride, and the carpenter to measure and use the rule,--all the thoughts and

pleasures of children should bear on their after-profession.--Do you agree

with me? 'Certainly.' And we must remember further that we are speaking of

the education, not of a trainer, or of the captain of a ship, but of a perfect

citizen who knows how to rule and how to obey; and such an education aims

at virtue, and not at wealth or strength or mere cleverness. To the good man,

education is of all things the most precious, and is also in constant need of

renovation. 'We agree.' And we have before agreed that good men are those

who are able to control themselves, and bad men are those who are not. Let

me offer you an illustration which will assist our argument. Man is one; but

in one and the same man are two foolish counsellors who contend within

him--pleasure and pain, and of either he has expectations which we call hope

and fear; and he is able to reason about good and evil, and reason, when

affirmed by the state, becomes law. 'We cannot follow you.' Let me put the

matter in another way: Every creature is a puppet of the Gods--whether he is

a mere plaything or has any serious use we do not know; but this we do

know, that he is drawn different ways by cords and strings. There is a softgolden cord which draws him towards virtue--this is the law of the state; and

there are other cords made of iron and hard materials drawing him other

ways. The golden reasoning influence has nothing of the nature of force, and

therefore requires ministers in order to vanquish the other principles. This

explains the doctrine that cities and citizens both conquer and are conquered

by  themselves.  The  individual  follows  reason,  and  the  city  law,  which  is

embodied reason, either derived from the Gods or from the legislator. When

virtue and vice are thus distinguished, education will be better understood,

and in particular the relation of education to convivial intercourse. And now

let  us  set  wine  before  the  puppet.  You  admit  that  wine  stimulates  the

passions?  'Yes.'  And  does  wine  equally  stimulate  the  reasoning  faculties?

'No; it brings the soul back to a state of childhood.' In such a state a man has

the least control over himself, and is, therefore, worst. 'Very true.' Then how

can we believe that drinking should be encouraged? 'You seem to think that it

ought to be.' And I am ready to maintain my position. 'We should like to hear

you prove that a man ought to make a beast of himself.' You are speaking of

the  degradation  of  the  soul:  but  how  about  the  body?  Would  any  man

willingly degrade or weaken that? 'Certainly not.' And yet if he goes to a

doctor or a gymnastic master, does he not make himself ill in the hope of

getting well? for no one would like to be always taking medicine, or always

to  be  in  training.  'True.'  And  may  not  convivial  meetings  have  a  similar

remedial  use?  And  if  so,  are  they  not  to  be  preferred  to  other  modes  of

training because they are painless? 'But have they any such use?' Let us see:

Are there not two kinds of fear--fear of evil and fear of an evil reputation?

'There are.' The latter kind of fear is opposed both to the fear of pain and to

the love of pleasure. This is called by the legislator reverence, and is greatly

honoured by him and by every good man; whereas confidence, which is the

opposite quality, is the worst fault both of individuals and of states. This sort

of  fear  or  reverence  is  one  of  the  two  chief  causes  of  victory  in  war,

fearlessness of enemies being the other. 'True.' Then every one should be

both fearful and fearless? 'Yes.' The right sort of fear is infused into a man

when he comes face to face with shame, or cowardice, or the temptations of

pleasure, and has to conquer them. He must learn by many trials to win the

victory over himself, if he is ever to be made perfect. 'That is reasonable

enough.'  And  now,  suppose  that  the  Gods  had  given  mankind  a  drug,  of

which the effect was to exaggerate every sort of evil and danger, so that the

bravest man entirely lost his presence of mind and became a coward for atime:--would such a drug have any value? 'But is there such a drug?' No; but

suppose that there were; might not the legislator use such a mode of testing

courage and cowardice? 'To be sure.' The legislator would induce fear in

order  to  implant  fearlessness;  and  would  give  rewards  or  punishments  to

those  who  behaved  well  or  the  reverse,  under  the  influence  of  the  drug?

'Certainly.' And this mode of training, whether practised in the case of one or

many, whether in solitude or in the presence of a large company--if a man

have  sufficient  confidence  in  himself  to  drink  the  potion  amid  his  boon

companions,  leaving  off  in  time  and  not  taking  too  much,--would  be  an

equally good test of temperance? 'Very true.' Let us return to the lawgiver and

say to him, 'Well, lawgiver, no such fear- producing potion has been given by

God or invented by man, but there is a potion which will make men fearless.'

'You mean wine.' Yes; has not wine an effect the contrary of that which I was

just now describing,--first mellowing and humanizing a man, and then filling

him with confidence, making him ready to say or do anything? 'Certainly.'

Let us not forget that there are two qualities which should be cultivated in the

soul-- first, the greatest fearlessness, and, secondly, the greatest fear, which

are  both  parts  of  reverence.  Courage  and  fearlessness  are  trained  amid

dangers; but we have still to consider how fear is to be trained. We desire to

attain fearlessness and confidence without the insolence and boldness which

commonly attend them. For do not love, ignorance, avarice, wealth, beauty,

strength, while they stimulate courage, also madden and intoxicate the soul?

What  better  and  more  innocent  test  of  character  is  there  than  festive

intercourse? Would you make a bargain with a man in order to try whether he

is honest? Or would you ascertain whether he is licentious by putting your

wife or daughter into his hands? No one would deny that the test proposed is

fairer, speedier, and safer than any other. And such a test will be particularly

useful  in  the  political  science,  which  desires  to  know  human  natures  and

characters. 'Very true.'BOOK II


And are there any other uses of well-ordered potations? There are; but in

order to explain them, I must repeat what I mean by right education; which, if

I am not mistaken, depends on the due regulation of convivial intercourse. 'A

high assumption.' I believe that virtue and vice are originally present to the

mind of children in the form of pleasure and pain; reason and fixed principles

come later, and happy is he who acquires them even in declining years; for he

who possesses them is the perfect man. When pleasure and pain, and love and

hate,  are  rightly  implanted  in  the  yet  unconscious  soul,  and  after  the

attainment of reason are discovered to be in harmony with her, this harmony

of the soul is virtue, and the preparatory stage, anticipating reason, I call

education. But the finer sense of pleasure and pain is apt to be impaired in the

course  of  life;  and  therefore  the  Gods,  pitying  the  toils  and  sorrows  of

mortals, have allowed them to have holidays, and given them the Muses and

Apollo and Dionysus for leaders and playfellows. All young creatures love

motion and frolic, and utter sounds of delight; but man only is capable of

taking  pleasure  in  rhythmical  and  harmonious  movements.  With  these

education  begins;  and  the  uneducated  is  he  who  has  never  known  the

discipline of the chorus, and the educated is he who has. The chorus is partly

dance and partly song, and therefore the well-educated must sing and dance

well. But when we say, 'He sings and dances well,' we mean that he sings and

dances what is good. And if he thinks that to be good which is really good, he

will have a much higher music and harmony in him, and be a far greater

master of imitation in sound and gesture than he who is not of this opinion.

'True.' Then, if we know what is good and bad in song and dance, we shall

know  what  education  is?  'Very  true.'  Let  us  now  consider  the  beauty  of

figure, melody, song, and dance. Will the same figures or sounds be equally

well adapted to the manly and the cowardly when they are in trouble? 'How

can they be, when the very colours of their faces are different?' Figures and

melodies have a rhythm and harmony which are adapted to the expression of

different feelings (I may remark, by the way, that the term 'colour,' which is a

favourite word of music-masters, is not really applicable to music). And one

class of harmonies is akin to courage and all virtue, the other to cowardice

and  all  vice.  'We  agree.'  And  do  all  men  equally  like  all  dances?  'Farotherwise.' Do some figures, then, appear to be beautiful which are not? For

no one will admit that the forms of vice are more beautiful than the forms of

virtue, or that he prefers the first kind to the second. And yet most persons

say that the merit of music is to give pleasure. But this is impiety. There is,

however, a more plausible account of the matter given by others, who make

their likes or dislikes the criterion of excellence. Sometimes nature crosses

habit, or conversely, and then they say that such and such fashions or gestures

are  pleasant,  but  they  do  not  like  to  exhibit  them  before  men  of  sense,

although they enjoy them in private. 'Very true.' And do vicious measures and

strains  do  any  harm,  or  good  measures  any  good  to  the  lovers  of  them?

'Probably.' Say, rather 'Certainly': for the gentle indulgence which we often

show to vicious men inevitably makes us become like them. And what can be

worse than this? 'Nothing.' Then in a well-administered city, the poet will not

be allowed to make the songs of the people just as he pleases, or to train his

choruses without regard to virtue and vice. 'Certainly not.' And yet he may do

this anywhere except in Egypt; for there ages ago they discovered the great

truth which I am now asserting, that the young should be educated in forms

and strains of virtue. These they fixed and consecrated in their temples; and

no artist or musician is allowed to deviate from them. They are literally the

same which they were ten thousand years ago. And this practice of theirs

suggests the reflection that legislation about music is not an impossible thing.

But the particular enactments must be the work of God or of some God-

inspired man, as in Egypt their ancient chants are said to be the composition

of the goddess Isis. The melodies which have a natural truth and correctness

should be embodied in a law, and then the desire of novelty is not strong

enough to change the old fashions. Is not the origin of music as follows? We

rejoice when we think that we prosper, and we think that we prosper when we

rejoice, and at such times we cannot rest, but our young men dance dances

and sing songs, and our old men, who have lost the elasticity of youth, regale

themselves with the memory of the past, while they contemplate the life and

activity  of  the  young.  'Most  true.'  People  say  that  he  who  gives  us  most

pleasure at such festivals is to win the palm: are they right? 'Possibly.' Let us

not be hasty in deciding, but first imagine a festival at which the lord of the

festival, having assembled the citizens, makes a proclamation that he shall be

crowned victor who gives the most pleasure, from whatever source derived.

We  will  further  suppose  that  there  are  exhibitions  of  rhapsodists  and

musicians, tragic and comic poets, and even marionette-players--which of thepleasure-makers will win? Shall I answer for you?--the marionette-players

will please the children; youths will decide for comedy; young men, educated

women, and people in general will prefer tragedy; we old men are lovers of

Homer and Hesiod. Now which of them is right? If you and I are asked, we

shall certainly say that the old men's way of thinking ought to prevail. 'Very

true.' So far I agree with the many that the excellence of music is to be

measured by pleasure; but then the pleasure must be that of the good and

educated, or better still, of one supremely virtuous and educated man. The

true  judge  must  have  both  wisdom  and  courage.  For  he  must  lead  the

multitude and not be led by them, and must not weakly yield to the uproar of

the theatre, nor give false judgment out of that mouth which has just appealed

to the Gods. The ancient custom of Hellas, which still prevails in Italy and

Sicily, left the judgment to the spectators, but this custom has been the ruin of

the  poets,  who  seek  only  to  please  their  patrons,  and  has  degraded  the

audience by the representation of inferior characters. What is the inference?

The same which we have often drawn, that education is the training of the

young idea in what the law affirms and the elders approve. And as the soul of

a child is too young to be trained in earnest, a kind of education has been

invented which tempts him with plays and songs, as the sick are tempted by

pleasant meats and drinks. And the wise legislator will compel the poet to

express in his poems noble thoughts in fitting words and rhythms. 'But is this

the practice elsewhere than in Crete and Lacedaemon? In other states, as far

as I know, dances and music are constantly changed at the pleasure of the

hearers.' I am afraid that I misled you; not liking to be always finding fault

with mankind as they are, I described them as they ought to be. But let me

understand:  you  say  that  such  customs  exist  among  the  Cretans  and

Lacedaemonians,  and  that  the  rest  of  the  world  would  be  improved  by

adopting them? 'Much improved.' And you compel your poets to declare that

the righteous are happy, and that the wicked man, even if he be as rich as

Midas, is unhappy? Or, in the words of Tyrtaeus, 'I sing not, I care not about

him' who is a great warrior not having justice; if he be unjust, 'I would not

have him look calmly upon death or be swifter than the wind'; and may he be

deprived of every good--that is, of every true good. For even if he have the

goods which men regard, these are not really goods: first health; beauty next;

thirdly wealth; and there are others. A man may have every sense purged and

improved; he may be a tyrant, and do what he likes, and live for ever: but you

and I will maintain that all these things are goods to the just, but to the unjustthe greatest of evils, if life be immortal; not so great if he live for a short time

only. If a man had health and wealth, and power, and was insolent and unjust,

his life would still be miserable; he might be fair and rich, and do what he

liked, but he would live basely, and if basely evilly, and if evilly painfully.

'There  I  cannot  agree  with  you.'  Then  may  heaven  give  us  the  spirit  of

agreement, for I am as convinced of the truth of what I say as that Crete is an

island; and, if I were a lawgiver, I would exercise a censorship over the poets,

and  I  would  punish  them  if  they  said  that  the  wicked  are  happy,  or  that

injustice is profitable. And these are not the only matters in which I should

make my citizens talk in a different way to the world in general. If I asked

Zeus and Apollo, the divine legislators of Crete and Sparta,--'Are the just and

pleasant life the same or not the same'?--and they replied,--'Not the same';

and I asked again--'Which is the happier'? And they said'--'The pleasant life,'

this is an answer not fit for a God to utter, and therefore I ought rather to put

the same question to some legislator. And if he replies 'The pleasant,' then I

should say to him, 'O my father, did you not tell me that I should live as justly

as  possible'?  and  if  to  be  just  is  to  be  happy,  what  is  that  principle  of

happiness or good which is superior to pleasure? Is the approval of gods and

men  to  be  deemed  good  and  honourable,  but  unpleasant,  and  their

disapproval the reverse? Or is the neither doing nor suffering evil good and

honourable, although not pleasant? But you cannot make men like what is not

pleasant, and therefore you must make them believe that the just is pleasant.

The business of the legislator is to clear up this confusion. He will show that

the just and the unjust are identical with the pleasurable and the painful, from

the point of view of the just man, of the unjust the reverse. And which is the

truer judgment? Surely that of the better soul. For if not the truth, it is the best

and most moral of fictions; and the legislator who desires to propagate this

useful lie, may be encouraged by remarking that mankind have believed the

story of Cadmus and the dragon's teeth, and therefore he may be assured that

he can make them believe anything, and need only consider what fiction will

do the greatest good. That the happiest is also the holiest, this shall be our

strain, which shall be sung by all three choruses alike. First will enter the

choir of children, who will lift up their voices on high; and after them the

young men, who will pray the God Paean to be gracious to the youth, and to

testify to the truth of their words; then will come the chorus of elder men,

between thirty and sixty; and, lastly, there will be the old men, and they will

tell stories enforcing the same virtues, as with the voice of an oracle. 'Whomdo you mean by the third chorus?' You remember how I spoke at first of the

restless nature of young creatures, who jumped about and called out in a

disorderly manner, and I said that no other animal attained any perception of

rhythm; but that to us the Gods gave Apollo and the Muses and Dionysus to

be our playfellows. Of the two first choruses I have already spoken, and I

have now to speak of the third, or Dionysian chorus, which is composed of

those who are between thirty and sixty years old. 'Let us hear.' We are agreed

(are we not?) that men, women, and children should be always charming

themselves with strains of virtue, and that there should be a variety in the

strains, that they may not weary of them? Now the fairest and most useful of

strains will be uttered by the elder men, and therefore we cannot let them off.

But how can we make them sing? For a discreet elderly man is ashamed to

hear the sound of his own voice in private, and still more in public. The only

way is to give them drink; this will mellow the sourness of age. No one

should be allowed to taste wine until they are eighteen; from eighteen to

thirty they may take a little; but when they have reached forty years, they

may be initiated into the mystery of drinking. Thus they will become softer

and more impressible; and when a man's heart is warm within him, he will be

more ready to charm himself and others with song. And what songs shall he

sing? 'At Crete and Lacedaemon we only know choral songs.' Yes; that is

because your way of life is military. Your young men are like wild colts

feeding in a herd together; no one takes the individual colt and trains him

apart, and tries to give him the qualities of a statesman as well as of a soldier.

He who was thus trained would be a greater warrior than those of whom

Tyrtaeus speaks, for he would be courageous, and yet he would know that

courage  was  only  fourth  in  the  scale  of  virtue.  'Once  more,  I  must  say,

Stranger,  that  you  run  down  our  lawgivers.'  Not  intentionally,  my  good

friend, but whither the argument leads I follow; and I am trying to find some

style of poetry suitable for those who dislike the common sort. 'Very good.'

In all things which have a charm, either this charm is their good, or they have

some accompanying truth or advantage. For example, in eating and drinking

there is pleasure and also profit, that is to say, health; and in learning there is

a pleasure and also truth. There is a pleasure or charm, too, in the imitative

arts, as well as a law of proportion or equality; but the pleasure which they

afford,  however  innocent,  is  not  the  criterion  of  their  truth.  The  test  of

pleasure cannot be applied except to that which has no other good or evil, no

truth or falsehood. But that which has truth must be judged of by the standardof truth, and therefore imitation and proportion are to be judged of by their

truth alone. 'Certainly.' And as music is imitative, it is not to be judged by the

criterion of pleasure, and the Muse whom we seek is the muse not of pleasure

but of truth, for imitation has a truth. 'Doubtless.' And if so, the judge must

know what is being imitated before he decides on the quality of the imitation,

and he who does not know what is true will not know what is good. 'He will

not.' Will any one be able to imitate the human body, if he does not know the

number,  proportion,  colour,  or  figure  of  the  limbs?  'How  can  he?'  But

suppose we know some picture or figure to be an exact resemblance of a

man, should we not also require to know whether the picture is beautiful or

not? 'Quite right.' The judge of the imitation is required to know, therefore,

first the original, secondly the truth, and thirdly the merit of the execution?

'True.' Then let us not weary in the attempt to bring music to the standard of

the Muses and of truth. The Muses are not like human poets; they never spoil

or  mix  rhythms  or  scales,  or  mingle  instruments  and  human  voices,  or

confuse  the  manners  and  strains  of  men  and  women,  or  of  freemen  and

slaves, or of rational beings and brute animals. They do not practise the baser

sorts  of  musical  arts,  such  as  the  'matured  judgments,'  of  whom  Orpheus

speaks, would ridicule. But modern poets separate metre from music, and

melody and rhythm from words, and use the instrument alone without the

voice. The consequence is, that the meaning of the rhythm and of the time are

not understood. I am endeavouring to show how our fifty-year-old choristers

are to be trained, and what they are to avoid. The opinion of the multitude

about these matters is worthless; they who are only made to step in time by

sheer  force  cannot  be  critics  of  music.  'Impossible.'  Then  our  newly-

appointed minstrels must be trained in music sufficiently to understand the

nature of rhythms and systems; and they should select such as are suitable to

men of their age, and will enable them to give and receive innocent pleasure.

This is a knowledge which goes beyond that either of the poets or of their

auditors in general. For although the poet must understand rhythm and music,

he need not necessarily know whether the imitation is good or not, which was

the third point required in a judge; but our chorus of elders must know all

three, if they are to be the instructors of youth.


And now we will resume the original argument, which may be summed up as

follows:  A  convivial  meeting  is  apt  to  grow  tumultuous  as  the  drinking

proceeds; every man becomes light-headed, and fancies that he can rule thewhole world. 'Doubtless.' And did we not say that the souls of the drinkers,

when subdued by wine, are made softer and more malleable at the hand of the

legislator? the docility of childhood returns to them. At times however they

become too valiant and disorderly, drinking out of their turn, and interrupting

one another. And the business of the legislator is to infuse into them that

divine fear, which we call shame, in opposition to this disorderly boldness.

But  in  order  to  discipline  them  there  must  be  guardians  of  the  law  of

drinking, and sober generals who shall take charge of the private soldiers;

they are as necessary in drinking as in fighting, and he who disobeys these

Dionysiac commanders will be equally disgraced. 'Very good.' If a drinking

festival were well regulated, men would go away, not as they now do, greater

enemies, but better friends. Of the greatest gift of Dionysus I hardly like to

speak, lest I should be misunderstood. 'What is that?' According to tradition

Dionysus was driven mad by his stepmother Here, and in order to revenge

himself he inspired mankind with Bacchic madness. But these are stories

which I would rather not repeat. However I do acknowledge that all men are

born in an imperfect state, and are at first restless, irrational creatures: this, as

you  will  remember,  has  been  already  said  by  us.  'I  remember.'  And  that

Apollo and the Muses and Dionysus gave us harmony and rhythm? 'Very

true.' The other story implies that wine was given to punish us and make us

mad; but we contend that wine is a balm and a cure; a spring of modesty in

the  soul,  and  of  health  and  strength  in  the  body.  Again,  the  work  of  the

chorus  is  co-extensive  with  the  work  of  education;  rhythm  and  melody

answer to the voice, and the motions of the body correspond to all three, and

the sound enters in and educates the soul in virtue. 'Yes.' And the movement

which, when pursued as an amusement, is termed dancing, when studied with

a view to the improvement of the body, becomes gymnastic. Shall we now

proceed to speak of this? 'What Cretan or Lacedaemonian would approve of

your omitting gymnastic?' Your question implies assent; and you will easily

understand a subject which is familiar to you. Gymnastic is based on the

natural tendency of every animal to rapid motion; and man adds a sense of

rhythm, which is awakened by music; music and dancing together form the

choral art. But before proceeding I must add a crowning word about drinking.

Like other pleasures, it has a lawful use; but if a state or an individual is

inclined to drink at will, I cannot allow them. I would go further than Crete or

Lacedaemon and have the law of the Carthaginians, that no slave of either sex

should drink wine at all, and no soldier while he is on a campaign, and nomagistrate or officer while he is on duty, and that no one should drink by

daylight or on a bridal night. And there are so many other occasions on which

wine  ought  to  be  prohibited,  that  there  will  not  be  many  vines  grown  or

vineyards required in the state.BOOK III


If a man wants to know the origin of states and societies, he should behold

them from the point of view of time. Thousands of cities have come into

being and have passed away again in infinite ages, every one of them having

had endless forms of government; and if we can ascertain the cause of these

changes in states, that will probably explain their origin. What do you think

of  ancient  traditions  about  deluges  and  destructions  of  mankind,  and  the

preservation of a remnant? 'Every one believes in them.' Then let us suppose

the world to have been destroyed by a deluge. The survivors would be hill-

shepherds,  small  sparks  of  the  human  race,  dwelling  in  isolation,  and

unacquainted with the arts and vices of civilization. We may further suppose

that the cities on the plain and on the coast have been swept away, and that all

inventions, and every sort of knowledge, have perished. 'Why, if all things

were  as  they  now  are,  nothing  would  have  ever  been  invented.  All  our

famous discoveries have been made within the last thousand years, and many

of  them  are  but  of  yesterday.'  Yes,  Cleinias,  and  you  must  not  forget

Epimenides,  who  was  really  of  yesterday;  he  practised  the  lesson  of

moderation  and  abstinence  which  Hesiod  only  preached.  'True.'  After  the

great destruction we may imagine that the earth was a desert, in which there

were a herd or two of oxen and a few goats, hardly enough to support those

who tended them; while of politics and governments the survivors would

know nothing. And out of this state of things have arisen arts and laws, and a

great deal of virtue and a great deal of vice; little by little the world has come

to be what it is. At first, the few inhabitants would have had a natural fear of

descending into the plains; although they would want to have intercourse

with one another, they would have a difficulty in getting about, having lost

the  arts,  and  having  no  means  of  extracting  metals  from  the  earth,  or  of

felling timber; for even if they had saved any tools, these would soon have

been worn out, and they could get no more until the art of metallurgy had

been again revived. Faction and war would be extinguished among them, for

being solitary they would incline to be friendly; and having abundance of

pasture and plenty of milk and flesh, they would have nothing to quarrel

about. We may assume that they had also dwellings, clothes, pottery, for the

weaving and plastic arts do not require the use of metals. In those days theywere neither poor nor rich, and there was no insolence or injustice among

them; for they were of noble natures, and lived up to their principles, and

believed what they were told; knowing nothing of land or naval warfare, or of

legal practices or party conflicts, they were simpler and more temperate, and

also more just than the men of our day. 'Very true.' I am showing whence the

need of lawgivers arises, for in primitive ages they neither had nor wanted

them.  Men  lived  according  to  the  customs  of  their  fathers,  in  a  simple

manner,  under  a  patriarchal  government,  such  as  still  exists  both  among

Hellenes and barbarians, and is described in Homer as prevailing among the

Cyclopes:--


'They have no laws, and they dwell in rocks or on the tops of mountains, and

every  one  is  the  judge  of  his  wife  and  children,  and  they  do  not  trouble

themselves about one another.'


'That is a charming poet of yours, though I know little of him, for in Crete

foreign poets are not much read.' 'But he is well known in Sparta, though he

describes Ionian rather than Dorian manners, and he seems to take your view

of primitive society.' May we not suppose that government arose out of the

union of single families who survived the destruction, and were under the

rule of patriarchs, because they had originally descended from a single father

and  mother?  'That  is  very  probable.'  As  time  went  on,  men  increased  in

number, and tilled the ground, living in a common habitation, which they

protected by walls against wild beasts; but the several families retained the

laws and customs which they separately received from their first parents.

They would naturally like their own laws better than any others, and would

be  already  formed  by  them  when  they  met  in  a  common  society:  thus

legislation  imperceptibly  began  among  them.  For  in  the  next  stage  the

associated families would appoint plenipotentiaries, who would select and

present to the chiefs those of all their laws which they thought best. The

chiefs in turn would make a further selection, and would thus become the

lawgivers  of  the  state,  which  they  would  form  into  an  aristocracy  or  a

monarchy. 'Probably.' In the third stage various other forms of government

would arise. This state of society is described by Homer in speaking of the

foundation of Dardania, which, he says,


'was built at the foot of many-fountained Ida, for Ilium, the city of the plain,as yet was not.'


Here,  as  also  in  the  account  of  the  Cyclopes,  the  poet  by  some  divine

inspiration has attained truth. But to proceed with our tale. Ilium was built in

a wide plain, on a low hill, which was surrounded by streams descending

from Ida. This shows that many ages must have passed; for the men who

remembered the deluge would never have placed their city at the mercy of the

waters. When mankind began to multiply, many other cities were built in

similar situations. These cities carried on a ten years' war against Troy, by sea

as well as land, for men were ceasing to be afraid of the sea, and, in the

meantime, while the chiefs of the army were at Troy, their homes fell into

confusion.  The  youth  revolted  and  refused  to  receive  their  own  fathers;

deaths, murders, exiles ensued. Under the new name of Dorians, which they

received from their chief Dorieus, the exiles returned: the rest of the story is

part of the history of Sparta.


Thus, after digressing from the subject of laws into music and drinking, we

return to the settlement of Sparta, which in laws and institutions is the sister

of Crete. We have seen the rise of a first, second, and third state, during the

lapse of ages; and now we arrive at a fourth state, and out of the comparison

of all four we propose to gather the nature of laws and governments, and the

changes which may be desirable in them. 'If,' replies the Spartan, 'our new

discussion is likely to be as good as the last, I would think the longest day too

short for such an employment.'


Let us imagine the time when Lacedaemon, and Argos, and Messene were all

subject, Megillus, to your ancestors. Afterwards, they distributed the army

into  three  portions,  and  made  three  cities--Argos,  Messene,  Lacedaemon.

'Yes.' Temenus was the king of Argos, Cresphontes of Messene, Procles and

Eurysthenes ruled at Lacedaemon. 'Just so.' And they all swore to assist any

one of their number whose kingdom was subverted. 'Yes.' But did we not say

that kingdoms or governments can only be subverted by themselves? 'That is

true.' Yes, and the truth is now proved by facts: there were certain conditions

upon which the three kingdoms were to assist one another; the government

was to be mild and the people obedient, and the kings and people were to

unite in assisting either of the two others when they were wronged. This latter

condition was a great security. 'Clearly.' Such a provision is in opposition tothe common notion that the lawgiver should make only such laws as the

people like; but we say that he should rather be like a physician, prepared to

effect a cure even at the cost of considerable suffering. 'Very true.' The early

lawgivers had another great advantage--they were saved from the reproach

which attends a division of land and the abolition of debts. No one could

quarrel with the Dorians for dividing the territory, and they had no debts of

long standing. 'They had not.' Then what was the reason why their legislation

signally failed? For there were three kingdoms, two of them quickly lost their

original constitution. That is a question which we cannot refuse to answer, if

we mean to proceed with our old man's game of enquiring into laws and

institutions. And the Dorian institutions are more worthy of consideration

than any other, having been evidently intended to be a protection not only to

the  Peloponnese,  but  to  all  the  Hellenes  against  the  Barbarians.  For  the

capture of Troy by the Achaeans had given great offence to the Assyrians, of

whose  empire  it  then  formed  part,  and  they  were  likely  to  retaliate.

Accordingly the royal Heraclid brothers devised their military constitution,

which was organised on a far better plan than the old Trojan expedition; and

the Dorians themselves were far superior to the Achaeans, who had taken part

in  that  expedition,  and  had  been  conquered  by  them.  Such  a  scheme,

undertaken  by  men  who  had  shared  with  one  another  toils  and  dangers,

sanctioned  by  the  Delphian  oracle,  under  the  guidance  of  the  Heraclidae,

seemed to have a promise of permanence. 'Naturally.' Yet this has not proved

to be the case. Instead of the three being one, they have always been at war;

had they been united, in accordance with the original intention, they would

have been invincible.


And what caused their ruin? Did you ever observe that there are beautiful

things of which men often say, 'What wonders they would have effected if

rightly used?' and yet, after all, this may be a mistake. And so I say of the

Heraclidae and their expedition, which I may perhaps have been justified in

admiring,  but  which  nevertheless  suggests  to  me  the  general  reflection,--

'What wonders might not strength and military resources have accomplished,

if  the  possessor  had  only  known  how  to  use  them!'  For  consider:  if  the

generals of the army had only known how to arrange their forces, might they

not have given their subjects everlasting freedom, and the power of doing

what they would in all the world? 'Very true.' Suppose a person to express his

admiration of wealth or rank, does he not do so under the idea that by thehelp of these he can attain his desires? All men wish to obtain the control of

all things, and they are always praying for what they desire. 'Certainly.' And

we ask for our friends what they ask for themselves. 'Yes.' Dear is the son to

the father, and yet the son, if he is young and foolish, will often pray to obtain

what the father will pray that he may not obtain. 'True.' And when the father,

in the heat of youth or the dotage of age, makes some rash prayer, the son,

like Hippolytus, may have reason to pray that the word of his father may be

ineffectual. 'You mean that a man should pray to have right desires, before he

prays that his desires may be fulfilled; and that wisdom should be the first

object of our prayers?' Yes; and you will remember my saying that wisdom

should be the principal aim of the legislator; but you said that defence in war

came  first.  And  I  replied,  that  there  were  four  virtues,  whereas  you

acknowledged one only--courage, and not wisdom which is the guide of all

the rest. And I repeat--in jest if you like, but I am willing that you should

receive my words in earnest--that 'the prayer of a fool is full of danger.' I will

prove to you, if you will allow me, that the ruin of those states was not

caused by cowardice or ignorance in war, but by ignorance of human affairs.

'Pray proceed: our attention will show better than compliments that we prize

your words.' I maintain that ignorance is, and always has been, the ruin of

states; wherefore the legislator should seek to banish it from the state; and the

greatest ignorance is the love of what is known to be evil, and the hatred of

what is known to be good; this is the last and greatest conflict of pleasure and

reason in the soul. I say the greatest, because affecting the greater part of the

soul; for the passions are in the individual what the people are in a state. And

when they become opposed to reason or law, and instruction no longer avails-

-that is the last and greatest ignorance of states and men. 'I agree.' Let this,

then,  be  our  first  principle:--That  the  citizen  who  does  not  know  how  to

choose between good and evil must not have authority, although he possess

great mental gifts, and many accomplishments; for he is really a fool. On the

other hand, he who has this knowledge may be unable either to read or swim;

nevertheless, he shall be counted wise and permitted to rule. For how can

there be wisdom where there is no harmony?--the wise man is the saviour,

and he who is devoid of wisdom is the destroyer of states and households.

There are rulers and there are subjects in states. And the first claim to rule is

that of parents to rule over their children; the second, that of the noble to rule

over the ignoble; thirdly, the elder must govern the younger; in the fourth

place,  the  slave  must  obey  his  master;  fifthly,  there  is  the  power  of  thestronger, which the poet Pindar declares to be according to nature; sixthly,

there is the rule of the wiser, which is also according to nature, as I must

inform Pindar, if he does not know, and is the rule of law over obedient

subjects. 'Most true.' And there is a seventh kind of rule which the Gods

love,--in this the ruler is elected by lot.


Then, now, we playfully say to him who fancies that it is easy to make laws:-

-You see, legislator, the many and inconsistent claims to authority; here is a

spring of troubles which you must stay. And first of all you must help us to

consider how the kings of Argos and Messene in olden days destroyed their

famous empire--did they forget the saying of Hesiod, that 'the half is better

than the whole'? And do we suppose that the ignorance of this truth is less

fatal to kings than to peoples? 'Probably the evil is increased by their way of

life.' The kings of those days transgressed the laws and violated their oaths.

Their deeds were not in harmony with their words, and their folly, which

seemed  to  them  wisdom,  was  the  ruin  of  the  state.  And  how  could  the

legislator have prevented this evil?--the remedy is easy to see now, but was

not easy to foresee at the time. 'What is the remedy?' The institutions of

Sparta may teach you, Megillus. Wherever there is excess, whether the vessel

has too large a sail, or the body too much food, or the mind too much power,

there destruction is certain. And similarly, a man who possesses arbitrary

power is soon corrupted, and grows hateful to his dearest friends. In order to

guard against this evil, the God who watched over Sparta gave you two kings

instead of one, that they might balance one another; and further to lower the

pulse of your body politic, some human wisdom, mingled with divine power,

tempered the strength and self-sufficiency of youth with the moderation of

age in the institution of your senate. A third saviour bridled your rising and

swelling power by ephors, whom he assimilated to officers elected by lot: and

thus the kingly power was preserved, and became the preserver of all the rest.

Had the constitution been arranged by the original legislators, not even the

portion of Aristodemus would have been saved; for they had no political

experience, and imagined that a youthful spirit invested with power could be

restrained by oaths. Now that God has instructed us in the arts of legislation,

there is no merit in seeing all this, or in learning wisdom after the event. But

if the coming danger could have been foreseen, and the union preserved, then

no Persian or other enemy would have dared to attack Hellas; and indeed

there was not so much credit to us in defeating the enemy, as discredit in ourdisloyalty to one another. For of the three cities one only fought on behalf of

Hellas;  and  of  the  two  others,  Argos  refused  her  aid;  and  Messenia  was

actually at war with Sparta: and if the Lacedaemonians and Athenians had not

united, the Hellenes would have been absorbed in the Persian empire, and

dispersed among the barbarians. We make these reflections upon past and

present legislators because we desire to find out what other course could have

been followed. We were saying just now, that a state can only be free and

wise and harmonious when there is a balance of powers. There are many

words by which we express the aims of the legislator,--temperance, wisdom,

friendship; but we need not be disturbed by the variety of expression,--these

words have all the same meaning. 'I should like to know at what in your

opinion the legislator should aim.' Hear me, then. There are two mother forms

of states--one monarchy, and the other democracy: the Persians have the first

in the highest form, and the Athenians the second; and no government can be

well administered which does not include both. There was a time when both

the Persians and Athenians had more the character of a constitutional state

than they now have. In the days of Cyrus the Persians were freemen as well

as lords of others, and their soldiers were free and equal, and the kings used

and honoured all the talent which they could find, and so the nation waxed

great, because there was freedom and friendship and communion of soul. But

Cyrus, though a wise general, never troubled himself about the education of

his family. He was a soldier from his youth upward, and left his children who

were born in the purple to be educated by women, who humoured and spoilt

them. 'A rare education, truly!' Yes, such an education as princesses who had

recently grown rich might be expected to give them in a country where the

men were solely occupied with warlike pursuits. 'Likely enough.' Their father

had possessions of men and animals, and never considered that the race to

whom he was about to make them over had been educated in a very different

school,  not  like  the  Persian  shepherd,  who  was  well  able  to  take  care  of

himself and his own. He did not see that his children had been brought up in

the Median fashion, by women and eunuchs. The end was that one of the

sons of Cyrus slew the other, and lost the kingdom by his own folly. Observe,

again,  that  Darius,  who  restored  the  kingdom,  had  not  received  a  royal

education. He was one of the seven chiefs, and when he came to the throne he

divided  the  empire  into  seven  provinces;  and  he  made  equal  laws,  and

implanted  friendship  among  the  people.  Hence  his  subjects  were  greatly

attached  to  him,  and  cheerfully  helped  him  to  extend  his  empire.  Nextfollowed Xerxes, who had received the same royal education as Cambyses,

and met with a similar fate. The reflection naturally occurs to us--How could

Darius,  with  all  his  experience,  have  made  such  a  mistake!  The  ruin  of

Xerxes was not a mere accident, but the evil life which is generally led by the

sons  of  very  rich  and  royal  persons;  and  this  is  what  the  legislator  has

seriously  to  consider.  Justly  may  the  Lacedaemonians  be  praised  for  not

giving special honour to birth or wealth; for such advantages are not to be

highly esteemed without virtue, and not even virtue is to be esteemed unless

it be accompanied by temperance. 'Explain.' No one would like to live in the

same house with a courageous man who had no control over himself, nor

with a clever artist who was a rogue. Nor can justice and wisdom ever be

separated from temperance. But considering these qualities with reference to

the honour and dishonour which is to be assigned to them in states, would

you say, on the other hand, that temperance, if existing without the other

virtues in the soul, is worth anything or nothing? 'I cannot tell.' You have

answered well. It would be absurd to speak of temperance as belonging to the

class of honourable or of dishonourable qualities, because all other virtues in

their  various  classes  require  temperance  to  be  added  to  them;  having  the

addition,  they  are  honoured  not  in  proportion  to  that,  but  to  their  own

excellence.  And  ought  not  the  legislator  to  determine  these  classes?

'Certainly.' Suppose then that, without going into details, we make three great

classes of them. Most honourable are the goods of the soul, always assuming

temperance  as  a  condition  of  them;  secondly,  those  of  the  body;  thirdly,

external possessions. The legislator who puts them in another order is doing

an unholy and unpatriotic thing.


These remarks were suggested by the history of the Persian kings; and to

them I will now return. The ruin of their empire was caused by the loss of

freedom and the growth of despotism; all community of feeling disappeared.

Hatred  and  spoliation  took  the  place  of  friendship;  the  people  no  longer

fought heartily for their masters; the rulers, finding their myriads useless on

the field of battle, resorted to mercenaries as their only salvation, and were

thus  compelled  by  their  circumstances  to  proclaim  the  stupidest  of

falsehoods--that virtue is a trifle in comparison of money.


But enough of the Persians: a different lesson is taught by the Athenians,

whose example shows that a limited freedom is far better than an unlimited.Ancient  Athens,  at  the  time  of  the  Persian  invasion,  had  such  a  limited

freedom. The people were divided into four classes, according to the amount

of their property, and the universal love of order, as well as the fear of the

approaching host, made them obedient and willing citizens. For Darius had

sent  Datis  and  Artaphernes,  commanding  them  under  pain  of  death  to

subjugate the Eretrians and Athenians. A report, whether true or not, came to

Athens that all the Eretrians had been 'netted'; and the Athenians in terror sent

all  over  Hellas  for  assistance.  None  came  to  their  relief  except  the

Lacedaemonians, and they arrived a day too late, when the battle of Marathon

had been already fought. In process of time Xerxes came to the throne, and

the Athenians heard of nothing but the bridge over the Hellespont, and the

canal of Athos, and the innumerable host and fleet. They knew that these

were  intended  to  avenge  the  defeat  of  Marathon.  Their  case  seemed

desperate, for there was no Hellene likely to assist them by land, and at sea

they  were  attacked  by  more  than  a  thousand  vessels;--their  only  hope,

however slender, was in victory; so they relied upon themselves and upon the

Gods. Their common danger, and the influence of their ancient constitution,

greatly tended to promote harmony among them. Reverence and fear--that

fear which the coward never knows-- made them fight for their altars and

their homes, and saved them from being dispersed all over the world. 'Your

words, Athenian, are worthy of your country.' And you Megillus, who have

inherited the virtues of your ancestors, are worthy to hear them. Let me ask

you  to  take  the  moral  of  my  tale.  The  Persians  have  lost  their  liberty  in

absolute slavery, and we in absolute freedom. In ancient times the Athenian

people were not the masters, but the servants of the laws. 'Of what laws?' In

the first place, there were laws about music, and the music was of various

kinds: there was one kind which consisted of hymns, another of lamentations;

there was also the paean and the dithyramb, and the so-called 'laws' (nomoi)

or strains, which were played upon the harp. The regulation of such matters

was not left to the whistling and clapping of the crowd; there was silence

while the judges decided, and the boys, and the audience in general, were

kept in order by raps of a stick. But after a while there arose a new race of

poets,  men  of  genius  certainly,  however  careless  of  musical  truth  and

propriety, who made pleasure the only criterion of excellence. That was a test

which the spectators could apply for themselves; the whole audience, instead

of being mute, became vociferous, and a theatrocracy took the place of an

aristocracy. Could the judges have been free, there would have been no greatharm done; a musical democracy would have been well enough-- but conceit

has been our ruin. Everybody knows everything, and is ready to say anything;

the age of reverence is gone, and the age of irreverence and licentiousness has

succeeded. 'Most true.' And with this freedom comes disobedience to rulers,

parents,  elders,--in  the  latter  days  to  the  law  also;  the  end  returns  to  the

beginning, and the old Titanic nature reappears--men have no regard for the

Gods or for oaths; and the evils of the human race seem as if they would

never cease. Whither are we running away? Once more we must pull up the

argument with bit and curb, lest, as the proverb says, we should fall off our

ass. 'Good.' Our purpose in what we have been saying is to prove that the

legislator  ought  to  aim  at  securing  for  a  state  three  things--freedom,

friendship, wisdom. And we chose two states;--one was the type of freedom,

and the other of despotism; and we showed that when in a mean they attained

their highest perfection. In a similar spirit we spoke of the Dorian expedition,

and of the settlement on the hills and in the plains of Troy; and of music, and

the use of wine, and of all that preceded.


And  now,  has  our  discussion  been  of  any  use?  'Yes,  stranger;  for  by  a

singular coincidence the Cretans are about to send out a colony, of which the

settlement has been confided to the Cnosians. Ten commissioners, of whom I

am one, are to give laws to the colonists, and we may give any which we

please--Cretan or foreign. And therefore let us make a selection from what

has been said, and then proceed with the construction of the state.' Very good:

I am quite at your service. 'And I too,' says Megillus.BOOK IV


And now, what is this city? I do not want to know what is to be the name of

the place (for some accident,--a river or a local deity, will determine that), but

what the situation is, whether maritime or inland. 'The city will be about

eleven  miles  from  the  sea.'  Are  there  harbours?  'Excellent.'  And  is  the

surrounding country self-supporting? 'Almost.' Any neighbouring states? 'No;

and that is the reason for choosing the place, which has been deserted from

time immemorial.' And is there a fair proportion of hill and plain and wood?

'Like Crete in general, more hill than plain.' Then there is some hope for your

citizens; had the city been on the sea, and dependent for support on other

countries, no human power could have preserved you from corruption. Even

the  distance  of  eleven  miles  is  hardly  enough.  For  the  sea,  although  an

agreeable, is a dangerous companion, and a highway of strange morals and

manners as well as of commerce. But as the country is only moderately fertile

there will be no great export trade and no great returns of gold and silver,

which are the ruin of states. Is there timber for ship-building? 'There is no

pine,  nor  much  cypress;  and  very  little  stone-pine  or  plane  wood  for  the

interior of ships.' That is good. 'Why?' Because the city will not be able to

imitate the bad ways of her enemies. 'What is the bearing of that remark?' To

explain my meaning, I would ask you to remember what we said about the

Cretan laws, that they had an eye to war only; whereas I maintained that they

ought  to  have  included  all  virtue.  And  I  hope  that  you  in  your  turn  will

retaliate upon me if I am false to my own principle. For I consider that the

lawgiver should go straight to the mark of virtue and justice, and disregard

wealth  and  every  other  good  when  separated  from  virtue.  What  further  I

mean, when I speak of the imitation of enemies, I will illustrate by the story

of Minos, if our Cretan friend will allow me to mention it. Minos, who was a

great sea-king, imposed upon the Athenians a cruel tribute, for in those days

they were not a maritime power; they had no timber for ship-building, and

therefore they could not 'imitate their enemies'; and better far, as I maintain,

would it have been for them to have lost many times over the lives which

they devoted to the tribute than to have turned soldiers into sailors. Naval

warfare is not a very praiseworthy art; men should not be taught to leap on

shore, and then again to hurry back to their ships, or to find specious excusesfor throwing away their arms; bad customs ought not to be gilded with fine

words.  And  retreat  is  always  bad,  as  we  are  taught  in  Homer,  when  he

introduces Odysseus, setting forth to Agamemnon the danger of ships being

at hand when soldiers are disposed to fly. An army of lions trained in such

ways  would  fly  before  a  herd  of  deer.  Further,  a  city  which  owes  its

preservation to a crowd of pilots and oarsmen and other undeserving persons,

cannot bestow rewards of honour properly; and this is the ruin of states. 'Still,

in Crete we say that the battle of Salamis was the salvation of Hellas.' Such is

the prevailing opinion. But I and Megillus say that the battle of Marathon

began the deliverance, and that the battle of Plataea completed it; for these

battles  made  men  better,  whereas  the  battles  of  Salamis  and  Artemisium

made them no better. And we further affirm that mere existence is not the

great political good of individuals or states, but the continuance of the best

existence.  'Certainly.'  Let  us  then  endeavour  to  follow  this  principle  in

colonization and legislation.


And first, let me ask you who are to be the colonists? May any one come

from any city of Crete? For you would surely not send a general invitation to

all Hellas. Yet I observe that in Crete there are people who have come from

Argos  and  Aegina  and  other  places.  'Our  recruits  will  be  drawn  from  all

Crete,  and  of  other  Hellenes  we  should  prefer  Peloponnesians.  As  you

observe, there are Argives among the Cretans; moreover the Gortynians, who

are the best of all Cretans, have come from Gortys in Peloponnesus.'


Colonization is in some ways easier when the colony goes out in a swarm

from one country, owing to the pressure of population, or revolution, or war.

In this case there is the advantage that the new colonists have a community of

race,  language,  and  laws.  But  then  again,  they  are  less  obedient  to  the

legislator; and often they are anxious to keep the very laws and customs

which caused their ruin at home. A mixed multitude, on the other hand, is

more tractable, although there is a difficulty in making them pull together.

There is nothing, however, which perfects men's virtue more than legislation

and  colonization.  And  yet  I  have  a  word  to  say  which  may  seem  to  be

depreciatory of legislators. 'What is that?'


I was going to make the saddening reflection, that accidents of all sorts are

the  true  legislators,--wars  and  pestilences  and  famines  and  the  frequentrecurrence of bad seasons. The observer will be inclined to say that almost all

human  things  are  chance;  and  this  is  certainly  true  about  navigation  and

medicine, and the art of the general. But there is another thing which may

equally be said. 'What is it?' That God governs all things, and that chance and

opportunity co-operate with Him. And according to yet a third view, art has

part with them, for surely in a storm it is well to have a pilot? And the same is

true of legislation: even if circumstances are favourable, a skilful lawgiver is

still necessary. 'Most true.' All artists would pray for certain conditions under

which  to  exercise  their  art:  and  would  not  the  legislator  do  the  same?

'Certainly?' Come, legislator, let us say to him, and what are the conditions

which you would have? He will answer, Grant me a city which is ruled by a

tyrant;  and  let  the  tyrant  be  young,  mindful,  teachable,  courageous,

magnanimous; and let him have the inseparable condition of all virtue, which

is temperance--not prudence, but that natural temperance which is the gift of

children and animals, and is hardly reckoned among goods--with this he must

be endowed, if the state is to acquire the form most conducive to happiness in

the speediest manner. And I must add one other condition: the tyrant must be

fortunate, and his good fortune must consist in his having the co-operation of

a great legislator. When God has done all this, He has done the best which He

can for a state; not so well if He has given them two legislators instead of

one, and less and less well if He has given them a great many. An orderly

tyranny  most  easily  passes  into  the  perfect  state;  in  the  second  degree,  a

monarchy; in the third degree, a democracy; an oligarchy is worst of all. 'I do

not understand.' I suppose that you have never seen a city which is subject to

a tyranny? 'I have no desire to see one.' You would have seen what I am

describing, if you ever had. The tyrant can speedily change the manners of a

state, and affix the stamp of praise or blame on any action which he pleases;

for the citizens readily follow the example which he sets. There is no quicker

way of making changes; but there is a counterbalancing difficulty. It is hard

to find the divine love of temperance and justice existing in any powerful

form of government, whether in a monarchy or an oligarchy. In olden days

there were chiefs like Nestor, who was the most eloquent and temperate of

mankind, but there is no one his equal now. If such an one ever arises among

us, blessed will he be, and blessed they who listen to his words. For where

power and wisdom and temperance meet in one, there are the best laws and

constitutions. I am endeavouring to show you how easy under the conditions

supposed, and how difficult under any other, is the task of giving a city goodlaws.  'How  do  you  mean?'  Let  us  old  men  attempt  to  mould  in  words  a

constitution for your new state, as children make figures out of wax. 'Proceed.

What constitution shall we give--democracy, oligarchy, or aristocracy?' To

which of these classes, Megillus, do you refer your own state? 'The Spartan

constitution  seems  to  me  to  contain  all  these  elements.  Our  state  is  a

democracy and also an aristocracy; the power of the Ephors is tyrannical, and

we have an ancient monarchy.' 'Much the same,' adds Cleinias, 'may be said

of Cnosus.' The reason is that you have polities, but other states are mere

aggregations of men dwelling together, which are named after their several

ruling  powers;  whereas  a  state,  if  an  'ocracy'  at  all,  should  be  called  a

theocracy. A tale of old will explain my meaning. There is a tradition of a

golden age, in which all things were spontaneous and abundant. Cronos, then

lord of the world, knew that no mortal nature could endure the temptations of

power,  and  therefore  he  appointed  demons  or  demi-gods,  who  are  of  a

superior race, to have dominion over man, as man has dominion over the

animals. They took care of us with great ease and pleasure to themselves, and

no less to us; and the tradition says that only when God, and not man, is the

ruler, can the human race cease from ill. This was the manner of life which

prevailed under Cronos, and which we must strive to follow so far as the

principle of immortality still abides in us and we live according to law and

the  dictates  of  right  reason.  But  in  an  oligarchy  or  democracy,  when  the

governing principle is athirst for pleasure, the laws are trampled under foot,

and there is no possibility of salvation. Is it not often said that there are as

many forms of laws as there are governments, and that they have no concern

either with any one virtue or with all virtue, but are relative to the will of the

government? Which is as much as to say that 'might makes right.' 'What do

you mean?' I mean that governments enact their own laws, and that every

government makes self-preservation its principal aim. He who transgresses

the laws is regarded as an evil-doer, and punished accordingly. This was one

of the unjust principles of government which we mentioned when speaking of

the different claims to rule. We were agreed that parents should rule their

children, the elder the younger, the noble the ignoble. But there were also

several other principles, and among them Pindar's 'law of violence.' To whom

then is our state to be entrusted? For many a government is only a victorious

faction  which  has  a  monopoly  of  power,  and  refuses  any  share  to  the

conquered, lest when they get into office they should remember their wrongs.

Such governments are not polities, but parties; nor are any laws good whichare made in the interest of particular classes only, and not of the whole. And

in our state I mean to protest against making any man a ruler because he is

rich, or strong, or noble. But those who are obedient to the laws, and who win

the  victory  of  obedience,  shall  be  promoted  to  the  service  of  the  Gods

according to the degree of their obedience. When I call the ruler the servant

or minister of the law, this is not a mere paradox, but I mean to say that upon

a  willingness  to  obey  the  law  the  existence  of  the  state  depends.  'Truly,

Stranger, you have a keen vision.' Why, yes; every man when he is old has

his intellectual vision most keen. And now shall we call in our colonists and

make a speech to them? Friends, we say to them, God holds in His hand the

beginning, middle, and end of all things, and He moves in a straight line

towards the accomplishment of His will. Justice always bears Him company,

and  punishes  those  who  fall  short  of  His  laws.  He  who  would  be  happy

follows humbly in her train; but he who is lifted up with pride, or wealth, or

honour, or beauty, is soon deserted by God, and, being deserted, he lives in

confusion and disorder. To many he seems a great man; but in a short time he

comes to utter destruction. Wherefore, seeing these things, what ought we to

do or think? 'Every man ought to follow God.' What life, then, is pleasing to

God?  There  is  an  old  saying  that  'like  agrees  with  like,  measure  with

measure,' and God ought to be our measure in all things. The temperate man

is the friend of God because he is like Him, and the intemperate man is not

His friend, because he is not like Him. And the conclusion is, that the best of

all things for a good man is to pray and sacrifice to the Gods; but the bad man

has a polluted soul; and therefore his service is wasted upon the Gods, while

the good are accepted of them. I have told you the mark at which we ought to

aim. You will say, How, and with what weapons? In the first place we affirm,

that after the Olympian Gods and the Gods of the state, honour should be

given to the Gods below, and to them should be offered everything in even

numbers  and  of  the  second  choice;  the  auspicious  odd  numbers  and

everything of the first choice are reserved for the Gods above. Next demi-

gods or spirits must be honoured, and then heroes, and after them family

gods, who will be worshipped at their local seats according to law. Further,

the honour due to parents should not be forgotten; children owe all that they

have to them, and the debt must be repaid by kindness and attention in old

age.  No  unbecoming  word  must  be  uttered  before  them;  for  there  is  an

avenging angel who hears them when they are angry, and the child should

consider that the parent when he has been wronged has a right to be angry.After their death let them have a moderate funeral, such as their fathers have

had  before  them;  and  there  shall  be  an  annual  commemoration  of  them.

Living on this wise, we shall be accepted of the Gods, and shall pass our days

in good hope. The law will determine all our various duties towards relatives

and  friends  and  other  citizens,  and  the  whole  state  will  be  happy  and

prosperous. But if the legislator would persuade as well as command, he will

add prefaces to his laws which will predispose the citizens to virtue. Even a

little accomplished in the way of gaining the hearts of men is of great value.

For most men are in no particular haste to become good. As Hesiod says:


'Long and steep is the first half of the way to virtue, But when you have

reached the top the rest is easy.'


'Those are excellent words.' Yes; but may I tell you the effect which the

preceding  discourse  has  had  upon  me?  I  will  express  my  meaning  in  an

address to the lawgiver:--O lawgiver, if you know what we ought to do and

say, you can surely tell us;--you are not like the poet, who, as you were just

now saying, does not know the effect of his own words. And the poet may

reply, that when he sits down on the tripod of the Muses he is not in his right

mind, and that being a mere imitator he may be allowed to say all sorts of

opposite things, and cannot tell which of them is true. But this licence cannot

be allowed to the lawgiver. For example, there are three kinds of funerals;

one of them is excessive, another mean, a third moderate, and you say that

the last is right. Now if I had a rich wife, and she told me to bury her, and I

were to sing of her burial, I should praise the extravagant kind; a poor man

would commend a funeral of the meaner sort, and a man of moderate means

would prefer a moderate funeral. But you, as legislator, would have to say

exactly what you meant by 'moderate.' 'Very true.' And is our lawgiver to

have  no  preamble  or  interpretation  of  his  laws,  never  offering  a  word  of

advice to his subjects, after the manner of some doctors? For of doctors are

there not two kinds? The one gentle and the other rough, doctors who are

freemen  and  learn  themselves  and  teach  their  pupils  scientifically,  and

doctor's assistants who get their knowledge empirically by attending on their

masters? 'Of course there are.' And did you ever observe that the gentlemen

doctors practise upon freemen, and that slave doctors confine themselves to

slaves?  The  latter  go  about  the  country  or  wait  for  the  slaves  at  the

dispensaries. They hold no parley with their patients about their diseases orthe  remedies  of  them;  they  practise  by  the  rule  of  thumb,  and  give  their

decrees in the most arbitrary manner. When they have doctored one patient

they run off to another, whom they treat with equal assurance, their duty

being to relieve the master of the care of his sick slaves. But the other doctor,

who practises on freemen, proceeds in quite a different way. He takes counsel

with his patient and learns from him, and never does anything until he has

persuaded him of what he is doing. He trusts to influence rather than force.

Now is not the use of both methods far better than the use of either alone?

And both together may be advantageously employed by us in legislation.


We may illustrate our proposal by an example. The laws relating to marriage

naturally come first, and therefore we may begin with them. The simple law

would  be  as  follows:--A  man  shall  marry  between  the  ages  of  thirty  and

thirty-five; if he do not, he shall be fined or deprived of certain privileges.

The  double  law  would  add  the  reason  why:  Forasmuch  as  man  desires

immortality, which he attains by the procreation of children, no one should

deprive himself of his share in this good. He who obeys the law is blameless,

but he who disobeys must not be a gainer by his celibacy; and therefore he

shall pay a yearly fine, and shall not be allowed to receive honour from the

young. That is an example of what I call the double law, which may enable us

to  judge  how  far  the  addition  of  persuasion  to  threats  is  desirable.

'Lacedaemonians in general, Stranger, are in favour of brevity; in this case,

however, I prefer length. But Cleinias is the real lawgiver, and he ought to be

first consulted.' 'Thank you, Megillus.' Whether words are to be many or few,

is a foolish question:--the best and not the shortest forms are always to be

approved. And legislators have never thought of the advantages which they

might gain by using persuasion as well as force, but trust to force only. And I

have something else to say about the matter. Here have we been from early

dawn until noon, discoursing about laws, and all that we have been saying is

only the preamble of the laws which we are about to give. I tell you this,

because  I  want  you  to  observe  that  songs  and  strains  have  all  of  them

preludes, but that laws, though called by the same name (nomoi), have never

any prelude. Now I am disposed to give preludes to laws, dividing them into

two parts--one containing the despotic command, which I described under the

image of the slave doctor--the other the persuasive part, which I term the

preamble. The legislator should give preludes or preambles to his laws. 'That

shall be the way in my colony.' I am glad that you agree with me; this is amatter  which  it  is  important  to  remember.  A  preamble  is  not  always

necessary to a law: the lawgiver must determine when it is needed, as the

musician determines when there is to be a prelude to a song. 'Most true: and

now, having a preamble, let us recommence our discourse.' Enough has been

said of Gods and parents, and we may proceed to consider what relates to the

citizens--their souls, bodies, properties,--their occupations and amusements;

and so arrive at the nature of education.


The first word of the Laws somewhat abruptly introduces the thought which

is present to the mind of Plato throughout the work, namely, that Law is of

divine origin. In the words of a great English writer--'Her seat is the bosom of

God, her voice the harmony of the world.' Though the particular laws of

Sparta and Crete had a narrow and imperfect aim, this is not true of divine

laws, which are based upon the principles of human nature, and not framed to

meet the exigencies of the moment. They have their natural divisions, too,

answering to the kinds of virtue; very unlike the discordant enactments of an

Athenian assembly or of an English Parliament. Yet we may observe two

inconsistencies in Plato's treatment of the subject: first, a lesser, inasmuch as

he does not clearly distinguish the Cretan and Spartan laws, of which the

exclusive aim is war, from those other laws of Zeus and Apollo which are

said to be divine, and to comprehend all virtue. Secondly, we may retort on

him his own complaint against Sparta and Crete, that he has himself given us

a code of laws, which for the most part have a military character; and that we

cannot point to 'obvious examples of similar institutions which are concerned

with  pleasure;'  at  least  there  is  only  one  such,  that  which  relates  to  the

regulation of convivial intercourse. The military spirit which is condemned

by him in the beginning of the Laws, reappears in the seventh and eighth

books.


The mention of Minos the great lawgiver, and of Rhadamanthus the righteous

administrator  of  the  law,  suggests  the  two  divisions  of  the  laws  into

enactments and appointments of officers. The legislator and the judge stand

side  by  side,  and  their  functions  cannot  be  wholly  distinguished.  For  the

judge  is  in  some  sort  a  legislator,  at  any  rate  in  small  matters;  and  his

decisions growing into precedents, must determine the innumerable details

which arise out of the conflict of circumstances. These Plato proposes to

leave to a younger generation of legislators. The action of courts of law inmaking law seems to have escaped him, probably because the Athenian law-

courts were popular assemblies; and, except in a mythical form, he can hardly

be said to have had before his eyes the ideal of a judge. In reading the Laws

of Plato, or any other ancient writing about Laws, we should consider how

gradual  the  process  is  by  which  not  only  a  legal  system,  but  the

administration of a court of law, becomes perfected.


There are other subjects on which Plato breaks ground, as his manner is, early

in  the  work.  First,  he  gives  a  sketch  of  the  subject  of  laws;  they  are  to

comprehend the whole of human life, from infancy to age, and from birth to

death, although the proposed plan is far from being regularly executed in the

books  which  follow,  partly  owing  to  the  necessity  of  describing  the

constitution as well as the laws of his new colony. Secondly, he touches on

the  power  of  music,  which  may  exercise  so  great  an  influence  on  the

character of men for good or evil; he refers especially to the great offence--

which he mentions again, and which he had condemned in the Republic--of

varying the modes and rhythms, as well as to that of separating the words

from the music. Thirdly, he reprobates the prevalence of unnatural loves in

Sparta and Crete, which he attributes to the practice of syssitia and gymnastic

exercises, and considers to be almost inseparable from them. To this subject

he again returns in the eighth book. Fourthly, the virtues are affirmed to be

inseparable  from  one  another,  even  if  not  absolutely  one;  this,  too,  is  a

principle  which  he  reasserts  at  the  conclusion  of  the  work.  As  in  the

beginnings  of  Plato's  other  writings,  we  have  here  several  'notes'  struck,

which  form  the  preludes  of  longer  discussions,  although  the  hint  is  less

ingeniously  given,  and  the  promise  more  imperfectly  fulfilled  than  in  the

earlier dialogues.


The distinction between ethics and politics has not yet dawned upon Plato's

mind. To him, law is still floating in a region between the two. He would

have desired that all the acts and laws of a state should have regard to all

virtue.  But  he  did  not  see  that  politics  and  law  are  subject  to  their  own

conditions,  and  are  distinguished  from  ethics  by  natural  differences.  The

actions  of  which  politics  take  cognisance  are  necessarily  collective  or

representative; and law is limited to external acts which affect others as well

as the agents. Ethics, on the other hand, include the whole duty of man in

relation both to himself and others. But Plato has never reflected on thesedifferences. He fancies that the life of the state can be as easily fashioned as

that of the individual. He is favourable to a balance of power, but never

seems to have considered that power might be so balanced as to produce an

absolute immobility in the state. Nor is he alive to the evils of confounding

vice and crime; or to the necessity of governments abstaining from excessive

interference with their subjects.


Yet this confusion of ethics and politics has also a better and a truer side. If

unable to grasp some important distinctions, Plato is at any rate seeking to

elevate the lower to the higher; he does not pull down the principles of men

to  their  practice,  or  narrow  the  conception  of  the  state  to  the  immediate

necessities of politics. Political ideals of freedom and equality, of a divine

government which has been or will be in some other age or country, have

greatly tended to educate and ennoble the human race. And if not the first

author of such ideals (for they are as old as Hesiod), Plato has done more

than any other writer to impress them on the world. To those who censure his

idealism we may reply in his own words-- 'He is not the worse painter who

draws a perfectly beautiful figure, because no such figure of a man could ever

have existed' (Republic).


A  new  thought  about  education  suddenly  occurs  to  him,  and  for  a  time

exercises a sort of fascination over his mind, though in the later books of the

Laws it is forgotten or overlooked. As true courage is allied to temperance, so

there must be an education which shall train mankind to resist pleasure as

well as to endure pain. No one can be on his guard against that of which he

has no experience. The perfectly trained citizen should have been accustomed

to look his enemy in the face, and to measure his strength against her. This

education in pleasure is to be given, partly by festive intercourse, but chiefly

by the song and dance. Youth are to learn music and gymnastics; their elders

are to be trained and tested at drinking parties. According to the old proverb,

in vino veritas, they will then be open and visible to the world in their true

characters; and also they will be more amenable to the laws, and more easily

moulded by the hand of the legislator. The first reason is curious enough,

though not important; the second can hardly be thought deserving of much

attention.  Yet  if  Plato  means  to  say  that  society  is  one  of  the  principal

instruments of education in after-life, he has expressed in an obscure fashion

a principle which is true, and to his contemporaries was also new. That at abanquet  a  degree  of  moral  discipline  might  be  exercised  is  an  original

thought, but Plato has not yet learnt to express his meaning in an abstract

form. He is sensible that moderation is better than total abstinence, and that

asceticism is but a one-sided training. He makes the sagacious remark, that

'those  who  are  able  to  resist  pleasure  may  often  be  among  the  worst  of

mankind.' He is as much aware as any modern utilitarian that the love of

pleasure is the great motive of human action. This cannot be eradicated, and

must therefore be regulated,--the pleasure must be of the right sort. Such

reflections seem to be the real, though imperfectly expressed, groundwork of

the discussion. As in the juxtaposition of the Bacchic madness and the great

gift of Dionysus, or where he speaks of the different senses in which pleasure

is and is not the object of imitative art, or in the illustration of the failure of

the Dorian institutions from the prayer of Theseus, we have to gather his

meaning as well as we can from the connexion.


The  feeling  of  old  age  is  discernible  in  this  as  well  as  in  several  other

passages of the Laws. Plato has arrived at the time when men sit still and

look on at life; and he is willing to allow himself and others the few pleasures

which remain to them. Wine is to cheer them now that their limbs are old and

their blood runs cold. They are the best critics of dancing and music, but

cannot  be  induced  to  join  in  song  unless  they  have  been  enlivened  by

drinking. Youth has no need of the stimulus of wine, but age can only be

made  young  again  by  its  invigorating  influence.  Total  abstinence  for  the

young, moderate and increasing potations for the old, is Plato's principle. The

fire, of which there is too much in the one, has to be brought to the other.

Drunkenness, like madness, had a sacredness and mystery to the Greek; if, on

the one hand, as in the case of the Tarentines, it degraded a whole population,

it  was  also  a  mode  of  worshipping  the  god  Dionysus,  which  was  to  be

practised on certain occasions. Moreover, the intoxication produced by the

fruit of the vine was very different from the grosser forms of drunkenness

which prevail among some modern nations.


The  physician  in  modern  times  would  restrict  the  old  man's  use  of  wine

within narrow limits. He would tell us that you cannot restore strength by a

stimulus.  Wine  may  call  back  the  vital  powers  in  disease,  but  cannot

reinvigorate old age. In his maxims of health and longevity, though aware of

the importance of a simple diet, Plato has omitted to dwell on the perfect ruleof moderation. His commendation of wine is probably a passing fancy, and

may have arisen out of his own habits or tastes. If so, he is not the only

philosopher whose theory has been based upon his practice.


Plato's denial of wine to the young and his approval of it for their elders has

some points of view which may be illustrated by the temperance controversy

of our own times. Wine may be allowed to have a religious as well as a

festive use; it is commended both in the Old and New Testament; it has been

sung  of  by  nearly  all  poets;  and  it  may  be  truly  said  to  have  a  healing

influence both on body and mind. Yet it is also very liable to excess and

abuse, and for this reason is prohibited by Mahometans, as well as of late

years by many Christians, no less than by the ancient Spartans; and to sound

its praises seriously seems to partake of the nature of a paradox. But we may

rejoin with Plato that the abuse of a good thing does not take away the use of

it.  Total  abstinence,  as  we  often  say,  is  not  the  best  rule,  but  moderate

indulgence;  and  it  is  probably  true  that  a  temperate  use  of  wine  may

contribute some elements of character to social life which we can ill afford to

lose. It draws men out of their reserve; it helps them to forget themselves and

to appear as they by nature are when not on their guard, and therefore to

make them more human and greater friends to their fellow-men. It gives them

a new experience; it teaches them to combine self-control with a measure of

indulgence; it may sometimes restore to them the simplicity of childhood. We

entirely agree with Plato in forbidding the use of wine to the young; but when

we are of mature age there are occasions on which we derive refreshment and

strength from moderate potations. It is well to make abstinence the rule, but

the rule may sometimes admit of an exception. We are in a higher, as well as

in a lower sense, the better for the use of wine. The question runs up into

wider ones--What is the general effect of asceticism on human nature? and,

Must there not be a certain proportion between the aspirations of man and his

powers?--questions  which  have  been  often  discussed  both  by  ancient  and

modern  philosophers.  So  by  comparing  things  old  and  new  we  may

sometimes help to realize to ourselves the meaning of Plato in the altered

circumstances of our own life.


Like  the  importance  which  he  attaches  to  festive  entertainments,  his

depreciation of courage to the fourth place in the scale of virtue appears to be

somewhat rhetorical and exaggerated. But he is speaking of courage in thelower sense of the term, not as including loyalty or temperance. He does not

insist in this passage, as in the Protagoras, on the unity of the virtues; or, as in

the Laches, on the identity of wisdom and courage. But he says that they all

depend upon their leader mind, and that, out of the union of wisdom and

temperance with courage, springs justice. Elsewhere he is disposed to regard

temperance rather as a condition of all virtue than as a particular virtue. He

generalizes temperance, as in the Republic he generalizes justice. The nature

of the virtues is to run up into one another, and in many passages Plato makes

but a faint effort to distinguish them. He still quotes the poets, somewhat

enlarging, as his manner is, or playing with their meaning. The martial poet

Tyrtaeus, and the oligarch Theognis, furnish him with happy illustrations of

the two sorts of courage. The fear of fear, the division of goods into human

and divine, the acknowledgment that peace and reconciliation are better than

the appeal to the sword, the analysis of temperance into resistance of pleasure

as well as endurance of pain, the distinction between the education which is

suitable for a trade or profession, and for the whole of life, are important and

probably new ethical conceptions. Nor has Plato forgotten his old paradox

(Gorgias) that to be punished is better than to be unpunished, when he says,

that to the bad man death is the only mitigation of his evil. He is not less ideal

in many passages of the Laws than in the Gorgias or Republic. But his wings

are heavy, and he is unequal to any sustained flight.


There is more attempt at dramatic effect in the first book than in the later

parts of the work. The outburst of martial spirit in the Lacedaemonian, 'O best

of men'; the protest which the Cretan makes against the supposed insult to his

lawgiver; the cordial acknowledgment on the part of both of them that laws

should  not  be  discussed  publicly  by  those  who  live  under  their  rule;  the

difficulty which they alike experience in following the speculations of the

Athenian, are highly characteristic.


In the second book, Plato pursues further his notion of educating by a right

use of pleasure. He begins by conceiving an endless power of youthful life,

which is to be reduced to rule and measure by harmony and rhythm. Men

differ from the lower animals in that they are capable of musical discipline.

But music, like all art, must be truly imitative, and imitative of what is true

and good. Art and morality agree in rejecting pleasure as the criterion of

good.  True  art  is  inseparable  from  the  highest  and  most  ennobling  ideas.Plato only recognizes the identity of pleasure and good when the pleasure is

of  the  higher  kind.  He  is  the  enemy  of  'songs  without  words,'  which  he

supposes to have some confusing or enervating effect on the mind of the

hearer; and he is also opposed to the modern degeneracy of the drama, which

he would probably have illustrated, like Aristophanes, from Euripides and

Agathon. From this passage may be gathered a more perfect conception of art

than from any other of Plato's writings. He understands that art is at once

imitative and ideal, an exact representation of truth, and also a representation

of the highest truth. The same double view of art may be gathered from a

comparison of the third and tenth books of the Republic, but is here more

clearly and pointedly expressed.


We  are  inclined  to  suspect  that  both  here  and  in  the  Republic  Plato

exaggerates the influence really exercised by the song and the dance. But we

must remember also the susceptible nature of the Greek, and the perfection to

which these arts were carried by him. Further, the music had a sacred and

Pythagorean character; the dance too was part of a religious festival. And

only at such festivals the sexes mingled in public, and the youths passed

under the eyes of their elders.


At the beginning of the third book, Plato abruptly asks the question, What is

the origin of states? The answer is, Infinite time. We have already seen--in

the Theaetetus, where he supposes that in the course of ages every man has

had numberless progenitors, kings and slaves, Greeks and barbarians; and in

the Critias, where he says that nine thousand years have elapsed since the

island  of  Atlantis  fought  with  Athens--that  Plato  is  no  stranger  to  the

conception of long periods of time. He imagines human society to have been

interrupted by natural convulsions; and beginning from the last of these, he

traces the steps by which the family has grown into the state, and the original

scattered society, becoming more and more civilised, has finally passed into

military organizations like those of Crete and Sparta. His conception of the

origin of states is far truer in the Laws than in the Republic; but it must be

remembered that here he is giving an historical, there an ideal picture of the

growth of society.


Modern enquirers, like Plato, have found in infinite ages the explanation not

only of states, but of languages, men, animals, the world itself; like him, also,they have detected in later institutions the vestiges of a patriarchal state still

surviving. Thus far Plato speaks as 'the spectator of all time and all existence,'

who may be thought by some divine instinct to have guessed at truths which

were hereafter to be revealed. He is far above the vulgar notion that Hellas is

the  civilized  world  (Statesman),  or  that  civilization  only  began  when  the

Hellenes appeared on the scene. But he has no special knowledge of 'the days

before the flood'; and when he approaches more historical times, in preparing

the way for his own theory of mixed government, he argues partially and

erroneously. He is desirous of showing that unlimited power is ruinous to any

state, and hence he is led to attribute a tyrannical spirit to the first Dorian

kings. The decay of Argos and the destruction of Messene are adduced by

him  as  a  manifest  proof  of  their  failure;  and  Sparta,  he  thinks,  was  only

preserved  by  the  limitations  which  the  wisdom  of  successive  legislators

introduced into the government. But there is no more reason to suppose that

the Dorian rule of life which was followed at Sparta ever prevailed in Argos

and Messene, than to assume that Dorian institutions were framed to protect

the Greeks against the power of Assyria; or that the empire of Assyria was in

any way affected by the Trojan war; or that the return of the Heraclidae was

only the return of Achaean exiles, who received a new name from their leader

Dorieus. Such fancies were chiefly based, as far as they had any foundation,

on the use of analogy, which played a great part in the dawn of historical and

geographical research. Because there was a Persian empire which was the

natural enemy of the Greek, there must also have been an Assyrian empire,

which had a similar hostility; and not only the fable of the island of Atlantis,

but the Trojan war, in Plato's mind derived some features from the Persian

struggle. So Herodotus makes the Nile answer to the Ister, and the valley of

the Nile to the Red Sea. In the Republic, Plato is flying in the air regardless

of fact and possibility-- in the Laws, he is making history by analogy. In the

former, he appears to be like some modern philosophers, absolutely devoid of

historical sense; in the latter, he is on a level, not with Thucydides, or the

critical historians of Greece, but with Herodotus, or even with Ctesias.


The chief object of Plato in tracing the origin of society is to show the point

at which regular government superseded the patriarchical authority, and the

separate customs of different families were systematized by legislators, and

took the form of laws consented to by them all. According to Plato, the only

sound principle on which any government could be based was a mixture orbalance of power. The balance of power saved Sparta, when the two other

Heraclid states fell into disorder. Here is probably the first trace of a political

idea, which has exercised a vast influence both in ancient and modern times.

And  yet  we  might  fairly  ask,  a  little  parodying  the  language  of  Plato--O

legislator, is unanimity only 'the struggle for existence'; or is the balance of

powers in a state better than the harmony of them?


In the fourth book we approach the realities of politics, and Plato begins to

ascend to the height of his great argument. The reign of Cronos has passed

away, and various forms of government have succeeded, which are all based

on  self-interest  and  self-preservation.  Right  and  wrong,  instead  of  being

measured  by  the  will  of  God,  are  created  by  the  law  of  the  state.  The

strongest  assertions  are  made  of  the  purely  spiritual  nature  of  religion--

'Without  holiness  no  man  is  accepted  of  God';  and  of  the  duty  of  filial

obedience,--'Honour thy parents.' The legislator must teach these precepts as

well as command them. He is to be the educator as well as the lawgiver of

future ages, and his laws are themselves to form a part of the education of the

state. Unlike the poet, he must be definite and rational; he cannot be allowed

to say one thing at one time, and another thing at another--he must know

what he is about. And yet legislation has a poetical or rhetorical element, and

must find words which will wing their way to the hearts of men. Laws must

be  promulgated  before  they  are  put  in  execution,  and  mankind  must  be

reasoned with before they are punished. The legislator, when he promulgates

a particular law, will courteously entreat those who are willing to hear his

voice. Upon the rebellious only does the heavy blow descend. A sermon and

a law in one, blending the secular punishment with the religious sanction,

appeared to Plato a new idea which might have a great result in reforming the

world. The experiment had never been tried of reasoning with mankind; the

laws of others had never had any preambles, and Plato seems to have great

pleasure in contemplating his discovery.


In these quaint forms of thought and language, great principles of morals and

legislation are enunciated by him for the first time. They all go back to mind

and God, who holds the beginning, middle, and end of all things in His hand.

The adjustment of the divine and human elements in the world is conceived

in the spirit of modern popular philosophy, differing not much in the mode of

expression. At first sight the legislator appears to be impotent, for all thingsare the sport of chance. But we admit also that God governs all things, and

that chance and opportunity co-operate with Him (compare the saying, that

chance is the name of the unknown cause). Lastly, while we acknowledge

that God and chance govern mankind and provide the conditions of human

action, experience will not allow us to deny a place to art. We know that there

is  a  use  in  having  a  pilot,  though  the  storm  may  overwhelm  him;  and  a

legislator is required to provide for the happiness of a state, although he will

pray for favourable conditions under which he may exercise his art.BOOK V.


Hear now, all ye who heard the laws about Gods and ancestors: Of all human

possessions the soul is most divine, and most truly a man's own. For in every

man there are two parts--a better which rules, and an inferior which serves;

and the ruler is to be preferred to the servant. Wherefore I bid every one next

after the Gods to honour his own soul, and he can only honour her by making

her  better.  A  man  does  not  honour  his  soul  by  flattery,  or  gifts,  or  self-

indulgence, or conceit of knowledge, nor when he blames others for his own

errors; nor when he indulges in pleasure or refuses to bear pain; nor when he

thinks that life at any price is a good, because he fears the world below,

which, far from being an evil, may be the greatest good; nor when he prefers

beauty to virtue-- not reflecting that the soul, which came from heaven, is

more honourable than the body, which is earth-born; nor when he covets

dishonest gains, of which no amount is equal in value to virtue;--in a word,

when  he  counts  that  which  the  legislator  pronounces  evil  to  be  good,  he

degrades his soul, which is the divinest part of him. He does not consider that

the real punishment of evil-doing is to grow like evil men, and to shun the

conversation of the good: and that he who is joined to such men must do and

suffer what they by nature do and say to one another, which suffering is not

justice  but  retribution.  For  justice  is  noble,  but  retribution  is  only  the

companion of injustice. And whether a man escapes punishment or not, he is

equally miserable; for in the one case he is not cured, and in the other case he

perishes that the rest may be saved.


The glory of man is to follow the better and improve the inferior. And the

soul is that part of man which is most inclined to avoid the evil and dwell

with the good. Wherefore also the soul is second only to the Gods in honour,

and in the third place the body is to be esteemed, which often has a false

honour. For honour is not to be given to the fair or the strong, or the swift or

the tall, or to the healthy, any more than to their opposites, but to the mean

states of all these habits; and so of property and external goods. No man

should  heap  up  riches  that  he  may  leave  them  to  his  children.  The  best

condition  for  them  as  for  the  state  is  a  middle  one,  in  which  there  is  a

freedom without luxury. And the best inheritance of children is modesty. Butmodesty cannot be implanted by admonition only--the elders must set the

example. He who would train the young must first train himself.


He who honours his kindred and family may fairly expect that the Gods will

give  him  children.  He  who  would  have  friends  must  think  much  of  their

favours to him, and little of his to them. He who prefers to an Olympic, or

any other victory, to win the palm of obedience to the laws, serves best both

the  state  and  his  fellow-citizens.  Engagements  with  strangers  are  to  be

deemed most sacred, because the stranger, having neither kindred nor friends,

is immediately under the protection of Zeus, the God of strangers. A prudent

man will not sin against the stranger; and still more carefully will he avoid

sinning against the suppliant, which is an offence never passed over by the

Gods.


I will now speak of those particulars which are matters of praise and blame

only,  and  which,  although  not  enforced  by  the  law,  greatly  affect  the

disposition to obey the law. Truth has the first place among the gifts of Gods

and men, for truth begets trust; but he is not to be trusted who loves voluntary

falsehood,  and  he  who  loves  involuntary  falsehood  is  a  fool.  Neither  the

ignorant nor the untrustworthy man is happy; for they have no friends in life,

and die unlamented and untended. Good is he who does no injustice--better

who  prevents  others  from  doing  any--best  of  all  who  joins  the  rulers  in

punishing injustice. And this is true of goods and virtues in general; he who

has and communicates them to others is the man of men; he who would, if he

could, is second-best; he who has them and is jealous of imparting them to

others is to be blamed, but the good or virtue which he has is to be valued

still. Let every man contend in the race without envy; for the unenvious man

increases the strength of the city; himself foremost in the race, he harms no

one with calumny. Whereas the envious man is weak himself, and drives his

rivals to despair with his slanders, thus depriving the whole city of incentives

to  the  exercise  of  virtue,  and  tarnishing  her  glory.  Every  man  should  be

gentle,  but  also  passionate;  for  he  must  have  the  spirit  to  fight  against

incurable and malignant evil. But the evil which is remediable should be dealt

with more in sorrow than anger. He who is unjust is to be pitied in any case;

for  no  man  voluntarily  does  evil  or  allows  evil  to  exist  in  his  soul.  And

therefore  he  who  deals  with  the  curable  sort  must  be  long-suffering  and

forbearing; but the incurable shall have the vials of our wrath poured outupon him. The greatest of all evils is self-love, which is thought to be natural

and excusable, and is enforced as a duty, and yet is the cause of many errors.

The lover is blinded about the beloved, and prefers his own interests to truth

and right; but the truly great man seeks justice before all things. Self-love is

the source of that ignorant conceit of knowledge which is always doing and

never succeeding. Wherefore let every man avoid self-love, and follow the

guidance of those who are better than himself. There are lesser matters which

a man should recall to mind; for wisdom is like a stream, ever flowing in and

out, and recollection flows in when knowledge is failing. Let no man either

laugh or grieve overmuch; but let him control his feelings in the day of good-

or ill-fortune, believing that the Gods will diminish the evils and increase the

blessings of the righteous. These are thoughts which should ever occupy a

good  man's  mind;  he  should  remember  them  both  in  lighter  and  in  more

serious hours, and remind others of them.


So much of divine matters and the relation of man to God. But man is man,

and dependent on pleasure and pain; and therefore to acquire a true taste

respecting either is a great matter. And what is a true taste? This can only be

explained by a comparison of one life with another. Pleasure is an object of

desire, pain of avoidance; and the absence of pain is to be preferred to pain,

but not to pleasure. There are infinite kinds and degrees of both of them, and

we choose the life which has more pleasure and avoid that which has less; but

we do not choose that life in which the elements of pleasure are either feeble

or equally balanced with pain. All the lives which we desire are pleasant; the

choice of any others is due to inexperience.


Now  there  are  four  lives--the  temperate,  the  rational,  the  courageous,  the

healthful; and to these let us oppose four others--the intemperate, the foolish,

the cowardly, the diseased. The temperate life has gentle pains and pleasures

and placid desires, the intemperate life has violent delights, and still more

violent desires. And the pleasures of the temperate exceed the pains, while

the pains of the intemperate exceed the pleasures. But if this is true, none are

voluntarily intemperate, but all who lack temperance are either ignorant or

wanting in self-control: for men always choose the life which (as they think)

exceeds  in  pleasure.  The  wise,  the  healthful,  the  courageous  life  have  a

similar  advantage--they  also  exceed  their  opposites  in  pleasure.  And,

generally speaking, the life of virtue is far more pleasurable and honourable,fairer and happier far, than the life of vice. Let this be the preamble of our

laws; the strain will follow.


As in a web the warp is stronger than the woof, so should the rulers be

stronger than their half-educated subjects. Let us suppose, then, that in the

constitution of a state there are two parts, the appointment of the rulers, and

the laws which they have to administer. But, before going further, there are

some preliminary matters which have to be considered.


As of animals, so also of men, a selection must be made; the bad breed must

be got rid of, and the good retained. The legislator must purify them, and if

he be not a despot he will find this task to be a difficult one. The severer

kinds of purification are practised when great offenders are punished by death

or exile, but there is a milder process which is necessary when the poor show

a disposition to attack the property of the rich, for then the legislator will send

them off to another land, under the name of a colony. In our case, however,

we shall only need to purify the streams before they meet. This is often a

troublesome  business,  but  in  theory  we  may  suppose  the  operation

performed, and the desired purity attained. Evil men we will hinder from

coming, and receive the good as friends.


Like the old Heraclid colony, we are fortunate in escaping the abolition of

debts  and  the  distribution  of  land,  which  are  difficult  and  dangerous

questions. But, perhaps, now that we are speaking of the subject, we ought to

say how, if the danger existed, the legislator should try to avert it. He would

have recourse to prayers, and trust to the healing influence of time. He would

create a kindly spirit between creditors and debtors: those who have should

give  to  those  who  have  not,  and  poverty  should  be  held  to  be  rather  the

increase of a man's desires than the diminution of his property. Good-will is

the only safe and enduring foundation of the political society; and upon this

our city shall be built. The lawgiver, if he is wise, will not proceed with the

arrangement of the state until all disputes about property are settled. And for

him to introduce fresh grounds of quarrel would be madness.


Let us now proceed to the distribution of our state, and determine the size of

the  territory  and  the  number  of  the  allotments.  The  territory  should  be

sufficient to maintain the citizens in moderation, and the population shouldbe  numerous  enough  to  defend  themselves,  and  sometimes  to  aid  their

neighbours. We will fix the number of citizens at 5040, to which the number

of houses and portions of land shall correspond. Let the number be divided

into two parts and then into three; for it is very convenient for the purposes of

distribution,  and  is  capable  of  fifty-nine  divisions,  ten  of  which  proceed

without interval from one to ten. Here are numbers enough for war and peace,

and for all contracts and dealings. These properties of numbers are true, and

should be ascertained with a view to use.


In carrying out the distribution of the land, a prudent legislator will be careful

to respect any provision for religious worship which has been sanctioned by

ancient  tradition  or  by  the  oracles  of  Delphi,  Dodona,  or  Ammon.  All

sacrifices,  and  altars,  and  temples,  whatever  may  be  their  origin,  should

remain as they are. Every division should have a patron God or hero; to these

a  portion  of  the  domain  should  be  appropriated,  and  at  their  temples  the

inhabitants of the districts should meet together from time to time, for the

sake  of  mutual  help  and  friendship.  All  the  citizens  of  a  state  should  be

known  to  one  another;  for  where  men  are  in  the  dark  about  each  other's

characters, there can be no justice or right administration. Every man should

be true and single-minded, and should not allow himself to be deceived by

others.


And now the game opens, and we begin to move the pieces. At first sight, our

constitution may appear singular and ill-adapted to a legislator who has not

despotic power; but on second thoughts will be deemed to be, if not the very

best,  the  second  best.  For  there  are  three  forms  of  government,  a  first,  a

second, and a third best, out of which Cleinias has now to choose. The first

and  highest  form  is  that  in  which  friends  have  all  things  in  common,

including  wives  and  property,--in  which  they  have  common  fears,  hopes,

desires, and do not even call their eyes or their hands their own. This is the

ideal state; than which there never can be a truer or better--a state, whether

inhabited by Gods or sons of Gods, which will make the dwellers therein

blessed. Here is the pattern on which we must ever fix our eyes; but we are

now concerned with another, which comes next to it, and we will afterwards

proceed to a third.


Inasmuch as our citizens are not fitted either by nature or education to receivethe saying, Friends have all things in common, let them retain their houses

and private property, but use them in the service of their country, who is their

God and parent, and of the Gods and demigods of the land. Their first care

should be to preserve the number of their lots. This may be secured in the

following manner: when the possessor of a lot dies, he shall leave his lot to

his best-beloved child, who will become the heir of all duties and interests,

and will minister to the Gods and to the family, to the living and to the dead.

Of the remaining children, the females must be given in marriage according

to the law to be hereafter enacted; the males may be assigned to citizens who

have no children of their own. How to equalize families and allotments will

be one of the chief cares of the guardians of the laws. When parents have too

many children they may give to those who have none, or couples may abstain

from having children, or, if there is a want of offspring, special care may be

taken to obtain them; or if the number of citizens becomes excessive, we may

send away the surplus to found a colony. If, on the other hand, a war or

plague  diminishes  the  number  of  inhabitants,  new  citizens  must  be

introduced; and these ought not, if possible, to be men of low birth or inferior

training; but even God, it is said, cannot always fight against necessity.


Wherefore we will thus address our citizens:--Good friends, honour order and

equality,  and  above  all  the  number  5040.  Secondly,  respect  the  original

division of the lots, which must not be infringed by buying and selling, for

the law says that the land which a man has is sacred and is given to him by

God. And priests and priestesses will offer frequent sacrifices and pray that

he who alienates either house or lot may receive the punishment which he

deserves, and their prayers shall be inscribed on tablets of cypress-wood for

the instruction of posterity. The guardians will keep a vigilant watch over the

citizens, and they will punish those who disobey God and the law.


To appreciate the benefit of such an institution a man requires to be well

educated; for he certainly will not make a fortune in our state, in which all

illiberal occupations are forbidden to freemen. The law also provides that no

private person shall have gold or silver, except a little coin for daily use,

which will not pass current in other countries. The state must also possess a

common  Hellenic  currency,  but  this  is  only  to  be  used  in  defraying  the

expenses  of  expeditions,  or  of  embassies,  or  while  a  man  is  on  foreign

travels; but in the latter case he must deliver up what is over, when he comesback, to the treasury in return for an equal amount of local currency, on pain

of  losing  the  sum  in  question;  and  he  who  does  not  inform  against  an

offender is to be mulcted in a like sum. No money is to be given or taken as a

dowry, or to be lent on interest. The law will not protect a man in recovering

either interest or principal. All these regulations imply that the aim of the

legislator is not to make the city as rich or as mighty as possible, but the best

and happiest. Now men can hardly be at the same time very virtuous and very

rich. And why? Because he who makes twice as much and saves twice as

much as he ought, receiving where he ought not and not spending where he

ought, will be at least twice as rich as he who makes money where he ought,

and  spends  where  he  ought.  On  the  other  hand,  an  utterly  bad  man  is

generally profligate and poor, while he who acquires honestly, and spends

what he acquires on noble objects, can hardly be very rich. A very rich man is

therefore not a good man, and therefore not a happy one. But the object of

our laws is to make the citizens as friendly and happy as possible, which they

cannot be if they are always at law and injuring each other in the pursuit of

gain. And therefore we say that there is to be no silver or gold in the state, nor

usury, nor the rearing of the meaner kinds of live-stock, but only agriculture,

and only so much of this as will not lead men to neglect that for the sake of

which  money  is  made,  first  the  soul  and  afterwards  the  body;  neither  of

which are good for much without music and gymnastic. Money is to be held

in honour last or third; the highest interests being those of the soul, and in the

second class are to be ranked those of the body. This is the true order of

legislation, which would be inverted by placing health before temperance,

and wealth before health.


It  might  be  well  if  every  man  could  come  to  the  colony  having  equal

property; but equality is impossible, and therefore we must avoid causes of

offence by having property valued and by equalizing taxation. To this end, let

us make four classes in which the citizens may be placed according to the

measure  of  their  original  property,  and  the  changes  of  their  fortune.  The

greatest of evils is revolution; and this, as the law will say, is caused by

extremes of poverty or wealth. The limit of poverty shall be the lot, which

must not be diminished, and may be increased fivefold, but not more. He who

exceeds the limit must give up the excess to the state; but if he does not, and

is informed against, the surplus shall be divided between the informer and the

Gods, and he shall pay a sum equal to the surplus out Of his own property.All property other than the lot must be inscribed in a register, so that any

disputes which arise may be easily determined.


The city shall be placed in a suitable situation, as nearly as possible in the

centre of the country, and shall be divided into twelve wards. First, we will

erect  an  acropolis,  encircled  by  a  wall,  within  which  shall  be  placed  the

temples of Hestia, and Zeus, and Athene. From this shall be drawn lines

dividing the city, and also the country, into twelve sections, and the country

shall be subdivided into 5040 lots. Each lot shall contain two parts, one at a

distance,  the  other  near  the  city;  and  the  distance  of  one  part  shall  be

compensated by the nearness of the other, the badness and goodness by the

greater or less size. Twelve lots will be assigned to twelve Gods, and they

will give their names to the tribes. The divisions of the city shall correspond

to those of the country; and every man shall have two habitations, one near

the centre of the country, the other at the extremity.


The objection will naturally arise, that all the advantages of which we have

been speaking will never concur. The citizens will not tolerate a settlement in

which they are deprived of gold and silver, and have the number of their

families regulated, and the sites of their houses fixed by law. It will be said

that our city is a mere image of wax. And the legislator will answer: 'I know

it, but I maintain that we ought to set forth an ideal which is as perfect as

possible. If difficulties arise in the execution of the plan, we must avoid them

and  carry  out  the  remainder.  But  the  legislator  must  first  be  allowed  to

complete his idea without interruption.'


The number twelve, which we have chosen for the number of division, must

run through all parts of the state,--phratries, villages, ranks of soldiers, coins,

and measures wet and dry, which are all to be made commensurable with one

another. There is no meanness in requiring that the smallest vessels should

have a common measure; for the divisions of number are useful in measuring

height and depth, as well as sounds and motions, upwards or downwards, or

round and round. The legislator should impress on his citizens the value of

arithmetic. No instrument of education has so much power; nothing more

tends  to  sharpen  and  inspire  the  dull  intellect.  But  the  legislator  must  be

careful to instil a noble and generous spirit into the students, or they will tend

to become cunning rather than wise. This may be proved by the example ofthe  Egyptians  and  Phoenicians,  who,  notwithstanding  their  knowledge  of

arithmetic,  are  degraded  in  their  general  character;  whether  this  defect  in

them is due to some natural cause or to a bad legislator. For it is clear that

there are great differences in the power of regions to produce good men: heat

and cold, and water and food, have great effects both on body and soul; and

those spots are peculiarly fortunate in which the air is holy, and the Gods are

pleased to dwell. To all this the legislator must attend, so far as in him lies.BOOK VI


And now we are about to consider (1) the appointment of magistrates; (2) the

laws which they will have to administer must be determined. I may observe

by the way that laws, however good, are useless and even injurious unless the

magistrates are capable of executing them. And therefore (1) the intended

rulers of our imaginary state should be tested from their youth upwards until

the time of their election; and (2) those who are to elect them ought to be

trained in habits of law, that they may form a right judgment of good and bad

men. But uneducated colonists, who are unacquainted with each other, will

not be likely to choose well. What, then, shall we do? I will tell you: The

colony will have to be intrusted to the ten commissioners, of whom you are

one, and I will help you and them, which is my reason for inventing this

romance.  And  I  cannot  bear  that  the  tale  should  go  wandering  about  the

world without a head,--it will be such an ugly monster. 'Very good.' Yes; and

I will be as good as my word, if God be gracious and old age permit. But let

us not forget what a courageously mad creation this our city is. 'What makes

you say so?' Why, surely our courage is shown in imagining that the new

colonists will quietly receive our laws? For no man likes to receive laws

when they are first imposed: could we only wait until those who had been

educated under them were grown up, and of an age to vote in the public

elections,  there  would  be  far  greater  reason  to  expect  permanence  in  our

institutions. 'Very true.' The Cnosian founders should take the utmost pains in

the matter of the colony, and in the election of the higher officers, particularly

of the guardians of the law. The latter should be appointed in this way: The

Cnosians, who take the lead in the colony, together with the colonists, will

choose  thirty-seven  persons,  of  whom  nineteen  will  be  colonists,  and  the

remaining eighteen Cnosians--you must be one of the eighteen yourself, and

become a citizen of the new state. 'Why do not you and Megillus join us?'

Athens is proud, and Sparta too; and they are both a long way off. But let me

proceed  with  my  scheme.  When  the  state  is  permanently  established,  the

mode of election will be as follows: All who are serving, or have served, in

the army will be electors; and the election will be held in the most sacred of

the temples. The voter will place on the altar a tablet, inscribing thereupon

the name of the candidate whom he prefers, and of his father, tribe, and ward,writing at the side of them his own name in like manner; and he may take

away any tablet which does not appear written to his mind, and place it in the

Agora for thirty days. The 300 who obtain the greatest number of votes will

be publicly announced, and out of them there will be a second election of

100;  and  out  of  the  100  a  third  and  final  election  of  thirty-  seven,

accompanied by the solemnity of the electors passing through victims. But

then who is to arrange all this? There is a common saying, that the beginning

is half the whole; and I should say a good deal more than half. 'Most true.'

The only way of making a beginning is from the parent city; and though in

after ages the tie may be broken, and quarrels may arise between them, yet in

early days the child naturally looks to the mother for care and education.

And, as I said before, the Cnosians ought to take an interest in the colony,

and select 100 elders of their own citizens, to whom shall be added 100 of the

colonists, to arrange and supervise the first elections and scrutinies; and when

the colony has been started, the Cnosians may return home and leave the

colonists to themselves.


The thirty-seven magistrates who have been elected in the manner described,

shall  have  the  following  duties:  first,  they  shall  be  guardians  of  the  law;

secondly, of the registers of property in the four classes-- not including the

one, two, three, four minae, which are allowed as a surplus. He who is found

to possess what is not entered in the registers, in addition to the confiscation

of such property shall be proceeded against by law, and if he be cast he shall

lose his share in the public property and in distributions of money; and his

sentence  shall  be  inscribed  in  some  public  place.  The  guardians  are  to

continue in office twenty years only, and to commence holding office at fifty

years, or if elected at sixty they are not to remain after seventy.


Generals have now to be elected, and commanders of horse and brigadiers of

foot. The generals shall be natives of the city, proposed by the guardians of

the law, and elected by those who are or have been of the age for military

service.  Any  one  may  challenge  the  person  nominated  and  start  another

candidate, whom he affirms upon oath to be better qualified. The three who

obtain the greatest number of votes shall be elected. The generals thus elected

shall propose the taxiarchs or brigadiers, and the challenge may be made, and

the  voting  shall  take  place,  in  the  same  manner  as  before.  The  elective

assembly will be presided over in the first instance, and until the prytanes andcouncil come into being, by the guardians of the law in some holy place; and

they shall divide the citizens into three divisions,--hoplites, cavalry, and the

rest of the army--placing each of them by itself. All are to vote for generals

and cavalry officers. The brigadiers are to be voted for only by the hoplites.

Next, the cavalry are to choose phylarchs for the generals; but captains of

archers  and  other  irregular  troops  are  to  be  appointed  by  the  generals

themselves. The cavalry-officers shall be proposed and voted upon by the

same  persons  who  vote  for  the  generals.  The  two  who  have  the  greatest

number of votes shall be leaders of all the horse. Disputes about the voting

may be raised once or twice, but, if a third time, the presiding officers shall

decide.


The council shall consist of 360, who may be conveniently divided into four

sections, making ninety councillors of each class. In the first place, all the

citizens  shall  select  candidates  from  the  first  class;  and  they  shall  be

compelled to vote under pain of a fine. This shall be the business of the first

day. On the second day a similar selection shall be made from the second

class  under  the  same  conditions.  On  the  third  day,  candidates  shall  be

selected from the third class; but the compulsion to vote shall only extend to

the voters of the first three classes. On the fourth day, members of the council

shall be selected from the fourth class; they shall be selected by all, but the

compulsion to vote shall only extend to the second class, who, if they do not

vote, shall pay a fine of triple the amount which was exacted at first, and to

the first class, who shall pay a quadruple fine. On the fifth day, the names

shall be exhibited, and out of them shall be chosen by all the citizens 180 of

each class: these are severally to be reduced by lot to ninety, and 90 x 4 will

form the council for the year.


The mode of election which has been described is a mean between monarchy

and democracy, and such a mean should ever be observed in the state. For

servants  and  masters  cannot  be  friends,  and,  although  equality  makes

friendship, we must remember that there are two sorts of equality. One of

them is the rule of number and measure; but there is also a higher equality,

which is the judgment of Zeus. Of this he grants but little to mortal men; yet

that little is the source of the greatest good to cities and individuals. It is

proportioned to the nature of each man; it gives more to the better and less to

the inferior, and is the true political justice; to this we in our state desire tolook, as every legislator should, not to the interests either of tyrants or mobs.

But justice cannot always be strictly enforced, and then equity and mercy

have to be substituted: and for a similar reason, when true justice will not be

endured, we must have recourse to the rougher justice of the lot, which God

must be entreated to guide.


These are the principal means of preserving the state, but perpetual care will

also be required. When a ship is sailing on the sea, vigilance must not be

relaxed night or day; and the vessel of state is tossing in a political sea, and

therefore watch must continually succeed watch, and rulers must join hands

with  rulers.  A  small  body  will  best  perform  this  duty,  and  therefore  the

greater part of the 360 senators may be permitted to go and manage their own

affairs,  but  a  twelfth  portion  must  be  set  aside  in  each  month  for  the

administration of the state. Their business will be to receive information and

answer  embassies;  also  they  must  endeavour  to  prevent  or  heal  internal

disorders; and with this object they must have the control of all assemblies of

the citizens.


Besides the council, there must be wardens of the city and of the agora, who

will superintend houses, ways, harbours, markets, and fountains, in the city

and the suburbs, and prevent any injury being done to them by man or beast.

The temples, also, will require priests and priestesses. Those who hold the

priestly office by hereditary tenure shall not be disturbed; but as there will

probably be few or none such in a new colony, priests and priestesses shall be

appointed for the Gods who have no servants. Some of these officers shall be

elected by vote, some by lot; and all classes shall mingle in a friendly manner

at the elections. The appointment of priests should be left to God,--that is, to

the lot; but the person elected must prove that he is himself sound in body

and of legitimate birth, and that his family has been free from homicide or

any other stain of impurity. Priests and priestesses are to be not less than sixty

years of age, and shall hold office for a year only. The laws which are to

regulate matters of religion shall be brought from Delphi, and interpreters

appointed  to  superintend  their  execution.  These  shall  be  elected  in  the

following manner:--The twelve tribes shall be formed into three bodies of

four, each of which shall select four candidates, and this shall be done three

times: of each twelve thus selected the three who receive the largest number

of votes, nine in all, after undergoing a scrutiny shall go to Delphi, in orderthat the God may elect one out of each triad. They shall be appointed for life;

and when any of them dies, another shall be elected by the four tribes who

made the original appointment. There shall also be treasurers of the temples;

three for the greater temples, two for the lesser, and one for those of least

importance.


The  defence  of  the  city  should  be  committed  to  the  generals  and  other

officers of the army, and to the wardens of the city and agora. The defence of

the  country  shall  be  on  this  wise:--The  twelve  tribes  shall  allot  among

themselves annually the twelve divisions of the country, and each tribe shall

appoint five wardens and commanders of the watch. The five wardens in each

division shall choose out of their own tribe twelve guards, who are to be

between twenty-five and thirty years of age. Both the wardens and the guards

are to serve two years; and they shall make a round of the divisions, staying a

month in each. They shall go from West to East during the first year, and

back from East to West during the second. Thus they will gain a perfect

knowledge of the country at every season of the year.


While  on  service,  their  first  duty  will  be  to  see  that  the  country  is  well

protected  by  means  of  fortifications  and  entrenchments;  they  will  use  the

beasts of burden and the labourers whom they find on the spot, taking care

however not to interfere with the regular course of agriculture. But while they

thus render the country as inaccessible as possible to enemies, they will also

make it as accessible as possible to friends by constructing and maintaining

good roads. They will restrain and preserve the rain which comes down from

heaven, making the barren places fertile, and the wet places dry. They will

ornament the fountains with plantations and buildings, and provide water for

irrigation at all seasons of the year. They will lead the streams to the temples

and groves of the Gods; and in such spots the youth shall make gymnasia for

themselves, and warm baths for the aged; there the rustic worn with toil will

receive a kindly welcome, and be far better treated than at the hands of an

unskilful doctor.


These works will be both useful and ornamental; but the sixty wardens must

not fail to give serious attention to other duties. For they must watch over the

districts assigned to them, and also act as judges. In small matters the five

commanders  shall  decide:  in  greater  matters  up  to  three  minae,  the  fivecommanders and the twelve guards. Like all other judges, except those who

have the final decision, they shall be liable to give an account. If the wardens

impose  unjust  tasks  on  the  villagers,  or  take  by  force  their  crops  or

implements,  or  yield  to  flattery  or  bribes  in  deciding  suits,  let  them  be

publicly dishonoured. In regard to any other wrong-doing, if the question be

of  a  mina,  let  the  neighbours  decide;  but  if  the  accused  person  will  not

submit,  trusting  that  his  monthly  removals  will  enable  him  to  escape

payment, and also in suits about a larger amount, the injured party may have

recourse to the common court; in the former case, if successful, he may exact

a double penalty.


The wardens and guards, while on their two years' service, shall live and eat

together,  and  the  guard  who  is  absent  from  the  daily  meals  without

permission or sleeps out at night, shall be regarded as a deserter, and may be

punished by any one who meets him. If any of the commanders is guilty of

such an irregularity, the whole sixty shall have him punished; and he of them

who screens him shall suffer a still heavier penalty than the offender himself.

Now  by  service  a  man  learns  to  rule;  and  he  should  pride  himself  upon

serving  well  the  laws  and  the  Gods  all  his  life,  and  upon  having  served

ancient and honourable men in his youth. The twelve and the five should be

their own servants, and use the labour of the villagers only for the good of the

public. Let them search the country through, and acquire a perfect knowledge

of  every  locality;  with  this  view,  hunting  and  field  sports  should  be

encouraged.


Next we have to speak of the elections of the wardens of the agora and of the

city. The wardens of the city shall be three in number, and they shall have the

care of the streets, roads, buildings, and also of the water- supply. They shall

be chosen out of the highest class, and when the number of candidates has

been reduced to six who have the greatest number of votes, three out of the

six shall be taken by lot, and, after a scrutiny, shall be admitted to their office.

The wardens of the agora shall be five in number--ten are to be first elected,

and every one shall vote for all the vacant places; the ten shall be afterwards

reduced to five by lot, as in the former election. The first and second class

shall be compelled to go to the assembly, but not the third and fourth, unless

they are specially summoned. The wardens of the agora shall have the care of

the temples and fountains which are in the agora, and shall punish those whoinjure them by stripes and bonds, if they be slaves or strangers; and by fines,

if they be citizens. And the wardens of the city shall have a similar power of

inflicting punishment and fines in their own department.


In the next place, there must be directors of music and gymnastic; one class

of  them  superintending  gymnasia  and  schools,  and  the  attendance  and

lodging of the boys and girls--the other having to do with contests of music

and gymnastic. In musical contests there shall be one kind of judges of solo

singing or playing, who will judge of rhapsodists, flute-players, harp-players

and the like, and another of choruses. There shall be choruses of men and

boys and maidens--one director will be enough to introduce them all, and he

should not be less than forty years of age; secondly, of solos also there shall

be  one  director,  aged  not  less  than  thirty  years;  he  will  introduce  the

competitors and give judgment upon them. The director of the choruses is to

be elected in an assembly at which all who take an interest in music are

compelled to attend, and no one else. Candidates must only be proposed for

their fitness, and opposed on the ground of unfitness. Ten are to be elected by

vote, and the one of these on whom the lot falls shall be director for a year.

Next  shall  be  elected  out  of  the  second  and  third  classes  the  judges  of

gymnastic contests, who are to be three in number, and are to be tested, after

being chosen by lot out of twenty who have been elected by the three highest

classes--these being compelled to attend at the election.


One  minister  remains,  who  will  have  the  general  superintendence  of

education. He must be not less than fifty years old, and be himself the father

of children born in wedlock. His office must be regarded by all as the highest

in the state. For the right growth of the first shoot in plants and animals is the

chief cause of matured perfection. Man is supposed to be a tame animal, but

he becomes either the gentlest or the fiercest of creatures, accordingly as he is

well or ill educated. Wherefore he who is elected to preside over education

should be the best man possible. He shall hold office for five years, and shall

be  elected  out  of  the  guardians  of  the  law,  by  the  votes  of  the  other

magistrates with the exception of the senate and prytanes; and the election

shall be held by ballot in the temple of Apollo.


When a magistrate dies before his term of office has expired, another shall be

elected in his place; and, if the guardian of an orphan dies, the relations shallappoint another within ten days, or be fined a drachma a day for neglect.


The city which has no courts of law will soon cease to be a city; and a judge

who sits in silence and leaves the enquiry to the litigants, as in arbitrations, is

not a good judge. A few judges are better than many, but the few must be

good. The matter in dispute should be clearly elicited; time and examination

will  find  out  the  truth.  Causes  should  first  be  tried  before  a  court  of

neighbours: if the decision is unsatisfactory, let them be referred to a higher

court; or, if necessary, to a higher still, of which the decision shall be final.


Every magistrate is a judge, and every judge is a magistrate, on the day on

which he is deciding the suit. This will therefore be an appropriate place to

speak of judges and their functions. The supreme tribunal will be that on

which the litigants agree; and let there be two other tribunals, one for public

and the other for private causes. The high court of appeal shall be composed

as follows:--All the officers of state shall meet on the last day but one of the

year  in  some  temple,  and  choose  for  a  judge  the  best  man  out  of  every

magistracy: and those who are elected, after they have undergone a scrutiny,

shall  be  judges  of  appeal.  They  shall  give  their  decisions  openly,  in  the

presence  of  the  magistrates  who  have  elected  them;  and  the  public  may

attend. If anybody charges one of them with having intentionally decided

wrong, he shall lay his accusation before the guardians of the law, and if the

judge be found guilty he shall pay damages to the extent of half the injury,

unless the guardians of the law deem that he deserves a severer punishment,

in which case the judges shall assess the penalty.


As the whole people are injured by offences against the state, they should

share in the trial of them. Such causes should originate with the people and be

decided by them: the enquiry shall take place before any three of the highest

magistrates upon whom the defendant and plaintiff can agree. Also in private

suits all should judge as far as possible, and therefore there should be a court

of law in every ward; for he who has no share in the administration of justice,

believes that he has no share in the state. The judges in these courts shall be

elected by lot and give their decision at once. The final judgment in all cases

shall rest with the court of appeal. And so, having done with the appointment

of courts and the election of officers, we will now make our laws.'Your way of proceeding, Stranger, is admirable.'


Then so far our old man's game of play has gone off well.


'Say, rather, our serious and noble pursuit.'


Perhaps; but let me ask you whether you have ever observed the manner in

which painters put in and rub out colour: yet their endless labour will last but

a short time, unless they leave behind them some successor who will restore

the picture and remove its defects. 'Certainly.' And have we not a similar

object at the present moment? We are old ourselves, and therefore we must

leave  our  work  of  legislation  to  be  improved  and  perfected  by  the  next

generation;  not  only  making  laws  for  our  guardians,  but  making  them

lawgivers. 'We must at least do our best.' Let us address them as follows.

Beloved saviours of the laws, we give you an outline of legislation which you

must fill up, according to a rule which we will prescribe for you. Megillus

and Cleinias and I are agreed, and we hope that you will agree with us in

thinking,  that  the  whole  energies  of  a  man  should  be  devoted  to  the

attainment of manly virtue, whether this is to be gained by study, or habit, or

desire, or opinion. And rather than accept institutions which tend to degrade

and enslave him, he should fly his country and endure any hardship. These

are our principles, and we would ask you to judge of our laws, and praise or

blame them, accordingly as they are or are not capable of improving our

citizens.


And first of laws concerning religion. We have already said that the number

5040 has many convenient divisions: and we took a twelfth part of this (420),

which is itself divisible by twelve, for the number of the tribe. Every divisor

is  a  gift  of  God,  and  corresponds  to  the  months  of  the  year  and  to  the

revolution  of  the  universe.  All  cities  have  a  number,  but  none  is  more

fortunate than our own, which can be divided by all numbers up to 12, with

the exception of 11, and even by 11, if two families are deducted. And now

let us divide the state, assigning to each division some God or demigod, who

shall have altars raised to them, and sacrifices offered twice a month; and

assemblies shall be held in their honour, twelve for the tribes, and twelve for

the city, corresponding to their divisions. The object of them will be first to

promote religion, secondly to encourage friendship and intercourse betweenfamilies; for families must be acquainted before they marry into one another,

or great mistakes will occur. At these festivals there shall be innocent dances

of young men and maidens, who may have the opportunity of seeing one

another in modest undress. To the details of all this the masters of choruses

and  the  guardians  will  attend,  embodying  in  laws  the  results  of  their

experience; and, after ten years, making the laws permanent, with the consent

of the legislator, if he be alive, or, if he be not alive, of the guardians of the

law, who shall perfect them and settle them once for all. At least, if any

further changes are required, the magistrates must take the whole people into

counsel, and obtain the sanction of all the oracles.


Whenever any one who is between the ages of twenty-five and thirty-five

wants to marry, let him do so; but first let him hear the strain which we will

address to him:--


My son, you ought to marry, but not in order to gain wealth or to avoid

poverty; neither should you, as men are wont to do, choose a wife who is like

yourself in property and character. You ought to consult the interests of the

state rather than your own pleasure; for by equal marriages a society becomes

unequal. And yet to enact a law that the rich and mighty shall not marry the

rich and mighty, that the quick shall be united to the slow, and the slow to the

quick, will arouse anger in some persons and laughter in others; for they do

not understand that opposite elements ought to be mingled in the state, as

wine  should  be  mingled  with  water.  The  object  at  which  we  aim  must

therefore be left to the influence of public opinion. And do not forget our

former precept, that every one should seek to attain immortality and raise up

a fair posterity to serve God.--Let this be the prelude of the law about the

duty of marriage. But if a man will not listen, and at thirty-five years of age is

still unmarried, he shall pay an annual fine: if he be of the first class, 100

drachmas; if of the second, 70; if of the third, 60; and if of the fourth, 30.

This fine shall be sacred to Here; and if he refuse to pay, a tenfold penalty

shall be exacted by the treasurer of Here, who shall be responsible for the

payment. Further, the unmarried man shall receive no honour or obedience

from the young, and he shall not retain the right of punishing others. A man is

neither to give nor receive a dowry beyond a certain fixed sum; in our state,

for his consolation, if he be poor, let him know that he need neither receive

nor give one, for every citizen is provided with the necessaries of life. Again,if the woman is not rich, her husband will not be her humble servant. He who

disobeys  this  law  shall  pay  a  fine  according  to  his  class,  which  shall  be

exacted by the treasurers of Here and Zeus.


The betrothal of the parties shall be made by the next of kin, or if there are

none, by the guardians. The offerings and ceremonies of marriage shall be

determined  by  the  interpreters  of  sacred  rites.  Let  the  wedding  party  be

moderate; five male and five female friends, and a like number of kinsmen,

will be enough. The expense should not exceed, for the first class, a mina;

and for the second, half a mina; and should be in like proportion for the other

classes. Extravagance is to be regarded as vulgarity and ignorance of nuptial

proprieties. Much wine is only to be drunk at the festivals of Dionysus, and

certainly not on the occasion of a marriage. The bride and bridegroom, who

are taking a great step in life, ought to have all their wits about them; they

should  be  especially  careful  of  the  night  on  which  God  may  give  them

increase, and which this will be none can say. Their bodies and souls should

be in the most temperate condition; they should abstain from all that partakes

of the nature of disease or vice, which will otherwise become hereditary.

There is an original divinity in man which preserves all things, if used with

proper respect. He who marries should make one of the two houses on the lot

the nest and nursery of his young; he should leave his father and mother, and

then his affection for them will be only increased by absence. He will go

forth as to a colony, and will there rear up his offspring, handing on the torch

of life to another generation.


About  property  in  general  there  is  little  difficulty,  with  the  exception  of

property in slaves, which is an institution of a very doubtful character. The

slavery of the Helots is approved by some and condemned by others; and

there is some doubt even about the slavery of the Mariandynians at Heraclea

and of the Thessalian Penestae. This makes us ask, What shall we do about

slaves? To which every one would agree in replying,--Let us have the best

and most attached whom we can get. All of us have heard stories of slaves

who have been better to their masters than sons or brethren. Yet there is an

opposite doctrine, that slaves are never to be trusted; as Homer says, 'Slavery

takes away half a man's understanding.' And different persons treat them in

different ways: there are some who never trust them, and beat them like dogs,

until they make them many times more slavish than they were before; andothers pursue the opposite plan. Man is a troublesome animal, as has been

often shown, Megillus, notably in the revolts of the Messenians; and great

mischiefs have arisen in countries where there are large bodies of slaves of

one nationality. Two rules may be given for their management: first that they

should not, if possible, be of the same country or have a common language;

and secondly, that they should be treated by their master with more justice

even than equals, out of regard to himself quite as much as to them. For he

who is righteous in the treatment of his slaves, or of any inferiors, will sow in

them the seed of virtue. Masters should never jest with their slaves: this,

which  is  a  common  but  foolish  practice,  increases  the  difficulty  and

painfulness of managing them.


Next as to habitations. These ought to have been spoken of before; for no

man can marry a wife, and have slaves, who has not a house for them to live

in.  Let  us  supply  the  omission.  The  temples  should  be  placed  round  the

Agora, and the city built in a circle on the heights. Near the temples, which

are holy places and the habitations of the Gods, should be buildings for the

magistrates, and the courts of law, including those in which capital offences

are to be tried. As to walls, Megillus, I agree with Sparta that they should

sleep in the earth; 'cold steel is the best wall,' as the poet finely says. Besides,

how absurd to be sending out our youth to fortify and guard the borders of

our country, and then to build a city wall, which is very unhealthy, and is apt

to  make  people  fancy  that  they  may  run  there  and  rest  in  idleness,  not

knowing  that  true  repose  comes  from  labour,  and  that  idleness  is  only  a

renewal of trouble. If, however, there must be a wall, the private houses had

better be so arranged as to form one wall; this will have an agreeable aspect,

and the building will be safer and more defensible. These objects should be

attended to at the foundation of the city. The wardens of the city must see that

they are carried out; and they must also enforce cleanliness, and preserve the

public buildings from encroachments. Moreover, they must take care to let

the  rain  flow  off  easily,  and  must  regulate  other  matters  concerning  the

general  administration  of  the  city.  If  any  further  enactments  prove  to  be

necessary, the guardians of the law must supply them.


And now, having provided buildings, and having married our citizens, we

will  proceed  to  speak  of  their  mode  of  life.  In  a  well-constituted  state,

individuals  cannot  be  allowed  to  live  as  they  please.  Why  do  I  say  this?Because I am going to enact that the bridegroom shall not absent himself

from the common meals. They were instituted originally on the occasion of

some war, and, though deemed singular when first founded, they have tended

greatly to the security of states. There was a difficulty in introducing them,

but there is no difficulty in them now. There is, however, another institution

about  which  I  would  speak,  if  I  dared.  I  may  preface  my  proposal  by

remarking that disorder in a state is the source of all evil, and order of all

good. Now in Sparta and Crete there are common meals for men, and this, as

I was saying, is a divine and natural institution. But the women are left to

themselves;  they  live  in  dark  places,  and,  being  weaker,  and  therefore

wickeder, than men, they are at the bottom of a good deal more than half the

evil of states. This must be corrected, and the institution of common meals

extended to both sexes. But, in the present unfortunate state of opinion, who

would dare to establish them? And still more, who can compel women to eat

and drink in public? They will defy the legislator to drag them out of their

holes. And in any other state such a proposal would be drowned in clamour,

but in our own I think that I can show the attempt to be just and reasonable.

'There is nothing which we should like to hear better.' Listen, then; having

plenty of time, we will go back to the beginning of things, which is an old

subject with us. 'Right.' Either the race of mankind never had a beginning and

will never have an end, or the time which has elapsed since man first came

into being is all but infinite. 'No doubt.' And in this infinity of time there have

been  changes  of  every  kind,  both  in  the  order  of  the  seasons  and  in  the

government of states and in the customs of eating and drinking. Vines and

olives  were  at  length  discovered,  and  the  blessings  of  Demeter  and

Persephone,  of  which  one  Triptolemus  is  said  to  have  been  the  minister;

before  his  time  the  animals  had  been  eating  one  another.  And  there  are

nations in which mankind still sacrifice their fellow-men, and other nations in

which they lead a kind of Orphic existence, and will not sacrifice animals, or

so much as taste of a cow--they offer fruits or cakes moistened with honey.

Perhaps you will ask me what is the bearing of these remarks? 'We would

gladly hear.' I will endeavour to explain their drift. I see that the virtue of

human life depends on the due regulation of three wants or desires. The first

is the desire of meat, the second of drink; these begin with birth, and make us

disobedient to any voice other than that of pleasure. The third and fiercest

and greatest need is felt latest; this is love, which is a madness setting men's

whole nature on fire. These three disorders of mankind we must endeavour torestrain by three mighty influences--fear, and law, and reason, which, with

the aid of the Muses and the Gods of contests, may extinguish our lusts.


But to return. After marriage let us proceed to the generation of children, and

then to their nurture and education--thus gradually approaching the subject of

syssitia. There are, however, some other points which are suggested by the

three words--meat, drink, love. 'Proceed,' the bride and bridegroom ought to

set their mind on having a brave offspring. Now a man only succeeds when

he takes pains; wherefore the bridegroom ought to take special care of the

bride, and the bride of the bridegroom, at the time when their children are

about to be born. And let there be a committee of matrons who shall meet

every day at the temple of Eilithyia at a time fixed by the magistrates, and

inform against any man or woman who does not observe the laws of married

life. The time of begetting children and the supervision of the parents shall

last  for  ten  years  only;  if  at  the  expiration  of  this  period  they  have  no

children, they may part, with the consent of their relatives and the official

matrons, and with a due regard to the interests of either; if a dispute arise, ten

of the guardians of the law shall be chosen as arbiters. The matrons shall also

have power to enter the houses of the young people, if necessary, and to

advise and threaten them. If their efforts fail, let them go to the guardians of

the law; and if they too fail, the offender, whether man or woman, shall be

forbidden  to  be  present  at  all  family  ceremonies.  If  when  the  time  for

begetting children has ceased, either husband or wife have connexion with

others who are of an age to beget children, they shall be liable to the same

penalties as those who are still having a family. But when both parties have

ceased to beget children there shall be no penalties. If men and women live

soberly,  the  enactments  of  law  may  be  left  to  slumber;  punishment  is

necessary only when there is great disorder of manners.


The first year of children's lives is to be registered in their ancestral temples;

the name of the archon of the year is to be inscribed on a whited wall in every

phratry, and the names of the living members of the phratry close to them, to

be erased at their decease. The proper time of marriage for a woman shall be

from sixteen years to twenty; for a man, from thirty to thirty-five (compare

Republic). The age of holding office for a woman is to be forty, for a man

thirty years. The time for military service for a man is to be from twenty

years  to  sixty;  for  a  woman,  from  the  time  that  she  has  ceased  to  bearchildren until fifty.BOOK VII.


Now that we have married our citizens and brought their children into the

world, we have to find nurture and education for them. This is a matter of

precept rather than of law, and cannot be precisely regulated by the legislator.

For minute regulations are apt to be transgressed, and frequent transgressions

impair the habit of obedience to the laws. I speak darkly, but I will also try to

exhibit my wares in the light of day. Am I not right in saying that a good

education tends to the improvement of body and mind? 'Certainly.' And the

body is fairest which grows up straight and well-formed from the time of

birth. 'Very true.' And we observe that the first shoot of every living thing is

the greatest; many even contend that man is not at twenty-five twice the

height that he was at five. 'True.' And growth without exercise of the limbs is

the source of endless evils in the body. 'Yes.' The body should have the most

exercise when growing most. 'What, the bodies of young infants?' Nay, the

bodies of unborn infants. I should like to explain to you this singular kind of

gymnastics. The Athenians are fond of cock-fighting, and the people who

keep cocks carry them about in their hands or under their arms, and take long

walks, to improve, not their own health, but the health of the birds. Here is a

proof of the usefulness of motion, whether of rocking, swinging, riding, or

tossing upon the wave; for all these kinds of motion greatly increase strength

and the powers of digestion. Hence we infer that our women, when they are

with child, should walk about and fashion the embryo; and the children, when

born, should be carried by strong nurses,--there must be more than one of

them,--and should not be suffered to walk until they are three years old. Shall

we impose penalties for the neglect of these rules? The greatest penalty, that

is, ridicule, and the difficulty of making the nurses do as we bid them, will be

incurred by ourselves. 'Then why speak of such matters?' In the hope that

heads of families may learn that the due regulation of them is the foundation

of law and order in the state.


And now, leaving the body, let us proceed to the soul; but we must first

repeat  that  perpetual  motion  by  night  and  by  day  is  good  for  the  young

creature.  This  is  proved  by  the  Corybantian  cure  of  motion,  and  by  the

practice of nurses who rock children in their arms, lapping them at the sametime in sweet strains. And the reason of this is obvious. The affections, both

of  the  Bacchantes  and  of  the  children,  arise  from  fear,  and  this  fear  is

occasioned  by  something  wrong  which  is  going  on  within  them.  Now  a

violent external commotion tends to calm the violent internal one; it quiets

the palpitation of the heart, giving to the children sleep, and bringing back the

Bacchantes  to  their  right  minds  by  the  help  of  dances  and  acceptable

sacrifices. But if fear has such power, will not a child who is always in a state

of terror grow up timid and cowardly, whereas if he learns from the first to

resist fear he will develop a habit of courage? 'Very true.' And we may say

that the use of motion will inspire the souls of children with cheerfulness and

therefore  with  courage.  'Of  course.'  Softness  enervates  and  irritates  the

temper of the young, and violence renders them mean and misanthropical.

'But  how  is  the  state  to  educate  them  when  they  are  as  yet  unable  to

understand the meaning of words?' Why, surely they roar and cry, like the

young  of  any  other  animal,  and  the  nurse  knows  the  meaning  of  these

intimations of the child's likes or dislikes, and the occasions which call them

forth.  About  three  years  is  passed  by  children  in  a  state  of  imperfect

articulation, which is quite long enough time to make them either good- or

ill-tempered. And, therefore, during these first three years, the infant should

be as free as possible from fear and pain. 'Yes, and he should have as much

pleasure  as  possible.'  There,  I  think,  you  are  wrong;  for  the  influence  of

pleasure in the beginning of education is fatal. A man should neither pursue

pleasure nor wholly avoid pain. He should embrace the mean, and cultivate

that state of calm which mankind, taught by some inspiration, attribute to

God; and he who would be like God should neither be too fond of pleasure

himself, nor should he permit any other to be thus given; above all, not the

infant, whose character is just in the making. It may sound ridiculous, but I

affirm that a woman in her pregnancy should be carefully tended, and kept

from excessive pleasures and pains.


'I quite agree with you about the duty of avoiding extremes and following the

mean.'


Let us consider a further point. The matters which are now in question are

generally called customs rather than laws; and we have already made the

reflection that, though they are not, properly speaking, laws, yet neither can

they be neglected. For they fill up the interstices of law, and are the props andligatures on which the strength of the whole building depends. Laws without

customs never last; and we must not wonder if habit and custom sometimes

lengthen out our laws. 'Very true.' Up to their third year, then, the life of

children may be regulated by customs such as we have described. From three

to six their minds have to be amused; but they must not be allowed to become

self-willed and spoilt. If punishment is necessary, the same rule will hold as

in the case of slaves; they must neither be punished in hot blood nor ruined

by  indulgence.  The  children  of  that  age  will  have  their  own  modes  of

amusing  themselves;  they  should  be  brought  for  their  play  to  the  village

temples, and placed under the care of nurses, who will be responsible to

twelve  matrons  annually  chosen  by  the  women  who  have  authority  over

marriage. These shall be appointed, one out of each tribe, and their duty shall

be to keep order at the meetings: slaves who break the rules laid down by

them, they shall punish by the help of some of the public slaves; but citizens

who dispute their authority shall be brought before the magistrates. After six

years of age there shall be a separation of the sexes; the boys will go to learn

riding and the use of arms, and the girls may, if they please, also learn. Here I

note a practical error in early training. Mothers and nurses foolishly believe

that the left hand is by nature different from the right, whereas the left leg and

foot are acknowledged to be the same as the right. But the truth is that nature

made all things to balance, and the power of using the left hand, which is of

little importance in the case of the plectrum of the lyre, may make a great

difference in the art of the warrior, who should be a skilled gymnast and able

to fight and balance himself in any position. If a man were a Briareus, he

should use all his hundred hands at once; at any rate, let everybody employ

the two which they have. To these matters the magistrates, male and female,

should attend; the women superintending the nursing and amusement of the

children, and the men superintending their education, that all of them, boys

and girls alike, may be sound, wind and limb, and not spoil the gifts of nature

by bad habits.


Education has two branches--gymnastic, which is concerned with the body;

and music, which improves the soul. And gymnastic has two parts, dancing

and wrestling. Of dancing one kind imitates musical recitation and aims at

stateliness and freedom; another kind is concerned with the training of the

body, and produces health, agility, and beauty. There is no military use in the

complex systems of wrestling which pass under the names of Antaeus andCercyon,  or  in  the  tricks  of  boxing,  which  are  attributed  to  Amycus  and

Epeius; but good wrestling and the habit of extricating the neck, hands, and

sides, should be diligently learnt and taught. In our dances imitations of war

should  be  practised,  as  in  the  dances  of  the  Curetes  in  Crete  and  of  the

Dioscuri at Sparta, or as in the dances in complete armour which were taught

us Athenians by the goddess Athene. Youths who are not yet of an age to go

to war should make religious processions armed and on horseback; and they

should also engage in military games and contests. These exercises will be

equally useful in peace and war, and will benefit both states and families.


Next follows music, to which we will once more return; and here I shall

venture to repeat my old paradox, that amusements have great influence on

laws. He who has been taught to play at the same games and with the same

playthings will be content with the same laws. There is no greater evil in a

state than the spirit of innovation. In the case of the seasons and winds, in the

management  of  our  bodies  and  in  the  habits  of  our  minds,  change  is  a

dangerous thing. And in everything but what is bad the same rule holds. We

all venerate and acquiesce in the laws to which we are accustomed; and if

they  have  continued  during  long  periods  of  time,  and  there  is  no

remembrance  of  their  ever  having  been  otherwise,  people  are  absolutely

afraid to change them. Now how can we create this quality of immobility in

the  laws?  I  say,  by  not  allowing  innovations  in  the  games  and  plays  of

children. The children who are always having new plays, when grown up will

be always having new laws. Changes in mere fashions are not serious evils,

but changes in our estimate of men's characters are most serious; and rhythms

and  music  are  representations  of  characters,  and  therefore  we  must  avoid

novelties in dance and song. For securing permanence no better method can

be imagined than that of the Egyptians. 'What is their method?' They make a

calendar for the year, arranging on what days the festivals of the various

Gods shall be celebrated, and for each festival they consecrate an appropriate

hymn and dance. In our state a similar arrangement shall in the first instance

be framed by certain individuals, and afterwards solemnly ratified by all the

citizens. He who introduces other hymns or dances shall be excluded by the

priests  and  priestesses  and  the  guardians  of  the  law;  and  if  he  refuses  to

submit, he may be prosecuted for impiety. But we must not be too ready to

speak about such great matters. Even a young man, when he hears something

unaccustomed, stands and looks this way and that, like a traveller at a placewhere three ways meet; and at our age a man ought to be very sure of his

ground in so singular an argument. 'Very true.' Then, leaving the subject for

further examination at some future time, let us proceed with our laws about

education, for in this manner we may probably throw light upon our present

difficulty. 'Let us do as you say.' The ancients used the term nomoi to signify

harmonious  strains,  and  perhaps  they  fancied  that  there  was  a  connexion

between the songs and laws of a country. And we say --Whosoever shall

transgress the strains by law established is a transgressor of the laws, and

shall  be  punished  by  the  guardians  of  the  law  and  by  the  priests  and

priestesses. 'Very good.' How can we legislate about these consecrated strains

without incurring ridicule? Moulds or types must be first framed, and one of

the types shall be--Abstinence from evil words at sacrifices. When a son or

brother blasphemes at a sacrifice there is a sound of ill-omen heard in the

family; and many a chorus stands by the altar uttering inauspicious words,

and he is crowned victor who excites the hearers most with lamentations.

Such lamentations should be reserved for evil days, and should be uttered

only by hired mourners; and let the singers not wear circlets or ornaments of

gold. To avoid every evil word, then, shall be our first type. 'Agreed.' Our

second law or type shall be, that prayers ever accompany sacrifices; and our

third, that, inasmuch as all prayers are requests, they shall be only for good;

this the poets must be made to understand. 'Certainly.' Have we not already

decided that no gold or silver Plutus shall be allowed in our city? And did not

this show that we were dissatisfied with the poets? And may we not fear that,

if they are allowed to utter injudicious prayers, they will bring the greatest

misfortunes on the state? And we must therefore make a law that the poet is

not to contradict the laws or ideas of the state; nor is he to show his poems to

any  private  persons  until  they  have  first  received  the  imprimatur  of  the

director of education. A fourth musical law will be to the effect that hymns

and  praises  shall  be  offered  to  Gods,  and  to  heroes  and  demigods.  Still

another law will permit eulogies of eminent citizens, whether men or women,

but only after their death. As to songs and dances, we will enact as follows:--

There shall be a selection made of the best ancient musical compositions and

dances; these shall be chosen by judges, who ought not to be less than fifty

years of age. They will accept some, and reject or amend others, for which

purpose they will call, if necessary, the poets themselves into council. The

severe and orderly music is the style in which to educate children, who, if

they are accustomed to this, will deem the opposite kind to be illiberal, but ifthey are accustomed to the other, will count this to be cold and unpleasing.

'True.' Further, a distinction should be made between the melodies of men

and women. Nature herself teaches that the grand or manly style should be

assigned to men, and to women the moderate and temperate. So much for the

subjects of education. But to whom are they to be taught, and when? I must

try, like the shipwright, who lays down the keel of a vessel, to build a secure

foundation  for  the  vessel  of  the  soul  in  her  voyage  through  life.  Human

affairs are hardly serious, and yet a sad necessity compels us to be serious

about them. Let us, therefore, do our best to bring the matter to a conclusion.

'Very  good.'  I  say  then,  that  God  is  the  object  of  a  man's  most  serious

endeavours. But man is created to be the plaything of the Gods; and therefore

the aim of every one should be to pass through life, not in grim earnest, but

playing at the noblest of pastimes, in another spirit from that which now

prevails. For the common opinion is, that work is for the sake of play, war of

peace;  whereas  in  war  there  is  neither  amusement  nor  instruction  worth

speaking of. The life of peace is that which men should chiefly desire to

lengthen out and improve. They should live sacrificing, singing, and dancing,

with the view of propitiating Gods and heroes. I have already told you the

types of song and dance which they should follow: and 'Some things,' as the

poet well says, 'you will devise for yourself--others, God will suggest to you.'


These  words  of  his  may  be  applied  to  our  pupils.  They  will  partly  teach

themselves, and partly will be taught by God, the art of propitiating Him; for

they are His puppets, and have only a small portion in truth. 'You have a poor

opinion of man.' No wonder, when I compare him with God; but, if you are

offended, I will place him a little higher.


Next follow the building for gymnasia and schools; these will be in the midst

of the city, and outside will be riding-schools and archery-grounds. In all of

them there ought to be instructors of the young, drawn from foreign parts by

pay, and they will teach them music and war. Education shall be compulsory;

the children must attend school, whether their parents like it or not; for they

belong to the state more than to their parents. And I say further, without

hesitation, that the same education in riding and gymnastic shall be given

both to men and women. The ancient tradition about the Amazons confirms

my  view,  and  at  the  present  day  there  are  myriads  of  women,  called

Sauromatides, dwelling near the Pontus, who practise the art of riding as wellas archery and the use of arms. But if I am right, nothing can be more foolish

than our modern fashion of training men and women differently, whereby the

power the city is reduced to a half. For reflect--if women are not to have the

education of men, some other must be found for them, and what other can we

propose? Shall they, like the women of Thrace, tend cattle and till the ground;

or, like our own, spin and weave, and take care of the house? or shall they

follow the Spartan custom, which is between the two?--there the maidens

share in gymnastic exercises and in music; and the grown women, no longer

engaged in spinning, weave the web of life, although they are not skilled in

archery,  like  the  Amazons,  nor  can  they  imitate  our  warrior  goddess  and

carry shield or spear, even in the extremity of their country's need. Compared

with  our  women,  the  Sauromatides  are  like  men.  But  your  legislators,

Megillus, as I maintain, only half did their work; they took care of the men,

and left the women to take care of themselves.


'Shall we suffer the Stranger, Cleinias, to run down Sparta in this way?'


'Why,  yes;  for  we  cannot  withdraw  the  liberty  which  we  have  already

conceded to him.'


What will be the manner of life of men in moderate circumstances, freed

from the toils of agriculture and business, and having common tables for

themselves and their families which are under the inspection of magistrates,

male and female? Are men who have these institutions only to eat and fatten

like beasts? If they do, how can they escape the fate of a fatted beast, which is

to be torn in pieces by some other beast more valiant than himself? True,

theirs is not the perfect way of life, for they have not all things in common;

but the second best way of life also confers great blessings. Even those who

live in the second state have a work to do twice as great as the work of any

Pythian or Olympic victor; for their labour is for the body only, but ours both

for body and soul. And this higher work ought to be pursued night and day to

the exclusion of every other. The magistrates who keep the city should be

wakeful, and the master of the household should be up early and before all

his servants; and the mistress, too, should awaken her handmaidens, and not

be awakened by them. Much sleep is not required either for our souls or

bodies. When a man is asleep, he is no better than if he were dead; and he

who loves life and wisdom will take no more sleep than is necessary forhealth. Magistrates who are wide awake at night are terrible to the bad; but

they are honoured by the good, and are useful to themselves and the state.


When the morning dawns, let the boy go to school. As the sheep need the

shepherd, so the boy needs a master; for he is at once the most cunning and

the most insubordinate of creatures. Let him be taken away from mothers and

nurses, and tamed with bit and bridle, being treated as a freeman in that he

learns and is taught, but as a slave in that he may be chastised by all other

freemen; and the freeman who neglects to chastise him shall be disgraced. All

these matters will be under the supervision of the Director of Education.


Him we will address as follows: We have spoken to you, O illustrious teacher

of youth, of the song, the time, and the dance, and of martial strains; but of

the learning of letters and of prose writings, and of music, and of the use of

calculation for military and domestic purposes we have not spoken, nor yet of

the higher use of numbers in reckoning divine things--such as the revolutions

of the stars, or the arrangements of days, months, and years, of which the true

calculation is necessary in order that seasons and festivals may proceed in

regular course, and arouse and enliven the city, rendering to the Gods their

due, and making men know them better. There are, we say, many things

about which we have not as yet instructed you--and first, as to reading and

music: Shall the pupil be a perfect scholar and musician, or not even enter on

these studies? He should certainly enter on both:--to letters he will apply

himself from the age of ten to thirteen, and at thirteen he will begin to handle

the lyre, and continue to learn music until he is sixteen; no shorter and no

longer time will be allowed, however fond he or his parents may be of the

pursuit. The study of letters he should carry to the extent of simple reading

and  writing,  but  he  need  not  care  for  calligraphy  and  tachygraphy,  if  his

natural gifts do not enable him to acquire them in the three years. And here

arises a question as to the learning of compositions when unaccompanied

with music, I mean, prose compositions. They are a dangerous species of

literature. Speak then, O guardians of the law, and tell us what we shall do

about them. 'You seem to be in a difficulty.' Yes; it is difficult to go against

the opinion of all the world. 'But have we not often already done so?' Very

true. And you imply that the road which we are taking, though disagreeable

to  many,  is  approved  by  those  whose  judgment  is  most  worth  having.

'Certainly.' Then I would first observe that we have many poets, comic aswell  as  tragic,  with  whose  compositions,  as  people  say,  youth  are  to  be

imbued and saturated. Some would have them learn by heart entire poets;

others prefer extracts. Now I believe, and the general opinion is, that some of

the things which they learn are good, and some bad. 'Then how shall we

reject  some  and  select  others?'  A  happy  thought  occurs  to  me;  this  long

discourse of ours is a sample of what we want, and is moreover an inspired

work and a kind of poem. I am naturally pleased in reflecting upon all our

words, which appear to me to be just the thing for a young man to hear and

learn. I would venture, then, to offer to the Director of Education this treatise

of laws as a pattern for his guidance; and in case he should find any similar

compositions, written or oral, I would have him carefully preserve them, and

commit them in the first place to the teachers who are willing to learn them

(he should turn off the teacher who refuses), and let them communicate the

lesson to the young.


I have said enough to the teacher of letters; and now we will proceed to the

teacher of the lyre. He must be reminded of the advice which we gave to the

sexagenarian minstrels; like them he should be quick to perceive the rhythms

suited to the expression of virtue, and to reject the opposite. With a view to

the attainment of this object, the pupil and his instructor are to use the lyre

because its notes are pure; the voice and string should coincide note for note:

nor  should  there  be  complex  harmonies  and  contrasts  of  intervals,  or

variations of times or rhythms. Three years' study is not long enough to give a

knowledge of these intricacies; and our pupils will have many things of more

importance to learn. The tunes and hymns which are to be consecrated for

each festival have been already determined by us.


Having given these instructions to the Director of Music, let us now proceed

to dancing and gymnastic, which must also be taught to boys and girls by

masters and mistresses. Our minister of education will have a great deal to

do; and being an old man, how will he get through so much work? There is

no difficulty;--the law will provide him with assistants, male and female; and

he will consider how important his office is, and how great the responsibility

of choosing them. For if education prospers, the vessel of state sails merrily

along; or if education fails, the consequences are not even to be mentioned.

Of dancing and gymnastics something has been said already. We include

under the latter military exercises, the various uses of arms, all that relates tohorsemanship, and military evolutions and tactics. There should be public

teachers of both arts, paid by the state, and women as well as men should be

trained in them. The maidens should learn the armed dance, and the grown-

up  women  be  practised  in  drill  and  the  use  of  arms,  if  only  in  case  of

extremity, when the men are gone out to battle, and they are left to guard

their families. Birds and beasts defend their young, but women instead of

fighting run to the altars, thus degrading man below the level of the animals.

'Such a lack of education, Stranger, is both unseemly and dangerous.'


Wrestling is to be pursued as a military exercise, but the meaning of this, and

the nature of the art, can only be explained when action is combined with

words. Next follows dancing, which is of two kinds; imitative, first, of the

serious and beautiful; and, secondly, of the ludicrous and grotesque. The first

kind may be further divided into the dance of war and the dance of peace.

The former is called the Pyrrhic; in this the movements of attack and defence

are  imitated  in  a  direct  and  manly  style,  which  indicates  strength  and

sufficiency of body and mind. The latter of the two, the dance of peace, is

suitable to orderly and law- abiding men. These must be distinguished from

the Bacchic dances which imitate drunken revelry, and also from the dances

by which purifications are effected and mysteries celebrated. Such dances

cannot be characterized either as warlike or peaceful, and are unsuited to a

civilized state. Now the dances of peace are of two classes:--the first of them

is the more violent, being an expression of joy and triumph after toil and

danger;  the  other  is  more  tranquil,  symbolizing  the  continuance  and

preservation of good. In speaking or singing we naturally move our bodies,

and as we have more or less courage or self-control we become less or more

violent and excited. Thus from the imitation of words in gestures the art of

dancing arises. Now one man imitates in an orderly, another in a disorderly

manner: and so the peaceful kinds of dance have been appropriately called

Emmeleiai, or dances of order, as the warlike have been called Pyrrhic. In the

latter a man imitates all sorts of blows and the hurling of weapons and the

avoiding of them; in the former he learns to bear himself gracefully and like a

gentleman. The types of these dances are to be fixed by the legislator, and

when the guardians of the law have assigned them to the several festivals,

and consecrated them in due order, no further change shall be allowed.


Thus much of the dances which are appropriate to fair forms and noble souls.Comedy, which is the opposite of them, remains to be considered. For the

serious implies the ludicrous, and opposites cannot be understood without

opposites. But a man of repute will desire to avoid doing what is ludicrous.

He should leave such performances to slaves,--they are not fit for freemen;

and there should be some element of novelty in them. Concerning tragedy, let

our law be as follows: When the inspired poet comes to us with a request to

be admitted into our state, we will reply in courteous words--We also are

tragedians and your rivals; and the drama which we enact is the best and

noblest, being the imitation of the truest and noblest life, with a view to

which our state is ordered. And we cannot allow you to pitch your stage in

the agora, and make your voices to be heard above ours, or suffer you to

address  our  women  and  children  and  the  common  people  on  opposite

principles  to  our  own.  Come  then,  ye  children  of  the  Lydian  Muse,  and

present yourselves first to the magistrates, and if they decide that your hymns

are as good or better than ours, you shall have your chorus; but if not, not.


There remain three kinds of knowledge which should be learnt by freemen--

arithmetic, geometry of surfaces and of solids, and thirdly, astronomy. Few

need make an accurate study of such sciences; and of special students we will

speak at another time. But most persons must be content with the study of

them which is absolutely necessary, and may be said to be a necessity of that

nature against which God himself is unable to contend. 'What are these divine

necessities of knowledge?' Necessities of a knowledge without which neither

gods, nor demigods, can govern mankind. And far is he from being a divine

man who cannot distinguish one, two, odd and even; who cannot number day

and night, and is ignorant of the revolutions of the sun and stars; for to every

higher knowledge a knowledge of number is necessary--a fool may see this;

how much, is a matter requiring more careful consideration. 'Very true.' But

the legislator cannot enter into such details, and therefore we must defer the

more careful consideration of these matters to another occasion. 'You seem to

fear our habitual want of training in these subjects.' Still more do I fear the

danger of bad training, which is often worse than none at all. 'Very true.' I

think that a gentleman and a freeman may be expected to know as much as an

Egyptian child. In Egypt, arithmetic is taught to children in their sports by a

distribution of apples or garlands among a greater or less number of people;

or  a  calculation  is  made  of  the  various  combinations  which  are  possible

among  a  set  of  boxers  or  wrestlers;  or  they  distribute  cups  among  thechildren, sometimes of gold, brass, and silver intermingled, sometimes of one

metal only. The knowledge of arithmetic which is thus acquired is a great

help,  either  to  the  general  or  to  the  manager  of  a  household;  wherever

measure is employed, men are more wide-awake in their dealings, and they

get rid of their ridiculous ignorance. 'What do you mean?' I have observed

this ignorance among my countrymen--they are like pigs--and I am heartily

ashamed both on my own behalf and on that of all the Hellenes. 'In what

respect?' Let me ask you a question. You know that there are such things as

length, breadth, and depth? 'Yes.' And the Hellenes imagine that they are

commensurable (1) with themselves, and (2) with each other; whereas they

are only commensurable with themselves. But if this is true, then we are in an

unfortunate case, and may well say to our compatriots that not to possess

necessary  knowledge  is  a  disgrace,  though  to  possess  such  knowledge  is

nothing very grand. 'Certainly.' The discussion of arithmetical problems is a

much better amusement for old men than their favourite game of draughts.

'True.' Mathematics, then, will be one of the subjects in which youth should

be trained. They may be regarded as an amusement, as well as a useful and

innocent  branch  of  knowledge;--I  think  that  we  may  include  them

provisionally.  'Yes;  that  will  be  the  way.'  The  next  question  is,  whether

astronomy  shall  be  made  a  part  of  education.  About  the  stars  there  is  a

strange notion prevalent. Men often suppose that it is impious to enquire into

the nature of God and the world, whereas the very reverse is the truth. 'How

do you mean?' What I am going to say may seem absurd and at variance with

the usual language of age, and yet if true and advantageous to the state, and

pleasing to God, ought not to be withheld. 'Let us hear.' My dear friend, how

falsely do we and all the Hellenes speak about the sun and moon! 'In what

respect?' We are always saying that they and certain of the other stars do not

keep the same path, and we term them planets. 'Yes; and I have seen the

morning and evening stars go all manner of ways, and the sun and moon

doing what we know that they always do. But I wish that you would explain

your  meaning  further.'  You  will  easily  understand  what  I  have  had  no

difficulty in understanding myself, though we are both of us past the time of

learning. 'True; but what is this marvellous knowledge which youth are to

acquire, and of which we are ignorant?' Men say that the sun, moon, and stars

are planets or wanderers; but this is the reverse of the fact. Each of them

moves  in  one  orbit  only,  which  is  circular,  and  not  in  many;  nor  is  the

swiftest of them the slowest, as appears to human eyes. What an insult shouldwe offer to Olympian runners if we were to put the first last and the last first!

And  if  that  is  a  ridiculous  error  in  speaking  of  men,  how  much  more  in

speaking of the Gods? They cannot be pleased at our telling falsehoods about

them. 'They cannot.' Then people should at least learn so much about them as

will enable them to avoid impiety.


Enough of education. Hunting and similar pursuits now claim our attention.

These  require  for  their  regulation  that  mixture  of  law  and  admonition  of

which we have often spoken; e.g., in what we were saying about the nurture

of  young  children.  And  therefore  the  whole  duty  of  the  citizen  will  not

consist in mere obedience to the laws; he must regard not only the enactments

but also the precepts of the legislator. I will illustrate my meaning by an

example. Of hunting there are many kinds--hunting of fish and fowl, man and

beast, enemies and friends; and the legislator can neither omit to speak about

these things, nor make penal ordinances about them all. 'What is he to do

then?' He will praise and blame hunting, having in view the discipline and

exercise of youth. And the young man will listen obediently and will regard

his praises and censures; neither pleasure nor pain should hinder him. The

legislator will express himself in the form of a pious wish for the welfare of

the young:--O my friends, he will say, may you never be induced to hunt for

fish in the waters, either by day or night; or for men, whether by sea or land.

Never let the wish to steal enter into your minds; neither be ye fowlers, which

is not an occupation for gentlemen. As to land animals, the legislator will

discourage hunting by night, and also the use of nets and snares by day; for

these are indolent and unmanly methods. The only mode of hunting which he

can  praise  is  with  horses  and  dogs,  running,  shooting,  striking  at  close

quarters. Enough of the prelude: the law shall be as follows:--


Let no one hinder the holy order of huntsmen; but let the nightly hunters who

lay snares and nets be everywhere prohibited. Let the fowler confine himself

to waste places and to the mountains. The fisherman is also permitted to

exercise  his  calling,  except  in  harbours  and  sacred  streams,  marshes  and

lakes; in all other places he may fish, provided he does not make use of

poisonous mixtures.BOOK VIII


Next, with the help of the Delphian Oracle, we will appoint festivals and

sacrifices. There shall be 365 of them, one for every day in the year; and one

magistrate, at least, shall offer sacrifice daily according to rites prescribed by

a  convocation  of  priests  and  interpreters,  who  shall  co-operate  with  the

guardians of the law, and supply what the legislator has omitted. Moreover

there shall be twelve festivals to the twelve Gods after whom the twelve

tribes  are  named:  these  shall  be  celebrated  every  month  with  appropriate

musical and gymnastic contests. There shall also be festivals for women, to

be  distinguished  from  the  men's  festivals.  Nor  shall  the  Gods  below  be

forgotten, but they must be separated from the Gods above--Pluto shall have

his own in the twelfth month. He is not the enemy, but the friend of man, who

releases the soul from the body, which is at least as good a work as to unite

them. Further, those who have to regulate these matters should consider that

our  state  has  leisure  and  abundance,  and  wishing  to  be  happy,  like  an

individual, should lead a good life; for he who leads such a life neither does

nor  suffers  injury,  of  which  the  first  is  very  easy,  and  the  second  very

difficult of attainment, and is only to be acquired by perfect virtue. A good

city has peace, but the evil city is full of wars within and without. To guard

against the danger of external enemies the citizens should practise war at least

one day in every month; they should go out en masse, including their wives

and children, or in divisions, as the magistrates determine, and have mimic

contests,  imitating  in  a  lively  manner  real  battles;  they  should  also  have

prizes and encomiums of valour, both for the victors in these contests, and for

the victors in the battle of life. The poet who celebrates the victors should be

fifty years old at least, and himself a man who has done great deeds. Of such

an one the poems may be sung, even though he is not the best of poets. To the

director of education and the guardians of the law shall be committed the

judgment, and no song, however sweet, which has not been licensed by them

shall  be  recited.  These  regulations  about  poetry,  and  about  military

expeditions, apply equally to men and to women.


The legislator may be conceived to make the following address to himself: --

With what object am I training my citizens? Are they not strivers for masteryin the greatest of combats? Certainly, will be the reply. And if they were

boxers or wrestlers, would they think of entering the lists without many days'

practice? Would they not as far as possible imitate all the circumstances of

the contest; and if they had no one to box with, would they not practise on a

lifeless  image,  heedless  of  the  laughter  of  the  spectators?  And  shall  our

soldiers go out to fight for life and kindred and property unprepared, because

sham fights are thought to be ridiculous? Will not the legislator require that

his citizens shall practise war daily, performing lesser exercises without arms,

while  the  combatants  on  a  greater  scale  will  carry  arms,  and  take  up

positions, and lie in ambuscade? And let their combats be not without danger,

that opportunity may be given for distinction, and the brave man and the

coward may receive their meed of honour or disgrace. If occasionally a man

is killed, there is no great harm done--there are others as good as he is who

will replace him; and the state can better afford to lose a few of her citizens

than to lose the only means of testing them.


'We agree, Stranger, that such warlike exercises are necessary.' But why are

they so rarely practised? Or rather, do we not all know the reasons? One of

them (1) is the inordinate love of wealth. This absorbs the soul of a man, and

leaves him no time for any other pursuit. Knowledge is valued by him only as

it tends to the attainment of wealth. All is lost in the desire of heaping up gold

and silver; anybody is ready to do anything, right or wrong, for the sake of

eating and drinking, and the indulgence of his animal passions. 'Most true.'

This is one of the causes which prevents a man being a good soldier, or

anything  else  which  is  good;  it  converts  the  temperate  and  orderly  into

shopkeepers or servants, and the brave into burglars or pirates. Many of these

latter are men of ability, and are greatly to be pitied, because their souls are

hungering and thirsting all their lives long. The bad forms of government (2)

are another reason-- democracy, oligarchy, tyranny, which, as I was saying,

are not states, but states of discord, in which the rulers are afraid of their

subjects, and therefore do not like them to become rich, or noble, or valiant.

Now our state will escape both these causes of evil; the society is perfectly

free, and has plenty of leisure, and is not allowed by the laws to be absorbed

in  the  pursuit  of  wealth;  hence  we  have  an  excellent  field  for  a  perfect

education, and for the introduction of martial pastimes. Let us proceed to

describe the character of these pastimes. All gymnastic exercises in our state

must  have  a  military  character;  no  other  will  be  allowed.  Activity  andquickness are most useful in war; and yet these qualities do not attain their

greatest efficiency unless the competitors are armed. The runner should enter

the lists in armour, and in the races which our heralds proclaim, no prize is to

be  given  except  to  armed  warriors.  Let  there  be  six  courses--first,  the

stadium; secondly, the diaulos or double course; thirdly, the horse course;

fourthly,  the  long  course;  fifthly,  races  (1)  between  heavy-armed  soldiers

who  shall  pass  over  sixty  stadia  and  finish  at  a  temple  of  Ares,  and  (2)

between  still  more  heavily-armed  competitors  who  run  over  smoother

ground; sixthly, a race for archers, who shall run over hill and dale a distance

of a hundred stadia, and their goal shall be a temple of Apollo and Artemis.

There shall be three contests of each kind--one for boys, another for youths, a

third for men; the course for the boys we will fix at half, and that for the

youths  at  two-thirds  of  the  entire  length.  Women  shall  join  in  the  races:

young girls who are not grown up shall run naked; but after thirteen they

shall be suitably dressed; from thirteen to eighteen they shall be obliged to

share in these contests, and from eighteen to twenty they may if they please

and if they are unmarried. As to trials of strength, single combats in armour,

or battles between two and two, or of any number up to ten, shall take the

place of wrestling and the heavy exercises. And there must be umpires, as

there  are  now  in  wrestling,  to  determine  what  is  a  fair  hit  and  who  is

conqueror.  Instead  of  the  pancratium,  let  there  be  contests  in  which  the

combatants carry bows and wear light shields and hurl javelins and throw

stones. The next provision of the law will relate to horses, which, as we are in

Crete, need be rarely used by us, and chariots never; our horse-racing prizes

will only be given to single horses, whether colts, half-grown, or full-grown.

Their riders are to wear armour, and there shall be a competition between

mounted archers. Women, if they have a mind, may join in the exercises of

men.


But enough of gymnastics, and nearly enough of music. All musical contests

will take place at festivals, whether every third or every fifth year, which are

to be fixed by the guardians of the law, the judges of the games, and the

director  of  education,  who  for  this  purpose  shall  become  legislators  and

arrange times and conditions. The principles on which such contests are to be

ordered have been often repeated by the first legislator; no more need be said

of them, nor are the details of them important. But there is another subject of

the highest importance, which, if possible, should be determined by the laws,not of man, but of God; or, if a direct revelation is impossible, there is need

of some bold man who, alone against the world, will speak plainly of the

corruption of human nature, and go to war with the passions of mankind. 'We

do not understand you.' I will try to make my meaning plainer. In speaking of

education, I seemed to see young men and maidens in friendly intercourse

with one another; and there arose in my mind a natural fear about a state, in

which the young of either sex are well nurtured, and have little to do, and

occupy themselves chiefly with festivals and dances. How can they be saved

from those passions which reason forbids them to indulge, and which are the

ruin of so many? The prohibition of wealth, and the influence of education,

and the all-seeing eye of the ruler, will alike help to promote temperance; but

they  will  not  wholly  extirpate  the  unnatural  loves  which  have  been  the

destruction  of  states;  and  against  this  evil  what  remedy  can  be  devised?

Lacedaemon and Crete give no assistance here; on the subject of love, as I

may whisper in your ear, they are against us. Suppose a person were to urge

that you ought to restore the natural use which existed before the days of

Laius; he would be quite right, but he would not be supported by public

opinion in either of your states. Or try the matter by the test which we apply

to all laws,--who will say that the permission of such things tends to virtue?

Will he who is seduced learn the habit of courage; or will the seducer acquire

temperance? And will any legislator be found to make such actions legal?


But to judge of this matter truly, we must understand the nature of love and

friendship, which may take very different forms. For we speak of friendship,

first, when there is some similarity or equality of virtue; secondly, when there

is some want; and either of these, when in excess, is termed love. The first

kind is gentle and sociable; the second is fierce and unmanageable; and there

is also a third kind, which is akin to both, and is under the dominion of

opposite  principles.  The  one  is  of  the  body,  and  has  no  regard  for  the

character  of  the  beloved;  but  he  who  is  under  the  influence  of  the  other

disregards the body, and is a looker rather than a lover, and desires only with

his soul to be knit to the soul of his friend; while the intermediate sort is both

of the body and of the soul. Here are three kinds of love: ought the legislator

to prohibit all of them equally, or to allow the virtuous love to remain? 'The

latter, clearly.' I expected to gain your approval; but I will reserve the task of

convincing our friend Cleinias for another occasion. 'Very good.' To make

right laws on this subject is in one point of view easy, and in another mostdifficult; for we know that in some cases most men abstain willingly from

intercourse with the fair. The unwritten law which prohibits members of the

same  family  from  such  intercourse  is  strictly  obeyed,  and  no  thought  of

anything else ever enters into the minds of men in general. A little word puts

out the fire of their lusts. 'What is it?' The declaration that such things are

hateful to the Gods, and most abominable and unholy. The reason is that

everywhere, in jest and earnest alike, this is the doctrine which is repeated to

all  from  their  earliest  youth.  They  see  on  the  stage  that  an  Oedipus  or  a

Thyestes  or  a  Macareus,  when  undeceived,  are  ready  to  kill  themselves.

There  is  an  undoubted  power  in  public  opinion  when  no  breath  is  heard

adverse to the law; and the legislator who would enslave these enslaving

passions must consecrate such a public opinion all through the city. 'Good:

but how can you create it?' A fair objection; but I promised to try and find

some means of restraining loves to their natural objects. A law which would

extirpate unnatural love as effectually as incest is at present extirpated, would

be the source of innumerable blessings, because it would be in accordance

with  nature,  and  would  get  rid  of  excess  in  eating  and  drinking  and  of

adulteries  and  frenzies,  making  men  love  their  wives,  and  having  other

excellent effects. I can imagine that some lusty youth overhears what we are

saying,  and  roars  out  in  abusive  terms  that  we  are  legislating  for

impossibilities. And so a person might have said of the syssitia, or common

meals; but this is refuted by facts, although even now they are not extended to

women. 'True.' There is no impossibility or super-humanity in my proposed

law, as I shall endeavour to prove. 'Do so.' Will not a man find abstinence

more easy when his body is sound than when he is in ill-condition? 'Yes.'

Have we not heard of Iccus of Tarentum and other wrestlers who abstained

wholly for a time? Yet they were infinitely worse educated than our citizens,

and far more lusty in their bodies. And shall they have abstained for the sake

of an athletic contest, and our citizens be incapable of a similar endurance for

the sake of a much nobler victory,--the victory over pleasure, which is true

happiness? Will not the fear of impiety enable them to conquer that which

many who were inferior to them have conquered? 'I dare say.' And therefore

the law must plainly declare that our citizens should not fall below the other

animals, who live all together in flocks, and yet remain pure and chaste until

the time of procreation comes, when they pair, and are ever after faithful to

their compact. But if the corruption of public opinion is too great to allow our

first law to be carried out, then our guardians of the law must turn legislators,and  try  their  hand  at  a  second  law.  They  must  minimize  the  appetites,

diverting the vigour of youth into other channels, allowing the practice of

love in secret, but making detection shameful. Three higher principles may be

brought  to  bear  on  all  these  corrupt  natures.  'What  are  they?'  Religion,

honour, and the love of the higher qualities of the soul. Perhaps this is a

dream only, yet it is the best of dreams; and if not the whole, still, by the

grace of God, a part of what we desire may be realized. Either men may learn

to abstain wholly from any loves, natural or unnatural, except of their wedded

wives; or, at least, they may give up unnatural loves; or, if detected, they

shall be punished with loss of citizenship, as aliens from the state in their

morals. 'I entirely agree with you,' said Megillus, 'but Cleinias must speak for

himself.' 'I will give my opinion by-and-by.'


We were speaking of the syssitia, which will be a natural institution in a

Cretan colony. Whether they shall be established after the model of Crete or

Lacedaemon, or shall be different from either, is an unimportant question

which may be determined without difficulty. We may, therefore, proceed to

speak of the mode of life among our citizens, which will be far less complex

than in other cities; a state which is inland and not maritime requires only half

the number of laws. There is no trouble about trade and commerce, and a

thousand  other  things.  The  legislator  has  only  to  regulate  the  affairs  of

husbandmen  and  shepherds,  which  will  be  easily  arranged,  now  that  the

principal questions, such as marriage, education, and government, have been

settled.


Let  us  begin  with  husbandry:  First,  let  there  be  a  law  of  Zeus  against

removing a neighbour's landmark, whether he be a citizen or stranger. For

this is 'to move the immoveable'; and Zeus, the God of kindred, witnesses to

the wrongs of citizens, and Zeus, the God of strangers, to the wrongs of

strangers.  The  offence  of  removing  a  boundary  shall  receive  two

punishments--the first will be inflicted by the God himself; the second by the

judges.  In  the  next  place,  the  differences  between  neighbours  about

encroachments  must  be  guarded  against.  He  who  encroaches  shall  pay

twofold  the  amount  of  the  injury;  of  all  such  matters  the  wardens  of  the

country shall be the judges, in lesser cases the officers, and in greater the

whole number of them belonging to any one division. Any injury done by

cattle, the decoying of bees, the careless firing of woods, the planting undulynear a neighbour's ground, shall all be visited with proper damages. Such

details have been determined by previous legislators, and need not now be

mixed up with greater matters. Husbandmen have had of old excellent rules

about streams and waters; and we need not 'divert their course.' Anybody

may take water from a common stream, if he does not thereby cut off a

private spring; he may lead the water in any direction, except through a house

or temple, but he must do no harm beyond the channel. If land is without

water the occupier shall dig down to the clay, and if at this depth he find no

water,  he  shall  have  a  right  of  getting  water  from  his  neighbours  for  his

household;  and  if  their  supply  is  limited,  he  shall  receive  from  them  a

measure of water fixed by the wardens of the country. If there be heavy rains,

the dweller on the higher ground must not recklessly suffer the water to flow

down  upon  a  neighbour  beneath  him,  nor  must  he  who  lives  upon  lower

ground or dwells in an adjoining house refuse an outlet. If the two parties

cannot agree, they shall go before the wardens of the city or country, and if a

man refuse to abide by their decision, he shall pay double the damage which

he has caused.


In autumn God gives us two boons--one the joy of Dionysus not to be laid

up--the other to be laid up. About the fruits of autumn let the law be as

follows: He who gathers the storing fruits of autumn, whether grapes or figs,

before the time of the vintage, which is the rising of Arcturus, shall pay fifty

drachmas as a fine to Dionysus, if he gathers on his own ground; if on his

neighbour's ground, a mina, and two-thirds of a mina if on that of any one

else.  The  grapes  or  figs  not  used  for  storing  a  man  may  gather  when  he

pleases on his own ground, but on that of others he must pay the penalty of

removing what he has not laid down. If he be a slave who has gathered, he

shall  receive  a  stroke  for  every  grape  or  fig.  A  metic  must  purchase  the

choice fruit; but a stranger may pluck for himself and his attendant. This right

of hospitality, however, does not extend to storing grapes. A slave who eats

of the storing grapes or figs shall be beaten, and the freeman be dismissed

with a warning. Pears, apples, pomegranates, may be taken secretly, but he

who is detected in the act of taking them shall be lightly beaten off, if he be

not more than thirty years of age. The stranger and the elder may partake of

them, but not carry any away; the latter, if he does not obey the law, shall fail

in the competition of virtue, if anybody brings up his offence against him.Water is also in need of protection, being the greatest element of nutrition,

and,  unlike  the  other  elements--soil,  air,  and  sun--which  conspire  in  the

growth  of  plants,  easily  polluted.  And  therefore  he  who  spoils  another's

water, whether in springs or reservoirs, either by trenching, or theft, or by

means of poisonous substances, shall pay the damage and purify the stream.

At the getting-in of the harvest everybody shall have a right of way over his

neighbour's  ground,  provided  he  is  careful  to  do  no  damage  beyond  the

trespass, or if he himself will gain three times as much as his neighbour loses.

Of all this the magistrates are to take cognizance, and they are to assess the

damage  where  the  injury  does  not  exceed  three  minae;  cases  of  greater

damage can be tried only in the public courts. A charge against a magistrate

is to be referred to the public courts, and any one who is found guilty of

deciding  corruptly  shall  pay  twofold  to  the  aggrieved  person.  Matters  of

detail relating to punishments and modes of procedure, and summonses, and

witnesses  to  summonses,  do  not  require  the  mature  wisdom  of  the  aged

legislator;  the  younger  generation  may  determine  them  according  to  their

experience; but when once determined, they shall remain unaltered.


The following are to be the regulations respecting handicrafts:--No citizen, or

servant of a citizen, is to practise them. For the citizen has already an art and

mystery, which is the care of the state; and no man can practise two arts, or

practise one and superintend another. No smith should be a carpenter, and no

carpenter,  having  many  slaves  who  are  smiths,  should  look  after  them

himself;  but  let  each  man  practise  one  art  which  shall  be  his  means  of

livelihood. The wardens of the city should see to this, punishing the citizen

who  offends  with  temporary  deprival  of  his  rights--the  foreigner  shall  be

imprisoned, fined, exiled. Any disputes about contracts shall be determined

by the wardens of the city up to fifty drachmae--above that sum by the public

courts. No customs are to be exacted either on imports or exports. Nothing

unnecessary is to be imported from abroad, whether for the service of the

Gods or for the use of man--neither purple, nor other dyes, nor frankincense,-

-and nothing needed in the country is to be exported. These things are to be

decided on by the twelve guardians of the law who are next in seniority to the

five elders. Arms and the materials of war are to be imported and exported

only with the consent of the generals, and then only by the state. There is to

be no retail trade either in these or any other articles. For the distribution of

the  produce  of  the  country,  the  Cretan  laws  afford  a  rule  which  may  beusefully followed. All shall be required to distribute corn, grain, animals, and

other  valuable  produce,  into  twelve  portions.  Each  of  these  shall  be

subdivided into three parts--one for freemen, another for servants, and the

third shall be sold for the supply of artisans, strangers, and metics. These

portions must be equal whether the produce be much or little; and the master

of a household may distribute the two portions among his family and his

slaves as he pleases--the remainder is to be measured out to the animals.


Next as to the houses in the country--there shall be twelve villages, one in the

centre of each of the twelve portions; and in every village there shall be

temples  and  an  agora--also  shrines  for  heroes  or  for  any  old  Magnesian

deities who linger about the place. In every division there shall be temples of

Hestia,  Zeus,  and  Athene,  as  well  as  of  the  local  deity,  surrounded  by

buildings on eminences, which will be the guard- houses of the rural police.

The dwellings of the artisans will be thus arranged:--The artisans shall be

formed into thirteen guilds, one of which will be divided into twelve parts

and settled in the city; of the rest there shall be one in each division of the

country. And the magistrates will fix them on the spots where they will cause

the least inconvenience and be most serviceable in supplying the wants of the

husbandmen.


The care of the agora will fall to the wardens of the agora. Their first duty

will be the regulation of the temples which surround the market- place; and

their  second  to  see  that  the  markets  are  orderly  and  that  fair  dealing  is

observed.  They  will  also  take  care  that  the  sales  which  the  citizens  are

required to make to strangers are duly executed. The law shall be, that on the

first day of each month the auctioneers to whom the sale is entrusted shall

offer grain; and at this sale a twelfth part of the whole shall be exposed, and

the foreigner shall supply his wants for a month. On the tenth, there shall be a

sale of liquids, and on the twenty- third of animals, skins, woven or woollen

stuffs, and other things which husbandmen have to sell and foreigners want to

buy. None of these commodities, any more than barley or flour, or any other

food, may be retailed by a citizen to a citizen; but foreigners may sell them to

one another in the foreigners' market. There must also be butchers who will

sell  parts  of  animals  to  foreigners  and  craftsmen,  and  their  servants;  and

foreigners may buy firewood wholesale of the commissioners of woods, and

may sell retail to foreigners. All other goods must be sold in the market, atsome place indicated by the magistrates, and shall be paid for on the spot. He

who gives credit, and is cheated, will have no redress. In buying or selling,

any excess or diminution of what the law allows shall be registered. The

same  rule  is  to  be  observed  about  the  property  of  metics.  Anybody  who

practises a handicraft may come and remain twenty years from the day on

which he is enrolled; at the expiration of this time he shall take what he has

and depart. The only condition which is to be imposed upon him as the tax of

his sojourn is good conduct; and he is not to pay any tax for being allowed to

buy or sell. But if he wants to extend the time of his sojourn, and has done

any service to the state, and he can persuade the council and assembly to

grant his request, he may remain. The children of metics may also be metics;

and the period of twenty years, during which they are permitted to sojourn, is

to count, in their case, from their fifteenth year.


No mention occurs in the Laws of the doctrine of Ideas. The will of God, the

authority of the legislator, and the dignity of the soul, have taken their place

in the mind of Plato. If we ask what is that truth or principle which, towards

the end of his life, seems to have absorbed him most, like the idea of good in

the Republic, or of beauty in the Symposium, or of the unity of virtue in the

Protagoras, we should answer-- The priority of the soul to the body: his later

system mainly hangs upon this. In the Laws, as in the Sophist and Statesman,

we pass out of the region of metaphysical or transcendental ideas into that of

psychology.


The opening of the fifth book, though abrupt and unconnected in style, is one

of the most elevated passages in Plato. The religious feeling which he seeks

to diffuse over the commonest actions of life, the blessedness of living in the

truth, the great mistake of a man living for himself, the pity as well as anger

which  should  be  felt  at  evil,  the  kindness  due  to  the  suppliant  and  the

stranger, have the temper of Christian philosophy. The remark that elder men,

if they want to educate others, should begin by educating themselves; the

necessity of creating a spirit of obedience in the citizens; the desirableness of

limiting property; the importance of parochial districts, each to be placed

under the protection of some God or demigod, have almost the tone of a

modern writer. In many of his views of politics, Plato seems to us, like some

politicians of our own time, to be half socialist, half conservative.In the Laws, we remark a change in the place assigned by him to pleasure and

pain. There are two ways in which even the ideal systems of morals may

regard  them:  either  like  the  Stoics,  and  other  ascetics,  we  may  say  that

pleasure must be eradicated; or if this seems unreal to us, we may affirm that

virtue is the true pleasure; and then, as Aristotle says, 'to be brought up to

take pleasure in what we ought, exercises a great and paramount influence on

human life' (Arist. Eth. Nic.). Or as Plato says in the Laws, 'A man will

recognize the noblest life as having the greatest pleasure and the least pain, if

he have a true taste.' If we admit that pleasures differ in kind, the opposition

between these two modes of speaking is rather verbal than real; and in the

greater part of the writings of Plato they alternate with each other. In the

Republic,  the  mere  suggestion  that  pleasure  may  be  the  chief  good,  is

received by Socrates with a cry of abhorrence; but in the Philebus, innocent

pleasures  vindicate  their  right  to  a  place  in  the  scale  of  goods.  In  the

Protagoras, speaking in the person of Socrates rather than in his own, Plato

admits the calculation of pleasure to be the true basis of ethics, while in the

Phaedo he indignantly denies that the exchange of one pleasure for another is

the exchange of virtue. So wide of the mark are they who would attribute to

Plato entire consistency in thoughts or words.


He acknowledges that the second state is inferior to the first--in this, at any

rate, he is consistent; and he still casts longing eyes upon the ideal. Several

features of the first are retained in the second: the education of men and

women is to be as far as possible the same; they are to have common meals,

though separate, the men by themselves, the women with their children; and

they are both to serve in the army; the citizens, if not actually communists,

are in spirit communistic; they are to be lovers of equality; only a certain

amount  of  wealth  is  permitted  to  them,  and  their  burdens  and  also  their

privileges are to be proportioned to this. The constitution in the Laws is a

timocracy of wealth, modified by an aristocracy of merit. Yet the political

philosopher will observe that the first of these two principles is fixed and

permanent, while the latter is uncertain and dependent on the opinion of the

multitude. Wealth, after all, plays a great part in the Second Republic of

Plato.  Like  other  politicians,  he  deems  that  a  property  qualification  will

contribute  stability  to  the  state.  The  four  classes  are  derived  from  the

constitution of Athens, just as the form of the city, which is clustered around

a citadel set on a hill, is suggested by the Acropolis at Athens. Plato, writingunder Pythagorean influences, seems really to have supposed that the well-

being of the city depended almost as much on the number 5040 as on justice

and moderation. But he is not prevented by Pythagoreanism from observing

the effects which climate and soil exercise on the characters of nations.


He was doubtful in the Republic whether the ideal or communistic state could

be realized, but was at the same time prepared to maintain that whether it

existed or not made no difference to the philosopher, who will in any case

regulate his life by it (Republic). He has now lost faith in the practicability of

his scheme--he is speaking to 'men, and not to Gods or sons of Gods' (Laws).

Yet he still maintains it to be the true pattern of the state, which we must

approach as nearly as possible: as Aristotle says, 'After having created a more

general form of state, he gradually brings it round to the other' (Pol.). He does

not observe, either here or in the Republic, that in such a commonwealth

there would be little room for the development of individual character. In

several respects the second state is an improvement on the first, especially in

being based more distinctly on the dignity of the soul. The standard of truth,

justice, temperance, is as high as in the Republic;--in one respect higher, for

temperance is now regarded, not as a virtue, but as the condition of all virtue.

It is finally acknowledged that the virtues are all one and connected, and that

if they are separated, courage is the lowest of them. The treatment of moral

questions  is  less  speculative  but  more  human.  The  idea  of  good  has

disappeared; the excellences of individuals--of him who is faithful in a civil

broil, of the examiner who is incorruptible, are the patterns to which the lives

of the citizens are to conform. Plato is never weary of speaking of the honour

of the soul, which can only be honoured truly by being improved. To make

the soul as good as possible, and to prepare her for communion with the Gods

in another world by communion with divine virtue in this, is the end of life. If

the Republic is far superior to the Laws in form and style, and perhaps in

reach of thought, the Laws leave on the mind of the modern reader much

more strongly the impression of a struggle against evil, and an enthusiasm for

human improvement. When Plato says that he must carry out that part of his

ideal which is practicable, he does not appear to have reflected that part of an

ideal cannot be detached from the whole.


The great defect of both his constitutions is the fixedness which he seeks to

impress  upon  them.  He  had  seen  the  Athenian  empire,  almost  within  thelimits of his own life, wax and wane, but he never seems to have asked

himself  what  would  happen  if,  a  century  from  the  time  at  which  he  was

writing, the Greek character should have as much changed as in the century

which had preceded. He fails to perceive that the greater part of the political

life of a nation is not that which is given them by their legislators, but that

which they give themselves. He has never reflected that without progress

there  cannot  be  order,  and  that  mere  order  can  only  be  preserved  by  an

unnatural and despotic repression. The possibility of a great nation or of an

universal empire arising never occurred to him. He sees the enfeebled and

distracted state of the Hellenic world in his own later life, and thinks that the

remedy  is  to  make  the  laws  unchangeable.  The  same  want  of  insight  is

apparent  in  his  judgments  about  art.  He  would  like  to  have  the  forms  of

sculpture  and  of  music  fixed  as  in  Egypt.  He  does  not  consider  that  this

would be fatal to the true principles of art, which, as Socrates had himself

taught, was to give life (Xen. Mem.). We wonder how, familiar as he was

with the statues of Pheidias, he could have endured the lifeless and half-

monstrous works of Egyptian sculpture. The 'chants of Isis' (Laws), we might

think, would have been barbarous in an Athenian ear. But although he is

aware that there are some things which are not so well among 'the children of

the Nile,' he is deeply struck with the stability of Egyptian institutions. Both

in politics and in art Plato seems to have seen no way of bringing order out of

disorder, except by taking a step backwards. Antiquity, compared with the

world in which he lived, had a sacredness and authority for him: the men of a

former age were supposed by him to have had a sense of reverence which

was wanting among his contemporaries. He could imagine the early stages of

civilization;  he  never  thought  of  what  the  future  might  bring  forth.  His

experience is confined to two or three centuries, to a few Greek states, and to

an uncertain report of Egypt and the East. There are many ways in which the

limitations of their knowledge affected the genius of the Greeks. In criticism

they were like children, having an acute vision of things which were near to

them, blind to possibilities which were in the distance.


The colony is to receive from the mother-country her original constitution,

and some of the first guardians of the law. The guardians of the law are to be

ministers of justice, and the president of education is to take precedence of

them all. They are to keep the registers of property, to make regulations for

trade,  and  they  are  to  be  superannuated  at  seventy  years  of  age.  Severalquestions  of  modern  politics,  such  as  the  limitation  of  property,  the

enforcement of education, the relations of classes, are anticipated by Plato.

He hopes that in his state will be found neither poverty nor riches; every man

having the necessaries of life, he need not go fortune-hunting in marriage.

Almost in the spirit of the Gospel he would say, 'How hardly can a rich man

dwell in a perfect state.' For he cannot be a good man who is always gaining

too much and spending too little (Laws; compare Arist. Eth. Nic.). Plato,

though he admits wealth as a political element, would deny that material

prosperity can be the foundation of a really great community. A man's soul,

as he often says, is more to be esteemed than his body; and his body than

external goods. He repeats the complaint which has been made in all ages,

that the love of money is the corruption of states. He has a sympathy with

thieves and burglars, 'many of whom are men of ability and greatly to be

pitied, because their souls are hungering and thirsting all their lives long;' but

he has little sympathy with shopkeepers or retailers, although he makes the

reflection, which sometimes occurs to ourselves, that such occupations, if

they  were  carried  on  honestly  by  the  best  men  and  women,  would  be

delightful and honourable. For traders and artisans a moderate gain was, in

his opinion, best. He has never, like modern writers, idealized the wealth of

nations, any more than he has worked out the problems of political economy,

which among the ancients had not yet grown into a science. The isolation of

Greek states, their constant wars, the want of a free industrial population, and

of  the  modern  methods  and  instruments  of  'credit,'  prevented  any  great

extension of commerce among them; and so hindered them from forming a

theory  of  the  laws  which  regulate  the  accumulation  and  distribution  of

wealth.


The  constitution  of  the  army  is  aristocratic  and  also  democratic;  official

appointment  is  combined  with  popular  election.  The  two  principles  are

carried out as follows: The guardians of the law nominate generals out of

whom three are chosen by those who are or have been of the age for military

service; and the generals elected have the nomination of certain of the inferior

officers. But if either in the case of generals or of the inferior officers any one

is ready to swear that he knows of a better man than those nominated, he may

put  the  claims  of  his  candidate  to  the  vote  of  the  whole  army,  or  of  the

division of the service which he will, if elected, command. There is a general

assembly, but its functions, except at elections, are hardly noticed. In theelection of the Boule, Plato again attempts to mix aristocracy and democracy.

This is effected, first as in the Servian constitution, by balancing wealth and

numbers;  for  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  those  who  possessed  a  higher

qualification were equal in number with those who had a lower, and yet they

have an equal number of representatives. In the second place, all classes are

compelled to vote in the election of senators from the first and second class;

but the fourth class is not compelled to elect from the third, nor the third and

fourth from the fourth. Thirdly, out of the 180 persons who are thus chosen

from each of the four classes, 720 in all, 360 are to be taken by lot; these

form the council for the year.


These  political  adjustments  of  Plato's  will  be  criticised  by  the  practical

statesman as being for the most part fanciful and ineffectual. He will observe,

first of all, that the only real check on democracy is the division into classes.

The second of the three proposals, though ingenious, and receiving some

light from the apathy to politics which is often shown by the higher classes in

a democracy, would have little power in times of excitement and peril, when

the precaution was most needed. At such political crises, all the lower classes

would  vote  equally  with  the  higher.  The  subtraction  of  half  the  persons

chosen at the first election by the chances of the lot would not raise the

character of the senators, and is open to the objection of uncertainty, which

necessarily  attends  this  and  similar  schemes  of  double  representative

government. Nor can the voters be expected to retain the continuous political

interest required for carrying out such a proposal as Plato's. Who could select

180 persons of each class, fitted to be senators? And whoever were chosen by

the voter in the first instance, his wishes might be neutralized by the action of

the lot. Yet the scheme of Plato is not really so extravagant as the actual

constitution of Athens, in which all the senators appear to have been elected

by  lot  (apo  kuamou  bouleutai),  at  least,  after  the  revolution  made  by

Cleisthenes; for the constitution of the senate which was established by Solon

probably  had  some  aristocratic  features,  though  their  precise  nature  is

unknown  to  us.  The  ancients  knew  that  election  by  lot  was  the  most

democratic of all modes of appointment, seeming to say in the objectionable

sense, that 'one man is as good as another.' Plato, who is desirous of mingling

different  elements,  makes  a  partial  use  of  the  lot,  which  he  applies  to

candidates already elected by vote. He attempts also to devise a system of

checks and balances such as he supposes to have been intended by the ancientlegislators. We are disposed to say to him, as he himself says in a remarkable

passage, that 'no man ever legislates, but accidents of all sorts, which legislate

for us in all sorts of ways. The violence of war and the hard necessity of

poverty are constantly overturning governments and changing laws.' And yet,

as  he  adds,  the  true  legislator  is  still  required:  he  must  co-operate  with

circumstances. Many things which are ascribed to human foresight are the

result of chance. Ancient, and in a less degree modern political constitutions,

are never consistent with themselves, because they are never framed on a

single design, but are added to from time to time as new elements arise and

gain the preponderance in the state. We often attribute to the wisdom of our

ancestors  great  political  effects  which  have  sprung  unforeseen  from  the

accident of the situation. Power, not wisdom, is most commonly the source of

political revolutions. And the result, as in the Roman Republic, of the co-

existence of opposite elements in the same state is, not a balance of power or

an equable progress of liberal principles, but a conflict of forces, of which

one or other may happen to be in the ascendant. In Greek history, as well as

in Plato's conception of it, this 'progression by antagonism' involves reaction:

the aristocracy expands into democracy and returns again to tyranny.


The constitution of the Laws may be said to consist, besides the magistrates,

mainly of three elements,--an administrative Council, the judiciary, and the

Nocturnal Council, which is an intellectual aristocracy, composed of priests

and the ten eldest guardians of the law and some younger co-opted members.

To  this  latter  chiefly  are  assigned  the  functions  of  legislation,  but  to  be

exercised  with  a  sparing  hand.  The  powers  of  the  ordinary  council  are

administrative rather than legislative. The whole number of 360, as in the

Athenian constitution, is distributed among the months of the year according

to the number of the tribes. Not more than one-twelfth is to be in office at

once, so that the government would be made up of twelve administrations

succeeding  one  another  in  the  course  of  the  year.  They  are  to  exercise  a

general superintendence, and, like the Athenian counsellors, are to preside in

monthly  divisions  over  all  assemblies.  Of  the  ecclesia  over  which  they

presided little is said, and that little relates to comparatively trifling duties.

Nothing  is  less  present  to  the  mind  of  Plato  than  a  House  of  Commons,

carrying on year by year the work of legislation. For he supposes the laws to

be already provided. As little would he approve of a body like the Roman

Senate. The people and the aristocracy alike are to be represented, not byassemblies, but by officers elected for one or two years, except the guardians

of the law, who are elected for twenty years.


The evils of this system are obvious. If in any state, as Plato says in the

Statesman,  it  is  easier  to  find  fifty  good  draught-players  than  fifty  good

rulers, the greater part of the 360 who compose the council must be unfitted

to rule. The unfitness would be increased by the short period during which

they held office. There would be no traditions of government among them, as

in a Greek or Italian oligarchy, and no individual would be responsible for

any of their acts. Everything seems to have been sacrificed to a false notion

of equality, according to which all have a turn of ruling and being ruled. In

the constitution of the Magnesian state Plato has not emancipated himself

from the limitations of ancient politics. His government may be described as

a democracy of magistrates elected by the people. He never troubles himself

about the political consistency of his scheme. He does indeed say that the

greater part of the good of this world arises, not from equality, but from

proportion,  which  he  calls  the  judgment  of  Zeus  (compare  Aristotle's

Distributive  Justice),  but  he  hardly  makes  any  attempt  to  carry  out  the

principle  in  practice.  There  is  no  attempt  to  proportion  representation  to

merit; nor is there any body in his commonwealth which represents the life

either of a class or of the whole state. The manner of appointing magistrates

is taken chiefly from the old democratic constitution of Athens, of which it

retains some of the worst features, such as the use of the lot, while by doing

away with the political character of the popular assembly the mainspring of

the machine is taken out. The guardians of the law, thirty- seven in number,

of whom the ten eldest reappear as a part of the Nocturnal Council at the end

of the twelfth book, are to be elected by the whole military class, but they are

to hold office for twenty years, and would therefore have an oligarchical

rather than a democratic character. Nothing is said of the manner in which the

functions of the Nocturnal Council are to be harmonized with those of the

guardians of the law, or as to how the ordinary council is related to it.


Similar principles are applied to inferior offices. To some the appointment is

made  by  vote,  to  others  by  lot.  In  the  elections  to  the  priesthood,  Plato

endeavours to mix or balance in a friendly manner 'demus and not demus.'

The commonwealth of the Laws, like the Republic, cannot dispense with a

spiritual head, which is the same in both--the oracle of Delphi. From this thelaws  about  all  divine  things  are  to  be  derived.  The  final  selection  of  the

Interpreters,  the  choice  of  an  heir  for  a  vacant  lot,  the  punishment  for

removing a deposit, are also to be determined by it. Plato is not disposed to

encourage amateur attempts to revive religion in states. For, as he says in the

Laws, 'To institute religious rites is the work of a great intelligence.'


Though the council is framed on the model of the Athenian Boule, the law

courts  of  Plato  do  not  equally  conform  to  the  pattern  of  the  Athenian

dicasteries. Plato thinks that the judges should speak and ask questions: --this

is not possible if they are numerous; he would, therefore, have a few judges

only, but good ones. He is nevertheless aware that both in public and private

suits there must be a popular element. He insists that the whole people must

share in the administration of justice--in public causes they are to take the

first step, and the final decision is to remain with them. In private suits they

are also to retain a share; 'for the citizen who has no part in the administration

of justice is apt to think that he has no share in the state. For this reason there

is to be a court of law in every tribe (i.e. for about every 2,000 citizens), and

the judges are to be chosen by lot.' Of the courts of law he gives what he calls

a superficial sketch. Nor, indeed is it easy to reconcile his various accounts of

them. It is however clear that although some officials, like the guardians of

the law, the wardens of the agora, city, and country have power to inflict

minor  penalties,  the  administration  of  justice  is  in  the  main  popular.  The

ingenious expedient of dividing the questions of law and fact between a judge

and jury, which would have enabled Plato to combine the popular element

with  the  judicial,  did  not  occur  to  him  or  to  any  other  ancient  political

philosopher. Though desirous of limiting the number of judges, and thereby

confining the office to persons specially fitted for it, he does not seem to have

understood that a body of law must be formed by decisions as well as by

legal enactments.


He would have men in the first place seek justice from their friends and

neighbours, because, as he truly remarks, they know best the questions at

issue; these are called in another passage arbiters rather than judges. But if

they cannot settle the matter, it is to be referred to the courts of the tribes, and

a higher penalty is to be paid by the party who is unsuccessful in the suit.

There is a further appeal allowed to the select judges, with a further increase

of penalty. The select judges are to be appointed by the magistrates, who areto choose one from every magistracy. They are to be elected annually, and

therefore probably for a year only, and are liable to be called to account

before the guardians of the law. In cases of which death is the penalty, the

trial takes place before a special court, which is composed of the guardians of

the law and of the judges of appeal.


In treating of the subject in Book ix, he proposes to leave for the most part

the  methods  of  procedure  to  a  younger  generation  of  legislators;  the

procedure in capital causes he determines himself. He insists that the vote of

the  judges  shall  be  given  openly,  and  before  they  vote  they  are  to  hear

speeches from the plaintiff and defendant. They are then to take evidence in

support of what has been said, and to examine witnesses. The eldest judge is

to  ask  his  questions  first,  and  then  the  second,  and  then  the  third.  The

interrogatories are to continue for three days, and the evidence is to be written

down. Apparently he does not expect the judges to be professional lawyers,

any more than he expects the members of the council to be trained statesmen.


In forming marriage connexions, Plato supposes that the public interest will

prevail over private inclination. There was nothing in this very shocking to

the notions of Greeks, among whom the feeling of love towards the other sex

was almost deprived of sentiment or romance. Married life is to be regulated

solely with a view to the good of the state. The newly- married couple are not

allowed to absent themselves from their respective syssitia, even during their

honeymoon; they are to give their whole mind to the procreation of children;

their duties to one another at a later period of life are not a matter about

which  the  state  is  equally  solicitous.  Divorces  are  readily  allowed  for

incompatibility of temper. As in the Republic, physical considerations seem

almost to exclude moral and social ones. To modern feelings there is a degree

of coarseness in Plato's treatment of the subject. Yet he also makes some

shrewd remarks on marriage, as for example, that a man who does not marry

for money will not be the humble servant of his wife. And he shows a true

conception  of  the  nature  of  the  family,  when  he  requires  that  the  newly-

married couple 'should leave their father and mother,' and have a separate

home. He also provides against extravagance in marriage festivals, which in

some states of society, for instance in the case of the Hindoos, has been a

social evil of the first magnitude.In treating of property, Plato takes occasion to speak of property in slaves.

They are to be treated with perfect justice; but, for their own sake, to be kept

at a distance. The motive is not so much humanity to the slave, of which there

are hardly any traces (although Plato allows that many in the hour of peril

have found a slave more attached than members of their own family), but the

self-respect  which  the  freeman  and  citizen  owes  to  himself  (compare

Republic). If they commit crimes, they are doubly punished; if they inform

against  illegal  practices  of  their  masters,  they  are  to  receive  a  protection,

which would probably be ineffectual, from the guardians of the law; in rare

cases they are to be set free. Plato still breathes the spirit of the old Hellenic

world, in which slavery was a necessity, because leisure must be provided for

the citizen.


The education propounded in the Laws differs in several points from that of

the Republic. Plato seems to have reflected as deeply and earnestly on the

importance of infancy as Rousseau, or Jean Paul (compare the saying of the

latter--'Not the moment of death, but the moment of birth, is probably the

more important'). He would fix the amusements of children in the hope of

fixing their characters in after-life. In the spirit of the statesman who said,

'Let me make the ballads of a country, and I care not who make their laws,'

Plato would say, 'Let the amusements of children be unchanged, and they will

not want to change the laws. The 'Goddess Harmonia' plays a great part in

Plato's ideas of education. The natural restless force of life in children, 'who

do nothing but roar until they are three years old,' is gradually to be reduced

to law and order. As in the Republic, he fixes certain forms in which songs

are to be composed: (1) they are to be strains of cheerfulness and good omen;

(2) they are to be hymns or prayers addressed to the Gods; (3) they are to sing

only of the lawful and good. The poets are again expelled or rather ironically

invited to depart; and those who remain are required to submit their poems to

the censorship of the magistrates. Youth are no longer compelled to commit

to  memory  many  thousand  lyric  and  tragic  Greek  verses;  yet,  perhaps,  a

worse fate is in store for them. Plato has no belief in 'liberty of prophesying';

and having guarded against the dangers of lyric poetry, he remembers that

there is an equal danger in other writings. He cannot leave his old enemies,

the Sophists, in possession of the field; and therefore he proposes that youth

shall learn by heart, instead of the compositions of poets or prose writers, his

own inspired work on laws. These, and music and mathematics, are the chiefparts of his education.


Mathematics are to be cultivated, not as in the Republic with a view to the

science of the idea of good,--though the higher use of them is not altogether

excluded,--but rather with a religious and political aim. They are a sacred

study which teaches men how to distribute the portions of a state, and which

is  to  be  pursued  in  order  that  they  may  learn  not  to  blaspheme  about

astronomy. Against three mathematical errors Plato is in profound earnest.

First, the error of supposing that the three dimensions of length, breadth, and

height, are really commensurable with one another. The difficulty which he

feels is analogous to the difficulty which he formerly felt about the connexion

of ideas, and is equally characteristic of ancient philosophy: he fixes his mind

on the point of difference, and cannot at the same time take in the similarity.

Secondly, he is puzzled about the nature of fractions: in the Republic, he is

disposed  to  deny  the  possibility  of  their  existence.  Thirdly,  his  optimism

leads him to insist (unlike the Spanish king who thought that he could have

improved  on  the  mechanism  of  the  heavens)  on  the  perfect  or  circular

movement  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  He  appears  to  mean,  that  instead  of

regarding the stars as overtaking or being overtaken by one another, or as

planets  wandering  in  many  paths,  a  more  comprehensive  survey  of  the

heavens would enable us to infer that they all alike moved in a circle around a

centre  (compare  Timaeus;  Republic).  He  probably  suspected,  though

unacquainted with the true cause, that the appearance of the heavens did not

agree with the reality: at any rate, his notions of what was right or fitting

easily  overpowered  the  results  of  actual  observation.  To  the  early

astronomers,  who  lived  at  the  revival  of  science,  as  to  Plato,  there  was

nothing absurd in a priori astronomy, and they would probably have made

fewer  real  discoveries  of  they  had  followed  any  other  track.  (Compare

Introduction to the Republic.)


The science of dialectic is nowhere mentioned by name in the Laws, nor is

anything said of the education of after-life. The child is to begin to learn at

ten years of age: he is to be taught reading and writing for three years, from

ten to thirteen, and no longer; and for three years more, from thirteen to

sixteen, he is to be instructed in music. The great fault which Plato finds in

the contemporary education is the almost total ignorance of arithmetic and

astronomy, in which the Greeks would do well to take a lesson from theEgyptians (compare Republic). Dancing and wrestling are to have a military

character, and women as well as men are to be taught the use of arms. The

military spirit which Plato has vainly endeavoured to expel in the first two

books returns again in the seventh and eighth. He has evidently a sympathy

with the soldier, as well as with the poet, and he is no mean master of the art,

or at least of the theory, of war (compare Laws; Republic), though inclining

rather to the Spartan than to the Athenian practice of it (Laws). Of a supreme

or master science which was to be the 'coping-stone' of the rest, few traces

appear in the Laws. He seems to have lost faith in it, or perhaps to have

realized that the time for such a science had not yet come, and that he was

unable to fill up the outline which he had sketched. There is no requirement

that the guardians of the law shall be philosophers, although they are to know

the unity of virtue, and the connexion of the sciences. Nor are we told that the

leisure  of  the  citizens,  when  they  are  grown  up,  is  to  be  devoted  to  any

intellectual  employment.  In  this  respect  we  note  a  falling  off  from  the

Republic, but also there is 'the returning to it' of which Aristotle speaks in the

Politics. The public and family duties of the citizens are to be their main

business, and these would, no doubt, take up a great deal more time than in

the modern world we are willing to allow to either of them. Plato no longer

entertains  the  idea  of  any  regular  training  to  be  pursued  under  the

superintendence of the state from eighteen to thirty, or from thirty to thirty-

five; he has taken the first step downwards on 'Constitution Hill' (Republic).

But he maintains as earnestly as ever that 'to men living under this second

polity there remains the greatest of all works, the education of the soul,' and

that no bye-work should be allowed to interfere with it. Night and day are not

long enough for the consummation of it.


Few among us are either able or willing to carry education into later life; five

or six years spent at school, three or four at a university, or in the preparation

for a profession, an occasional attendance at a lecture to which we are invited

by friends when we have an hour to spare from house-keeping or money-

making--these  comprise,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  education  even  of  the

educated; and then the lamp is extinguished 'more truly than Heracleitus' sun,

never to be lighted again' (Republic). The description which Plato gives in the

Republic of the state of adult education among his contemporaries may be

applied  almost  word  for  word  to  our  own  age.  He  does  not  however

acquiesce in this widely-spread want of a higher education; he would ratherseek to make every man something of a philosopher before he enters on the

duties of active life. But in the Laws he no longer prescribes any regular

course of study which is to be pursued in mature years. Nor does he remark

that the education of after-life is of another kind, and must consist with the

majority  of  the  world  rather  in  the  improvement  of  character  than  in  the

acquirement of knowledge. It comes from the study of ourselves and other

men:  from  moderation  and  experience:  from  reflection  on  circumstances:

from the pursuit of high aims: from a right use of the opportunities of life. It

is  the  preservation  of  what  we  have  been,  and  the  addition  of  something

more. The power of abstract study or continuous thought is very rare, but

such a training as this can be given by every one to himself.


The singular passage in Book vii., in which Plato describes life as a pastime,

like many other passages in the Laws is imperfectly expressed. Two thoughts

seem to be struggling in his mind: first, the reflection, to which he returns at

the end of the passage, that men are playthings or puppets, and that God only

is the serious aim of human endeavours; this suggests to him the afterthought

that, although playthings, they are the playthings of the Gods, and that this is

the best of them. The cynical, ironical fancy of the moment insensibly passes

into a religious sentiment. In another passage he says that life is a game of

which God, who is the player, shifts the pieces so as to procure the victory of

good on the whole. Or once more: Tragedies are acted on the stage; but the

best and noblest of them is the imitation of the noblest life, which we affirm

to be the life of our whole state. Again, life is a chorus, as well as a sort of

mystery, in which we have the Gods for playmates. Men imagine that war is

their  serious  pursuit,  and  they  make  war  that  they  may  return  to  their

amusements. But neither wars nor amusements are the true satisfaction of

men, which is to be found only in the society of the Gods, in sacrificing to

them and propitiating them. Like a Christian ascetic, Plato seems to suppose

that life should be passed wholly in the enjoyment of divine things. And after

meditating in amazement on the sadness and unreality of the world, he adds,

in a sort of parenthesis, 'Be cheerful, Sirs' (Shakespeare, Tempest.)


In one of the noblest passages of Plato, he speaks of the relation of the sexes.

Natural relations between members of the same family have been established

of old; a 'little word' has put a stop to incestuous connexions. But unnatural

unions of another kind continued to prevail at Crete and Lacedaemon, andwere  even  justified  by  the  example  of  the  Gods.  They,  too,  might  be

banished, if the feeling that they were unholy and abominable could sink into

the minds of men. The legislator is to cry aloud, and spare not, 'Let not men

fall below the level of the beasts.' Plato does not shrink, like some modern

philosophers, from 'carrying on war against the mightiest lusts of mankind;'

neither does he expect to extirpate them, but only to confine them to their

natural use and purpose, by the enactments of law, and by the influence of

public opinion. He will not feed them by an over-luxurious diet, nor allow the

healthier  instincts  of  the  soul  to  be  corrupted  by  music  and  poetry.  The

prohibition of excessive wealth is, as he says, a very considerable gain in the

way  of  temperance,  nor  does  he  allow  of  those  enthusiastic  friendships

between older and younger persons which in his earlier writings appear to be

alluded to with a certain degree of amusement and without reproof (compare

Introduction to the Symposium). Sappho and Anacreon are celebrated by him

in the Charmides and the Phaedrus; but they would have been expelled from

the Magnesian state.


Yet he does not suppose that the rule of absolute purity can be enforced on all

mankind. Something must be conceded to the weakness of human nature. He

therefore adopts a 'second legal standard of honourable and dishonourable,

having  a  second  standard  of  right.'  He  would  abolish  altogether  'the

connexion of men with men...As to women, if any man has to do with any but

those who come into his house duly married by sacred rites, and he offends

publicly in the face of all mankind, we shall be right in enacting that he be

deprived of civic honours and privileges.' But feeling also that it is impossible

wholly  to  control  the  mightiest  passions  of  mankind,'  Plato,  like  other

legislators,  makes  a  compromise.  The  offender  must  not  be  found  out;

decency, if not morality, must be respected. In this he appears to agree with

the practice of all civilized ages and countries. Much may be truly said by the

moralist on the comparative harm of open and concealed vice. Nor do we

deny that some moral evils are better turned out to the light, because, like

diseases, when exposed, they are more easily cured. And secrecy introduces

mystery which enormously exaggerates their power; a mere animal want is

thus elevated into a sentimental ideal. It may very well be that a word spoken

in season about things which are commonly concealed may have an excellent

effect.  But  having  regard  to  the  education  of  youth,  to  the  innocence  of

children, to the sensibilities of women, to the decencies of society, Plato andthe world in general are not wrong in insisting that some of the worst vices, if

they must exist, should be kept out of sight; this, though only a second-best

rule, is a support to the weakness of human nature. There are some things

which  may  be  whispered  in  the  closet,  but  should  not  be  shouted  on  the

housetop. It may be said of this, as of many other things, that it is a great part

of education to know to whom they are to be spoken of, and when, and

where.BOOK IX


Punishments of offences and modes of procedure come next in order. We

have a sense of disgrace in making regulations for all the details of crime in a

virtuous and well-ordered state. But seeing that we are legislating for men

and not for Gods, there is no uncharitableness in apprehending that some one

of our citizens may have a heart, like the seed which has touched the ox's

horn, so hard as to be impenetrable to the law. Let our first enactment be

directed  against  the  robbing  of  temples.  No  well-educated  citizen  will  be

guilty of such a crime, but one of their servants, or some stranger, may, and

with a view to him, and at the same time with a remoter eye to the general

infirmity of human nature, I will lay down the law, beginning with a prelude.

To the intending robber we will say--O sir, the complaint which troubles you

is not human; but some curse has fallen upon you, inherited from the crimes

of your ancestors, of which you must purge yourself: go and sacrifice to the

Gods, associate with the good, avoid the wicked; and if you are cured of the

fatal impulse, well; but if not, acknowledge death to be better than life, and

depart.


These  are  the  accents,  soft  and  low,  in  which  we  address  the  would-be

criminal. And if he will not listen, then cry aloud as with the sound of a

trumpet: Whosoever robs a temple, if he be a slave or foreigner shall be

branded in the face and hands, and scourged, and cast naked beyond the

border. And perhaps this may improve him: for the law aims either at the

reformation of the criminal, or the repression of crime. No punishment is

designed to inflict useless injury. But if the offender be a citizen, he must be

incurable, and for him death is the only fitting penalty. His iniquity, however,

shall not be visited on his children, nor shall his property be confiscated.


As to the exaction of penalties, any person who is fined for an offence shall

not be liable to pay the fine, unless he have property in excess of his lot. For

the lots must never go uncultivated for lack of means; the guardians of the

law are to provide against this. If a fine is inflicted upon a man which he

cannot pay, and for which his friends are unwilling to give security, he shall

be  imprisoned  and  otherwise  dishonoured.  But  no  criminal  shall  gounpunished:--whether  death,  or  imprisonment,  or  stripes,  or  fines,  or  the

stocks, or banishment to a remote temple, be the penalty. Capital offences

shall come under the cognizance of the guardians of the law, and a college of

the best of the last year's magistrates. The order of suits and similar details we

shall leave to the lawgivers of the future, and only determine the mode of

voting. The judges are to sit in order of seniority, and the proceedings shall

begin  with  the  speeches  of  the  plaintiff  and  the  defendant;  and  then  the

judges, beginning with the eldest, shall ask questions and collect evidence

during three days, which, at the end of each day, shall be deposited in writing

under their seals on the altar of Hestia; and when they have evidence enough,

after a solemn declaration that they will decide justly, they shall vote and end

the case. The votes are to be given openly in the presence of the citizens.


Next to religion, the preservation of the constitution is the first object of the

law. The greatest enemy of the state is he who attempts to set up a tyrant, or

breeds plots and conspiracies; not far below him in guilt is a magistrate who

either knowingly, or in ignorance, fails to bring the offender to justice. Any

one who is good for anything will give information against traitors. The mode

of proceeding at such trials will be the same as at trials for sacrilege; the

penalty, death. But neither in this case nor in any other is the son to bear the

iniquity of the father, unless father, grandfather, great-grandfather, have all of

them been capitally convicted, and then the family of the criminal are to be

sent off to the country of their ancestor, retaining their property, with the

exception of the lot and its fixtures. And ten are to be selected from the

younger sons of the other citizens--one of whom is to be chosen by the oracle

of Delphi to be heir of the lot.


Our third law will be a general one, concerning the procedure and the judges

in cases of treason. As regards the remaining or departure of the family of the

offender, the same law shall apply equally to the traitor, the sacrilegious, and

the conspirator.


A thief, whether he steals much or little, must refund twice the amount, if he

can do so without impairing his lot; if he cannot, he must go to prison until he

either pays the plaintiff, or in case of a public theft, the city, or they agree to

forgive  him.  'But  should  all  kinds  of  theft  incur  the  same  penalty?'  You

remind me of what I know--that legislation is never perfect. The men forwhom  laws  are  now  made  may  be  compared  to  the  slave  who  is  being

doctored,  according  to  our  old  image,  by  the  unscientific  doctor.  For  the

empirical practitioner, if he chance to meet the educated physician talking to

his patient, and entering into the philosophy of his disease, would burst out

laughing  and  say,  as  doctors  delight  in  doing,  'Foolish  fellow,  instead  of

curing  the  patient  you  are  educating  him!'  'And  would  he  not  be  right?'

Perhaps; and he might add, that he who discourses in our fashion preaches to

the citizens instead of legislating for them. 'True.' There is, however, one

advantage which we possess--that being amateurs only, we may either take

the most ideal, or the most necessary and utilitarian view. 'But why offer such

an alternative? As if all our legislation must be done to-day, and nothing put

off until the morrow. We may surely rough-hew our materials first, and shape

and place them afterwards.' That will be the natural way of proceeding. There

is a further point. Of all writings either in prose or verse the writings of the

legislator are the most important. For it is he who has to determine the nature

of  good  and  evil,  and  how  they  should  be  studied  with  a  view  to  our

instruction. And is it not as disgraceful for Solon and Lycurgus to lay down

false precepts about the institutions of life as for Homer and Tyrtaeus? The

laws of states ought to be the models of writing, and what is at variance with

them should be deemed ridiculous. And we may further imagine them to

express the affection and good sense of a father or mother, and not to be the

fiats of a tyrant. 'Very true.'


Let us enquire more particularly about sacrilege, theft and other crimes, for

which we have already legislated in part. And this leads us to ask, first of all,

whether we are agreed or disagreed about the nature of the honourable and

just. 'To what are you referring?' I will endeavour to explain. All are agreed

that  justice  is  honourable,  whether  in  men  or  things,  and  no  one  who

maintains that a very ugly men who is just, is in his mind fair, would be

thought extravagant. 'Very true.' But if honour is to be attributed to justice,

are just sufferings honourable, or only just actions? 'What do you mean?' Our

laws supply a case in point; for we enacted that the robber of temples and the

traitor should die; and this was just, but the reverse of honourable. In this way

does the language of the many rend asunder the just and honourable. 'That is

true.' But is our own language consistent? I have already said that the evil are

involuntarily evil; and the evil are the unjust. Now the voluntary cannot be

the involuntary; and if you two come to me and say, 'Then shall we legislatefor our city?' Of course, I shall reply.--'Then will you distinguish what crimes

are voluntary and what involuntary, and shall we impose lighter penalties on

the latter, and heavier on the former? Or shall we refuse to determine what is

the meaning of voluntary and involuntary, and maintain that our words have

come down from heaven, and that they should be at once embodied in a law?'

All states legislate under the idea that there are two classes of actions, the

voluntary and the involuntary, but there is great confusion about them in the

minds of men; and the law can never act unless they are distinguished. Either

we must abstain from affirming that unjust actions are involuntary, or explain

the meaning of this statement. Believing, then, that acts of injustice cannot be

divided into voluntary and involuntary, I must endeavour to find some other

mode of classifying them. Hurts are voluntary and involuntary, but all hurts

are not injuries: on the other hand, a benefit when wrongly conferred may be

an injury. An act which gives or takes away anything is not simply just; but

the legislator who has to decide whether the case is one of hurt or injury,

must consider the animus of the agent; and when there is hurt, he must as far

as possible, provide a remedy and reparation: but if there is injustice, he

must, when compensation has been made, further endeavour to reconcile the

two parties. 'Excellent.' Where injustice, like disease, is remediable, there the

remedy must be applied in word or deed, with the assistance of pleasures and

pains, of bounties and penalties, or any other influence which may inspire

man with the love of justice, or hatred of injustice; and this is the noblest

work of law. But when the legislator perceives the evil to be incurable, he

will consider that the death of the offender will be a good to himself, and in

two  ways  a  good  to  society:  first,  as  he  becomes  an  example  to  others;

secondly, because the city will be quit of a rogue; and in such a case, but in

no other, the legislator will punish with death. 'There is some truth in what

you  say.  I  wish,  however,  that  you  would  distinguish  more  clearly  the

difference  of  injury  and  hurt,  and  the  complications  of  voluntary  and

involuntary.' You will admit that anger is of a violent and destructive nature?

'Certainly.'  And  further,  that  pleasure  is  different  from  anger,  and  has  an

opposite power, working by persuasion and deceit? 'Yes.' Ignorance is the

third source of crimes; this is of two kinds-- simple ignorance and ignorance

doubled by conceit of knowledge; the latter, when accompanied with power,

is a source of terrible errors, but is excusable when only weak and childish.

'True.'  We  often  say  that  one  man  masters,  and  another  is  mastered  by

pleasure and anger. 'Just so.' But no one says that one man masters, andanother is mastered by ignorance. 'You are right.' All these motives actuate

men and sometimes drive them in different ways. 'That is so.' Now, then, I

am in a position to define the nature of just and unjust. By injustice I mean

the dominion of anger and fear, pleasure and pain, envy and desire, in the

soul, whether doing harm or not: by justice I mean the rule of the opinion of

the  best,  whether  in  states  or  individuals,  extending  to  the  whole  of  life;

although actions done in error are often thought to be involuntary injustice.

No controversy need be raised about names at present; we are only desirous

of fixing in our memories the heads of error. And the pain which is called

fear and anger is our first head of error; the second is the class of pleasures

and desires; and the third, of hopes which aim at true opinion about the best;-

-this latter falls into three divisions (i.e. (1) when accompanied by simple

ignorance,  (2)  when  accompanied  by  conceit  of  wisdom  combined  with

power, or (3) with weakness), so that there are in all five. And the laws

relating to them may be summed up under two heads, laws which deal with

acts of open violence and with acts of deceit; to which may be added acts

both violent and deceitful, and these last should be visited with the utmost

rigour of the law. 'Very properly.'


Let us now return to the enactment of laws. We have treated of sacrilege, and

of conspiracy, and of treason. Any of these crimes may be committed by a

person not in his right mind, or in the second childhood of old age. If this is

proved to be the fact before the judges, the person in question shall only have

to pay for the injury, and not be punished further, unless he have on his hands

the stain of blood. In this case he shall be exiled for a year, and if he return

before the expiration of the year, he shall be retained in the public prison two

years.


Homicides  may  be  divided  into  voluntary  and  involuntary:  and  first  of

involuntary homicide. He who unintentionally kills another man at the games

or in military exercises duly authorized by the magistrates, whether death

follow immediately or after an interval, shall be acquitted, subject only to the

purification required by the Delphian Oracle. Any physician whose patient

dies  against  his  will  shall  in  like  manner  be  acquitted.  Any  one  who

unintentionally kills the slave of another, believing that he is his own, with or

without weapons, shall bear the master of the slave harmless, or pay a penalty

amounting  to  twice  the  value  of  the  slave,  and  to  this  let  him  add  apurification greater than in the case of homicide at the games. If a man kill

his own slave, a purification only is required of him. If he kill a freeman

unintentionally, let him also make purification; and let him remember the

ancient tradition which says that the murdered man is indignant when he sees

the murderer walk about in his own accustomed haunts, and that he terrifies

him with the remembrance of his crime. And therefore the homicide should

keep away from his native land for a year, or, if he have slain a stranger, let

him avoid the land of the stranger for a like period. If he complies with this

condition, the nearest kinsman of the deceased shall take pity upon him and

be reconciled to him; but if he refuses to remain in exile, or visits the temples

unpurified, then let the kinsman proceed against him, and demand a double

penalty. The kinsman who neglects this duty shall himself incur the curse,

and any one who likes may proceed against him, and compel him to leave his

country for five years. If a stranger involuntarily kill a stranger, any one may

proceed against him in the same manner: and the homicide, if he be a metic,

shall be banished for a year; but if he be an entire stranger, whether he have

murdered metic, citizen, or stranger, he shall be banished for ever; and if he

return, he shall be punished with death, and his property shall go to the next

of kin of the murdered man. If he come back by sea against his will, he shall

remain on the seashore, wetting his feet in the water while he waits for a

vessel to sail; or if he be brought back by land, the magistrates shall send him

unharmed beyond the border.


Next follows murder done from anger, which is of two kinds--either arising

out  of  a  sudden  impulse,  and  attended  with  remorse;  or  committed  with

premeditation, and unattended with remorse. The cause of both is anger, and

both are intermediate between voluntary and involuntary. The one which is

committed from sudden impulse, though not wholly involuntary, bears the

image of the involuntary, and is therefore the more excusable of the two, and

should receive a gentler punishment. The act of him who nurses his wrath is

more  voluntary,  and  therefore  more  culpable.  The  degree  of  culpability

depends  on  the  presence  or  absence  of  intention,  to  which  the  degree  of

punishment should correspond. For the first kind of murder, that which is

done on a momentary impulse, let two years' exile be the penalty; for the

second, that which is accompanied with malice prepense, three. When the

time of any one's exile has expired, the guardians shall send twelve judges to

the borders of the land, who shall have authority to decide whether he mayreturn or not. He who after returning repeats the offence, shall be exiled and

return no more, and, if he return, shall be put to death, like the stranger in a

similar case. He who in a fit of anger kills his own slave, shall purify himself;

and he who kills another man's slave, shall pay to his master double the

value.  Any  one  may  proceed  against  the  offender  if  he  appear  in  public

places, not having been purified; and may bring to trial both the next of kin to

the dead man and the homicide, and compel the one to exact, and the other to

pay, a double penalty. If a slave kill his master, or a freeman who is not his

master,  in  anger,  the  kinsmen  of  the  murdered  person  may  do  with  the

murderer whatever they please, but they must not spare his life. If a father or

mother kill their son or daughter in anger, let the slayer remain in exile for

three years; and on the return of the exile let the parents separate, and no

longer continue to cohabit, or have the same sacred rites with those whom he

or she has deprived of a brother or sister. The same penalty is decreed against

the husband who murders his wife, and also against the wife who murders her

husband. Let them be absent three years, and on their return never again share

in the same sacred rites with their children, or sit at the same table with them.

Nor is a brother or sister who have lifted up their hands against a brother or

sister, ever to come under the same roof or share in the same rites with those

whom they have robbed of a child. If a son feels such hatred against his

father or mother as to take the life of either of them, then, if the parent before

death  forgive  him,  he  shall  only  suffer  the  penalty  due  to  involuntary

homicide; but if he be unforgiven, there are many laws against which he has

offended; he is guilty of outrage, impiety, sacrilege all in one, and deserves to

be put to death many times over. For if the law will not allow a man to kill

the authors of his being even in self-defence, what other penalty than death

can be inflicted upon him who in a fit of passion wilfully slays his father or

mother? If a brother kill a brother in self-defence during a civil broil, or a

citizen a citizen, or a slave a slave, or a stranger a stranger, let them be free

from blame, as he is who slays an enemy in battle. But if a slave kill a

freeman, let him be as a parricide. In all cases, however, the forgiveness of

the injured party shall acquit the agents; and then they shall only be purified,

and remain in exile for a year.


Enough of actions that are involuntary, or done in anger; let us proceed to

voluntary and premeditated actions. The great source of voluntary crime is

the desire of money, which is begotten by evil education; and this arises outof the false praise of riches, common both among Hellenes and barbarians;

they think that to be the first of goods which is really the third. For the body

is not for the sake of wealth, but wealth for the body, as the body is for the

soul. If this were better understood, the crime of murder, of which avarice is

the chief cause, would soon cease among men. Next to avarice, ambition is a

source of crime, troublesome to the ambitious man himself, as well as to the

chief men of the state. And next to ambition, base fear is a motive, which has

led  many  an  one  to  commit  murder  in  order  that  he  may  get  rid  of  the

witnesses of his crimes. Let this be said as a prelude to all enactments about

crimes of violence; and the tradition must not be forgotten, which tells that

the murderer is punished in the world below, and that when he returns to this

world he meets the fate which he has dealt out to others. If a man is deterred

by the prelude and the fear of future punishment, he will have no need of the

law; but in case he disobey, let the law be declared against him as follows:--

He who of malice prepense kills one of his kindred, shall in the first place be

outlawed;  neither  temple,  harbour,  nor  agora  shall  be  polluted  by  his

presence. And if a kinsman of the deceased refuse to proceed against his

slayer, he shall take the curse of pollution upon himself, and also be liable to

be  prosecuted  by  any  one  who  will  avenge  the  dead.  The  prosecutor,

however, must observe the customary ceremonial before he proceeds against

the offender. The details of these observances will be best determined by a

conclave of prophets and interpreters and guardians of the law, and the judges

of  the  cause  itself  shall  be  the  same  as  in  cases  of  sacrilege.  He  who  is

convicted shall be punished with death, and not be buried within the country

of the murdered person. He who flies from the law shall undergo perpetual

banishment;  if  he  return,  he  may  be  put  to  death  with  impunity  by  any

relative of the murdered man or by any other citizen, or bound and delivered

to  the  magistrates.  He  who  accuses  a  man  of  murder  shall  demand

satisfactory bail of the accused, and if this is not forthcoming, the magistrate

shall keep him in prison against the day of trial. If a man commit murder by

the  hand  of  another,  he  shall  be  tried  in  the  same  way  as  in  the  cases

previously supposed, but if the offender be a citizen, his body after execution

shall be buried within the land.


If a slave kill a freeman, either with his own hand or by contrivance, let him

be led either to the grave or to a place whence he can see the grave of the

murdered man, and there receive as many stripes at the hand of the publicexecutioner as the person who took him pleases; and if he survive he shall be

put to death. If a slave be put out of the way to prevent his informing of some

crime, his death shall be punished like that of a citizen. If there are any of

those  horrible  murders  of  kindred  which  sometimes  occur  even  in  well-

regulated societies, and of which the legislator, however unwilling, cannot

avoid taking cognizance, he will repeat the old myth of the divine vengeance

against  the  perpetrators  of  such  atrocities.  The  myth  will  say  that  the

murderer must suffer what he has done: if he have slain his father, he must be

slain by his children; if his mother, he must become a woman and perish at

the hands of his offspring in another age of the world. Such a preamble may

terrify him; but if, notwithstanding, in some evil hour he murders father or

mother or brethren or children, the mode of proceeding shall be as follows:--

Him who is convicted, the officers of the judges shall lead to a spot without

the city where three ways meet, and there slay him and expose his body

naked; and each of the magistrates shall cast a stone upon his head and justify

the city, and he shall be thrown unburied beyond the border. But what shall

we say of him who takes the life which is dearest to him, that is to say, his

own; and this not from any disgrace or calamity, but from cowardice and

indolence? The manner of his burial and the purification of his crime is a

matter for God and the interpreters to decide and for his kinsmen to execute.

Let him, at any rate, be buried alone in some uncultivated and nameless spot,

and be without name or monument. If a beast kill a man, not in a public

contest, let it be prosecuted for murder, and after condemnation slain and cast

without the border. Also inanimate things which have caused death, except in

the  case  of  lightning  and  other  visitations  from  heaven,  shall  be  carried

without the border. If the body of a dead man be found, and the murderer

remain unknown, the trial shall take place all the same, and the unknown

murderer shall be warned not to set foot in the temples or come within the

borders of the land; if discovered, he shall die, and his body shall be cast out.

A man is justified in taking the life of a burglar, of a footpad, of a violator of

women  or  youth;  and  he  may  take  the  life  of  another  with  impunity  in

defence of father, mother, brother, wife, or other relations.


The nurture and education which are necessary to the existence of men have

been considered, and the punishment of acts of violence which destroy life.

There remain maiming, wounding, and the like, which admit of a similar

division  into  voluntary  and  involuntary.  About  this  class  of  actions  thepreamble  shall  be:  Whereas  men  would  be  like  wild  beasts  unless  they

obeyed the laws, the first duty of citizens is the care of the public interests,

which unite and preserve states, as private interests distract them. A man may

know what is for the public good, but if he have absolute power, human

nature will impel him to seek pleasure instead of virtue, and so darkness will

come over his soul and over the state. If he had mind, he would have no need

of law; for mind is the perfection of law. But such a freeman, 'whom the truth

makes free,' is hardly to be found; and therefore law and order are necessary,

which are the second-best, and they regulate things as they exist in part only,

but cannot take in the whole. For actions have innumerable characteristics,

which must be partly determined by the law and partly left to the judge. The

judge  must  determine  the  fact;  and  to  him  also  the  punishment  must

sometimes be left. What shall the law prescribe, and what shall be left to the

judge?  A  city  is  unfortunate  in  which  the  tribunals  are  either  secret  and

speechless, or, what is worse, noisy and public, when the people, as if they

were in a theatre, clap and hoot the various speakers. Such courts a legislator

would rather not have; but if he is compelled to have them, he will speak

distinctly, and leave as little as possible to their discretion. But where the

courts are good, and presided over by well-trained judges, the penalties to be

inflicted may be in a great measure left to them; and as there are to be good

courts  among  our  colonists,  we  need  not  determine  beforehand  the  exact

proportion of the penalty and the crime. Returning, then, to our legislator, let

us indite a law about wounding, which shall run as follows:--He who wounds

with intent to kill, and fails in his object, shall be tried as if he had succeeded.

But since God has favoured both him and his victim, instead of being put to

death, he shall be allowed to go into exile and take his property with him, the

damage due to the sufferer having been previously estimated by the court,

which shall be the same as would have tried the case if death had ensued. If a

child should intentionally wound a parent, or a servant his master, or brother

or sister wound brother or sister with malice prepense, the penalty shall be

death. If a husband or wife wound one another with intent to kill, the penalty

which is inflicted upon them shall be perpetual exile; and if they have young

children, the guardians shall take care of them and administer their property

as if they were orphans. If they have no children, their kinsmen male and

female shall meet, and after a consultation with the priests and guardians of

the law, shall appoint an heir of the house; for the house and family belong to

the state, being a 5040th portion of the whole. And the state is bound to