PROTARCHUS: Proceed.


SOCRATES: I have just mentioned envy; would you not call that a pain of

the soul?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And yet the envious man finds something in the misfortunes of

his neighbours at which he is pleased?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And ignorance, and what is termed clownishness, are surely an

evil?


PROTARCHUS: To be sure.


SOCRATES:  From  these  considerations  learn  to  know  the  nature  of  the

ridiculous.


PROTARCHUS: Explain.


SOCRATES: The ridiculous is in short the specific name which is used to

describe the vicious form of a certain habit; and of vice in general it is that

kind which is most at variance with the inscription at Delphi.


PROTARCHUS: You mean, Socrates, 'Know thyself.'


SOCRATES: I do; and the opposite would be, 'Know not thyself.'


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And now, O Protarchus, try to divide this into three.


PROTARCHUS: Indeed I am afraid that I cannot.


SOCRATES: Do you mean to say that I must make the division for you?PROTARCHUS: Yes, and what is more, I beg that you will.


SOCRATES: Are there not three ways in which ignorance of self may be

shown?


PROTARCHUS: What are they?


SOCRATES: In the first place, about money; the ignorant may fancy himself

richer than he is.


PROTARCHUS: Yes, that is a very common error.


SOCRATES: And still more often he will fancy that he is taller or fairer than

he is, or that he has some other advantage of person which he really has not.


PROTARCHUS: Of course.


SOCRATES: And yet surely by far the greatest number err about the goods

of the mind; they imagine themselves to be much better men than they are.


PROTARCHUS: Yes, that is by far the commonest delusion.


SOCRATES: And of all the virtues, is not wisdom the one which the mass of

mankind are always claiming, and which most arouses in them a spirit of

contention and lying conceit of wisdom?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And may not all this be truly called an evil condition?


PROTARCHUS: Very evil.


SOCRATES: But we must pursue the division a step further, Protarchus, if

we would see in envy of the childish sort a singular mixture of pleasure and

pain.


PROTARCHUS: How can we make the further division which you suggest?SOCRATES:  All  who  are  silly  enough  to  entertain  this  lying  conceit  of

themselves  may  of  course  be  divided,  like  the  rest  of  mankind,  into  two

classes--one having power and might; and the other the reverse.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Let this, then, be the principle of division; those of them who

are weak and unable to revenge themselves, when they are laughed at, may

be truly called ridiculous, but those who can defend themselves may be more

truly described as strong and formidable; for ignorance in the powerul is

hateful and horrible, because hurtful to others both in reality and in fiction,

but powerless ignorance may be reckoned, and in truth is, ridiculous.


PROTARCHUS:  That  is  very  true,  but  I  do  not  as  yet  see  where  is  the

admixture of pleasures and pains.


SOCRATES: Well, then, let us examine the nature of envy.


PROTARCHUS: Proceed.


SOCRATES: Is not envy an unrighteous pleasure, and also an unrighteous

pain?


PROTARCHUS: Most true.


SOCRATES:  There  is  nothing  envious  or  wrong  in  rejoicing  at  the

misfortunes of enemies?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: But to feel joy instead of sorrow at the sight of our friends'

misfortunes--is not that wrong?


PROTARCHUS: Undoubtedly.


SOCRATES: Did we not say that ignorance was always an evil?


PROTARCHUS: True.SOCRATES: And the three kinds of vain conceit in our friends which we

enumerated--the  vain  conceit  of  beauty,  of  wisdom,  and  of  wealth,  are

ridiculous if they are weak, and detestable when they are powerful: May we

not say, as I was saying before, that our friends who are in this state of mind,

when harmless to others, are simply ridiculous?


PROTARCHUS: They are ridiculous.


SOCRATES: And do we not acknowledge this ignorance of theirs to be a

misfortune?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And do we feel pain or pleasure in laughing at it?


PROTARCHUS: Clearly we feel pleasure.


SOCRATES: And was not envy the source of this pleasure which we feel at

the misfortunes of friends?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Then the argument shows that when we laugh at the folly of

our friends, pleasure, in mingling with envy, mingles with pain, for envy has

been acknowledged by us to be mental pain, and laughter is pleasant; and so

we envy and laugh at the same instant.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES:  And  the  argument  implies  that  there  are  combinations  of

pleasure and pain in lamentations, and in tragedy and comedy, not only on

the stage, but on the greater stage of human life; and so in endless other

cases.


PROTARCHUS: I do not see how any one can deny what you say, Socrates,

however eager he may be to assert the opposite opinion.


SOCRATES: I mentioned anger, desire, sorrow, fear, love, emulation, envy,and similar emotions, as examples in which we should find a mixture of the

two elements so often named; did I not?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  We  may  observe  that  our  conclusions  hitherto  have  had

reference only to sorrow and envy and anger.


PROTARCHUS: I see.


SOCRATES: Then many other cases still remain?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And why do you suppose me to have pointed out to you the

admixture which takes place in comedy? Why but to convince you that there

was no difficulty in showing the mixed nature of fear and love and similar

affections;  and  I  thought  that  when  I  had  given  you  the  illustration,  you

would have let me off, and have acknowledged as a general truth that the

body without the soul, and the soul without the body, as well as the two

united, are susceptible of all sorts of admixtures of pleasures and pains; and

so further discussion would have been unnecessary. And now I want to know

whether I may depart; or will you keep me here until midnight? I fancy that I

may obtain my release without many words;--if I promise that to-morrow I

will give you an account of all these cases. But at present I would rather sail

in  another  direction,  and  go  to  other  matters  which  remain  to  be  settled,

before the judgment can be given which Philebus demands.


PROTARCHUS:  Very  good,  Socrates;  in  what  remains  take  your  own

course.


SOCRATES: Then after the mixed pleasures the unmixed should have their

turn; this is the natural and necessary order.


PROTARCHUS: Excellent.


SOCRATES: These, in turn, then, I will now endeavour to indicate; for with

the maintainers of the opinion that all pleasures are a cessation of pain, I donot  agree,  but,  as  I  was  saying,  I  use  them  as  witnesses,  that  there  are

pleasures which seem only and are not, and there are others again which have

great power and appear in many forms, yet are intermingled with pains, and

are partly alleviations of agony and distress, both of body and mind.


PROTARCHUS:  Then  what  pleasures,  Socrates,  should  we  be  right  in

conceiving to be true?


SOCRATES: True pleasures are those which are given by beauty of colour

and form, and most of those which arise from smells; those of sound, again,

and in general those of which the want is painless and unconscious, and of

which the fruition is palpable to sense and pleasant and unalloyed with pain.


PROTARCHUS: Once more, Socrates, I must ask what you mean.


SOCRATES: My meaning is certainly not obvious, and I will endeavour to

be plainer. I do not mean by beauty of form such beauty as that of animals or

pictures, which the many would suppose to be my meaning; but, says the

argument, understand me to mean straight lines and circles, and the plane or

solid figures which are formed out of them by turning-lathes and rulers and

measurers of angles; for these I affirm to be not only relatively beautiful, like

other things, but they are eternally and absolutely beautiful, and they have

peculiar pleasures, quite unlike the pleasures of scratching. And there are

colours which are of the same character, and have similar pleasures; now do

you understand my meaning?


PROTARCHUS: I am trying to understand, Socrates, and I hope that you will

try to make your meaning clearer.


SOCRATES: When sounds are smooth and clear, and have a single pure

tone, then I mean to say that they are not relatively but absolutely beautiful,

and have natural pleasures associated with them.


PROTARCHUS: Yes, there are such pleasures.


SOCRATES: The pleasures of smell are of a less ethereal sort, but they have

no necessary admixture of pain; and all pleasures, however and whereverexperienced, which are unattended by pains, I assign to an analogous class.

Here then are two kinds of pleasures.


PROTARCHUS: I understand.


SOCRATES:  To  these  may  be  added  the  pleasures  of  knowledge,  if  no

hunger of knowledge and no pain caused by such hunger precede them.


PROTARCHUS: And this is the case.


SOCRATES:  Well,  but  if  a  man  who  is  full  of  knowledge  loses  his

knowledge, are there not pains of forgetting?


PROTARCHUS: Not necessarily, but there may be times of reflection, when

he feels grief at the loss of his knowledge.


SOCRATES: Yes, my friend, but at present we are enumerating only the

natural perceptions, and have nothing to do with reflection.


PROTARCHUS:  In  that  case  you  are  right  in  saying  that  the  loss  of

knowledge is not attended with pain.


SOCRATES: These pleasures of knowledge, then, are unmixed with pain;

and they are not the pleasures of the many but of a very few.


PROTARCHUS: Quite true.


SOCRATES: And now, having fairly separated the pure pleasures and those

which may be rightly termed impure, let us further add to our description of

them, that the pleasures which are in excess have no measure, but that those

which are not in excess have measure; the great, the excessive, whether more

or less frequent, we shall be right in referring to the class of the infinite, and

of the more and less, which pours through body and soul alike; and the others

we shall refer to the class which has measure.


PROTARCHUS: Quite right, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Still there is something more to be considered about pleasures.PROTARCHUS: What is it?


SOCRATES:  When  you  speak  of  purity  and  clearness,  or  of  excess,

abundance, greatness and sufficiency, in what relation do these terms stand to

truth?


PROTARCHUS: Why do you ask, Socrates?


SOCRATES:  Because,  Protarchus,  I  should  wish  to  test  pleasure  and

knowledge in every possible way, in order that if there be a pure and impure

element in either of them, I may present the pure element for judgment, and

then they will be more easily judged of by you and by me and by all of us.


PROTARCHUS: Most true.


SOCRATES:  Let  us  investigate  all  the  pure  kinds;  first  selecting  for

consideration a single instance.


PROTARCHUS: What instance shall we select?


SOCRATES: Suppose that we first of all take whiteness.


PROTARCHUS: Very good.


SOCRATES: How can there be purity in whiteness, and what purity? Is that

purest  which  is  greatest  or  most  in  quantity,  or  that  which  is  most

unadulterated and freest from any admixture of other colours?


PROTARCHUS: Clearly that which is most unadulterated.


SOCRATES: True, Protarchus; and so the purest white, and not the greatest

or largest in quantity, is to be deemed truest and most beautiful?


PROTARCHUS: Right.


SOCRATES: And we shall be quite right in saying that a little pure white is

whiter and fairer and truer than a great deal that is mixed.PROTARCHUS: Perfectly right.


SOCRATES:  There  is  no  need  of  adducing  many  similar  examples  in

illustration of the argument about pleasure; one such is sufficient to prove to

us that a small pleasure or a small amount of pleasure, if pure or unalloyed

with pain, is always pleasanter and truer and fairer than a great pleasure or a

great amount of pleasure of another kind.


PROTARCHUS:  Assuredly;  and  the  instance  you  have  given  is  quite

sufficient.


SOCRATES: But what do you say of another question:--have we not heard

that pleasure is always a generation, and has no true being? Do not certain

ingenious philosophers teach this doctrine, and ought not we to be grateful to

them?


PROTARCHUS: What do they mean?


SOCRATES: I will explain to you, my dear Protarchus, what they mean, by

putting a question.


PROTARCHUS: Ask, and I will answer.


SOCRATES: I assume that there are two natures, one self-existent, and the

other ever in want of something.


PROTARCHUS: What manner of natures are they?


SOCRATES: The one majestic ever, the other inferior.


PROTARCHUS: You speak riddles.


SOCRATES: You have seen loves good and fair, and also brave lovers of

them.


PROTARCHUS: I should think so.


SOCRATES: Search the universe for two terms which are like these two andare present everywhere.


PROTARCHUS: Yet a third time I must say, Be a little plainer, Socrates.


SOCRATES: There is no difficulty, Protarchus; the argument is only in play,

and insinuates that some things are for the sake of something else (relatives),

and  that  other  things  are  the  ends  to  which  the  former  class  subserve

(absolutes).


PROTARCHUS: Your many repetitions make me slow to understand.


SOCRATES: As the argument proceeds, my boy, I dare say that the meaning

will become clearer.


PROTARCHUS: Very likely.


SOCRATES: Here are two new principles.


PROTARCHUS: What are they?


SOCRATES: One is the generation of all things, and the other is essence.


PROTARCHUS: I readily accept from you both generation and essence.


SOCRATES: Very right; and would you say that generation is for the sake of

essence, or essence for the sake of generation?


PROTARCHUS: You want to know whether that which is called essence is,

properly speaking, for the sake of generation?


SOCRATES: Yes.


PROTARCHUS: By the gods, I wish that you would repeat your question.


SOCRATES: I mean, O my Protarchus, to ask whether you would tell me

that  ship-building  is  for  the  sake  of  ships,  or  ships  for  the  sake  of  ship-

building? and in all similar cases I should ask the same question.PROTARCHUS: Why do you not answer yourself, Socrates?


SOCRATES: I have no objection, but you must take your part.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: My answer is, that all things instrumental, remedial, material,

are given to us with a view to generation, and that each generation is relative

to, or for the sake of, some being or essence, and that the whole of generation

is relative to the whole of essence.


PROTARCHUS: Assuredly.


SOCRATES: Then pleasure, being a generation, must surely be for the sake

of some essence?


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: And that for the sake of which something else is done must be

placed in the class of good, and that which is done for the sake of something

else, in some other class, my good friend.


PROTARCHUS: Most certainly.


SOCRATES: Then pleasure, being a generation, will be rightly placed in

some other class than that of good?


PROTARCHUS: Quite right.


SOCRATES: Then, as I said at first, we ought to be very grateful to him who

first pointed out that pleasure was a generation only, and had no true being at

all; for he is clearly one who laughs at the notion of pleasure being a good.


PROTARCHUS: Assuredly.


SOCRATES: And he would surely laugh also at those who make generation

their highest end.PROTARCHUS: Of whom are you speaking, and what do they mean?


SOCRATES: I am speaking of those who when they are cured of hunger or

thirst or any other defect by some process of generation are delighted at the

process as if it were pleasure; and they say that they would not wish to live

without these and other feelings of a like kind which might be mentioned.


PROTARCHUS: That is certainly what they appear to think.


SOCRATES: And is not destruction universally admitted to be the opposite

of generation?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES:  Then  he  who  chooses  thus,  would  choose  generation  and

destruction rather than that third sort of life, in which, as we were saying, was

neither pleasure nor pain, but only the purest possible thought.


PROTARCHUS: He who would make us believe pleasure to be a good is

involved in great absurdities, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Great, indeed; and there is yet another of them.


PROTARCHUS: What is it?


SOCRATES: Is there not an absurdity in arguing that there is nothing good or

noble in the body, or in anything else, but that good is in the soul only, and

that the only good of the soul is pleasure; and that courage or temperance or

understanding, or any other good of the soul, is not really a good?--and is

there not yet a further absurdity in our being compelled to say that he who

has  a  feeling  of  pain  and  not  of  pleasure  is  bad  at  the  time  when  he  is

suffering pain, even though he be the best of men; and again, that he who has

a feeling of pleasure, in so far as he is pleased at the time when he is pleased,

in that degree excels in virtue?


PROTARCHUS: Nothing, Socrates, can be more irrational than all this.


SOCRATES: And now, having subjected pleasure to every sort of test, let usnot appear to be too sparing of mind and knowledge: let us ring their metal

bravely, and see if there be unsoundness in any part, until we have found out

what in them is of the purest nature; and then the truest elements both of

pleasure and knowledge may be brought up for judgment.


PROTARCHUS: Right.


SOCRATES: Knowledge has two parts,--the one productive, and the other

educational?


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: And in the productive or handicraft arts, is not one part more

akin to knowledge, and the other less; and may not the one part be regarded

as the pure, and the other as the impure?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Let us separate the superior or dominant elements in each of

them.


PROTARCHUS: What are they, and how do you separate them?


SOCRATES: I mean to say, that if arithmetic, mensuration, and weighing be

taken away from any art, that which remains will not be much.


PROTARCHUS: Not much, certainly.


SOCRATES:  The  rest  will  be  only  conjecture,  and  the  better  use  of  the

senses which is given by experience and practice, in addition to a certain

power  of  guessing,  which  is  commonly  called  art,  and  is  perfected  by

attention and pains.


PROTARCHUS: Nothing more, assuredly.


SOCRATES: Music, for instance, is full of this empiricism; for sounds are

harmonized, not by measure, but by skilful conjecture; the music of the flute

is always trying to guess the pitch of each vibrating note, and is thereforemixed up with much that is doubtful and has little which is certain.


PROTARCHUS: Most true.


SOCRATES:  And  the  same  will  be  found  to  hold  good  of  medicine  and

husbandry and piloting and generalship.


PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: The art of the builder, on the other hand, which uses a number

of  measures  and  instruments,  attains  by  their  help  to  a  greater  degree  of

accuracy than the other arts.


PROTARCHUS: How is that?


SOCRATES: In ship-building and house-building, and in other branches of

the art of carpentering, the builder has his rule, lathe, compass, line, and a

most ingenious machine for straightening wood.


PROTARCHUS: Very true, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Then now let us divide the arts of which we were speaking into

two kinds,--the arts which, like music, are less exact in their results, and those

which, like carpentering, are more exact.


PROTARCHUS: Let us make that division.


SOCRATES: Of the latter class, the most exact of all are those which we just

now spoke of as primary.


PROTARCHUS:  I  see  that  you  mean  arithmetic,  and  the  kindred  arts  of

weighing and measuring.


SOCRATES:  Certainly,  Protarchus;  but  are  not  these  also  distinguishable

into two kinds?


PROTARCHUS: What are the two kinds?SOCRATES: In the first place, arithmetic is of two kinds, one of which is

popular, and the other philosophical.


PROTARCHUS: How would you distinguish them?


SOCRATES:  There  is  a  wide  difference  between  them,  Protarchus;  some

arithmeticians reckon unequal units; as for example, two armies, two oxen,

two very large things or two very small things. The party who are opposed to

them insist that every unit in ten thousand must be the same as every other

unit.


PROTARCHUS: Undoubtedly there is, as you say, a great difference among

the votaries of the science; and there may be reasonably supposed to be two

sorts of arithmetic.


SOCRATES: And when we compare the art of mensuration which is used in

building with philosophical geometry, or the art of computation which is used

in trading with exact calculation, shall we say of either of the pairs that it is

one or two?


PROTARCHUS:  On  the  analogy  of  what  has  preceded,  I  should  be  of

opinion that they were severally two.


SOCRATES: Right; but do you understand why I have discussed the subject?


PROTARCHUS: I think so, but I should like to be told by you.


SOCRATES: The argument has all along been seeking a parallel to pleasure,

and  true  to  that  original  design,  has  gone  on  to  ask  whether  one  sort  of

knowledge is purer than another, as one pleasure is purer than another.


PROTARCHUS: Clearly; that was the intention.


SOCRATES: And has not the argument in what has preceded, already shown

that the arts have different provinces, and vary in their degrees of certainty?


PROTARCHUS: Very true.SOCRATES: And just now did not the argument first designate a particular

art by a common term, thus making us believe in the unity of that art; and

then again, as if speaking of two different things, proceed to enquire whether

the art as pursed by philosophers, or as pursued by non- philosophers, has

more of certainty and purity?


PROTARCHUS: That is the very question which the argument is asking.


SOCRATES: And how, Protarchus, shall we answer the enquiry?


PROTARCHUS: O Socrates, we have reached a point at which the difference

of clearness in different kinds of knowledge is enormous.


SOCRATES: Then the answer will be the easier.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly; and let us say in reply, that those arts into which

arithmetic and mensuration enter, far surpass all others; and that of these the

arts  or  sciences  which  are  animated  by  the  pure  philosophic  impulse  are

infinitely superior in accuracy and truth.


SOCRATES: Then this is your judgment; and this is the answer which, upon

your authority, we will give to all masters of the art of misinterpretation?


PROTARCHUS: What answer?


SOCRATES: That there are two arts of arithmetic, and two of mensuration;

and also several other arts which in like manner have this double nature, and

yet only one name.


PROTARCHUS: Let us boldly return this answer to the masters of whom

you speak, Socrates, and hope for good luck.


SOCRATES:  We  have  explained  what  we  term  the  most  exact  arts  or

sciences.


PROTARCHUS: Very good.


SOCRATES: And yet, Protarchus, dialectic will refuse to acknowledge us, ifwe do not award to her the first place.


PROTARCHUS: And pray, what is dialectic?


SOCRATES: Clearly the science which has to do with all that knowledge of

which we are now speaking; for I am sure that all men who have a grain of

intelligence will admit that the knowledge which has to do with being and

reality, and sameness and unchangeableness, is by far the truest of all. But

how would you decide this question, Protarchus?


PROTARCHUS: I have often heard Gorgias maintain, Socrates, that the art

of persuasion far surpassed every other; this, as he says, is by far the best of

them all, for to it all things submit, not by compulsion, but of their own free

will. Now, I should not like to quarrel either with you or with him.


SOCRATES: You mean to say that you would like to desert, if you were not

ashamed?


PROTARCHUS: As you please.


SOCRATES: May I not have led you into a misapprehension?


PROTARCHUS: How?


SOCRATES: Dear Protarchus, I never asked which was the greatest or best

or usefullest of arts or sciences, but which had clearness and accuracy, and

the greatest amount of truth, however humble and little useful an art. And as

for Gorgias, if you do not deny that his art has the advantage in usefulness to

mankind, he will not quarrel with you for saying that the study of which I am

speaking is superior in this particular of essential truth; as in the comparison

of white colours, a little whiteness, if that little be only pure, was said to be

superior in truth to a great mass which is impure. And now let us give our

best attention and consider well, not the comparative use or reputation of the

sciences, but the power or faculty, if there be such, which the soul has of

loving the truth, and of doing all things for the sake of it; let us search into

the pure element of mind and intelligence, and then we shall be able to say

whether the science of which I have been speaking is most likely to possessthe faculty, or whether there be some other which has higher claims.


PROTARCHUS: Well, I have been considering, and I can hardly think that

any other science or art has a firmer grasp of the truth than this.


SOCRATES: Do you say so because you observe that the arts in general and

those engaged in them make use of opinion, and are resolutely engaged in the

investigation of matters of opinion? Even he who supposes himself to be

occupied with nature is really occupied with the things of this world, how

created, how acting or acted upon. Is not this the sort of enquiry in which his

life is spent?


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: He is labouring, not after eternal being, but about things which

are becoming, or which will or have become.


PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: And can we say that any of these things which neither are nor

have been nor will be unchangeable, when judged by the strict rule of truth

ever become certain?


PROTARCHUS: Impossible.


SOCRATES: How can anything fixed be concerned with that which has no

fixedness?


PROTARCHUS: How indeed?


SOCRATES: Then mind and science when employed about such changing

things do not attain the highest truth?


PROTARCHUS: I should imagine not.


SOCRATES: And now let us bid farewell, a long farewell, to you or me or

Philebus or Gorgias, and urge on behalf of the argument a single point.PROTARCHUS: What point?


SOCRATES: Let us say that the stable and pure and true and unalloyed has

to do with the things which are eternal and unchangeable and unmixed, or if

not, at any rate what is most akin to them has; and that all other things are to

be placed in a second or inferior class.


PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: And of the names expressing cognition, ought not the fairest to

be given to the fairest things?


PROTARCHUS: That is natural.


SOCRATES:  And  are  not  mind  and  wisdom  the  names  which  are  to  be

honoured most?


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And these names may be said to have their truest and most

exact  application  when  the  mind  is  engaged  in  the  contemplation  of  true

being?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And these were the names which I adduced of the rivals of

pleasure?


PROTARCHUS: Very true, Socrates.


SOCRATES: In the next place, as to the mixture, here are the ingredients,

pleasure and wisdom, and we may be compared to artists who have their

materials ready to their hands.


PROTARCHUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And now we must begin to mix them?PROTARCHUS: By all means.


SOCRATES: But had we not better have a preliminary word and refresh our

memories?


PROTARCHUS: Of what?


SOCRATES: Of that which I have already mentioned. Well says the proverb,

that we ought to repeat twice and even thrice that which is good.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Well then, by Zeus, let us proceed, and I will make what I

believe to be a fair summary of the argument.


PROTARCHUS: Let me hear.


SOCRATES: Philebus says that pleasure is the true end of all living beings,

at which all ought to aim, and moreover that it is the chief good of all, and

that the two names 'good' and 'pleasant' are correctly given to one thing and

one nature; Socrates, on the other hand, begins by denying this, and further

says, that in nature as in name they are two, and that wisdom partakes more

than pleasure of the good. Is not and was not this what we were saying,

Protarchus?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And is there not and was there not a further point which was

conceded between us?


PROTARCHUS: What was it?


SOCRATES: That the good differs from all other things.


PROTARCHUS: In what respect?


SOCRATES: In that the being who possesses good always everywhere and in

all things has the most perfect sufficiency, and is never in need of anythingelse.


PROTARCHUS: Exactly.


SOCRATES: And did we not endeavour to make an imaginary separation of

wisdom and pleasure, assigning to each a distinct life, so that pleasure was

wholly  excluded  from  wisdom,  and  wisdom  in  like  manner  had  no  part

whatever in pleasure?


PROTARCHUS: We did.


SOCRATES: And did we think that either of them alone would be sufficient?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: And if we erred in any point, then let any one who will, take up

the enquiry again and set us right; and assuming memory and wisdom and

knowledge and true opinion to belong to the same class, let him consider

whether  he  would  desire  to  possess  or  acquire,--I  will  not  say  pleasure,

however abundant or intense, if he has no real perception that he is pleased,

nor  any  consciousness  of  what  he  feels,  nor  any  recollection,  however

momentary, of the feeling,--but would he desire to have anything at all, if

these  faculties  were  wanting  to  him?  And  about  wisdom  I  ask  the  same

question; can you conceive that any one would choose to have all wisdom

absolutely devoid of pleasure, rather than with a certain degree of pleasure, or

all pleasure devoid of wisdom, rather than with a certain degree of wisdom?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly not, Socrates; but why repeat such questions any

more?


SOCRATES:  Then  the  perfect  and  universally  eligible  and  entirely  good

cannot possibly be either of them?


PROTARCHUS: Impossible.


SOCRATES: Then now we must ascertain the nature of the good more or

less accurately, in order, as we were saying, that the second place may be

duly assigned.PROTARCHUS: Right.


SOCRATES: Have we not found a road which leads towards the good?


PROTARCHUS: What road?


SOCRATES: Supposing that a man had to be found, and you could discover

in what house he lived, would not that be a great step towards the discovery

of the man himself?


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And now reason intimates to us, as at our first beginning, that

we should seek the good, not in the unmixed life but in the mixed.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: There is greater hope of finding that which we are seeking in

the life which is well mixed than in that which is not?


PROTARCHUS: Far greater.


SOCRATES: Then now let us mingle, Protarchus, at the same time offering

up a prayer to Dionysus or Hephaestus, or whoever is the god who presides

over the ceremony of mingling.


PROTARCHUS: By all means.


SOCRATES: Are not we the cup-bearers? and here are two fountains which

are flowing at our side: one, which is pleasure, may be likened to a fountain

of honey; the other, wisdom, a sober draught in which no wine mingles, is of

water unpleasant but healthful; out of these we must seek to make the fairest

of all possible mixtures.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES:  Tell  me  first;--should  we  be  most  likely  to  succeed  if  wemingled every sort of pleasure with every sort of wisdom?


PROTARCHUS: Perhaps we might.


SOCRATES: But I should be afraid of the risk, and I think that I can show a

safer plan.


PROTARCHUS: What is it?


SOCRATES: One pleasure was supposed by us to be truer than another, and

one art to be more exact than another.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: There was also supposed to be a difference in sciences; some of

them regarding only the transient and perishing, and others the permanent

and imperishable and everlasting and immutable; and when judged by the

standard of truth, the latter, as we thought, were truer than the former.


PROTARCHUS: Very good and right.


SOCRATES: If, then, we were to begin by mingling the sections of each

class which have the most of truth, will not the union suffice to give us the

loveliest of lives, or shall we still want some elements of another kind?


PROTARCHUS: I think that we ought to do what you suggest.


SOCRATES: Let us suppose a man who understands justice, and has reason

as well as understanding about the true nature of this and of all other things.


PROTARCHUS: We will suppose such a man.


SOCRATES: Will he have enough of knowledge if he is acquainted only

with the divine circle and sphere, and knows nothing of our human spheres

and circles, but uses only divine circles and measures in the building of a

house?


PROTARCHUS:  The  knowledge  which  is  only  superhuman,  Socrates,  isridiculous in man.


SOCRATES: What do you mean? Do you mean that you are to throw into the

cup and mingle the impure and uncertain art which uses the false measure

and the false circle?


PROTARCHUS: Yes, we must, if any of us is ever to find his way home.


SOCRATES: And am I to include music, which, as I was saying just now, is

full of guesswork and imitation, and is wanting in purity?


PROTARCHUS: Yes, I think that you must, if human life is to be a life at all.


SOCRATES: Well, then, suppose that I give way, and, like a doorkeeper who

is pushed and overborne by the mob, I open the door wide, and let knowledge

of every sort stream in, and the pure mingle with the impure?


PROTARCHUS: I do not know, Socrates, that any great harm would come of

having them all, if only you have the first sort.


SOCRATES: Well, then, shall I let them all flow into what Homer poetically

terms 'a meeting of the waters'?


PROTARCHUS: By all means.


SOCRATES: There--I have let them in, and now I must return to the fountain

of  pleasure.  For  we  were  not  permitted  to  begin  by  mingling  in  a  single

stream the true portions of both according to our original intention; but the

love of all knowledge constrained us to let all the sciences flow in together

before the pleasures.


PROTARCHUS: Quite true.


SOCRATES:  And  now  the  time  has  come  for  us  to  consider  about  the

pleasures also, whether we shall in like manner let them go all at once, or at

first only the true ones.


PROTARCHUS: It will be by far the safer course to let flow the true onesfirst.


SOCRATES:  Let  them  flow,  then;  and  now,  if  there  are  any  necessary

pleasures, as there were arts and sciences necessary, must we not mingle

them?


PROTARCHUS: Yes; the necessary pleasures should certainly be allowed to

mingle.


SOCRATES: The knowledge of the arts has been admitted to be innocent and

useful always; and if we say of pleasures in like manner that all of them are

good and innocent for all of us at all times, we must let them all mingle?


PROTARCHUS: What shall we say about them, and what course shall we

take?


SOCRATES: Do not ask me, Protarchus; but ask the daughters of pleasure

and wisdom to answer for themselves.


PROTARCHUS: How?


SOCRATES: Tell us, O beloved--shall we call you pleasures or by some

other name?--would you rather live with or without wisdom? I am of opinion

that they would certainly answer as follows:


PROTARCHUS: How?


SOCRATES: They would answer, as we said before, that for any single class

to be left by itself pure and isolated is not good, nor altogether possible; and

that if we are to make comparisons of one class with another and choose,

there  is  no  better  companion  than  knowledge  of  things  in  general,  and

likewise the perfect knowledge, if that may be, of ourselves in every respect.


PROTARCHUS: And our answer will be:--In that ye have spoken well.


SOCRATES: Very true. And now let us go back and interrogate wisdom and

mind: Would you like to have any pleasures in the mixture? And they will

reply:--'What pleasures do you mean?'PROTARCHUS: Likely enough.


SOCRATES: And we shall take up our parable and say: Do you wish to have

the greatest and most vehement pleasures for your companions in addition to

the true ones? 'Why, Socrates,' they will say, 'how can we? seeing that they

are the source of ten thousand hindrances to us; they trouble the souls of men,

which are our habitation, with their madness; they prevent us from coming to

the birth, and are commonly the ruin of the children which are born to us,

causing them to be forgotten and unheeded; but the true and pure pleasures,

of which you spoke, know to be of our family, and also those pleasures which

accompany health and temperance, and which every Virtue, like a goddess,

has in her train to follow her about wherever she goes,--mingle these and not

the others; there would be great want of sense in any one who desires to see a

fair and perfect mixture, and to find in it what is the highest good in man and

in the universe, and to divine what is the true form of good--there would be

great want of sense in his allowing the pleasures, which are always in the

company of folly and vice, to mingle with mind in the cup.'--Is not this a very

rational and suitable reply, which mind has made, both on her own behalf, as

well as on the behalf of memory and true opinion?


PROTARCHUS: Most certainly.


SOCRATES:  And  still  there  must  be  something  more  added,  which  is  a

necessary ingredient in every mixture.


PROTARCHUS: What is that?


SOCRATES: Unless truth enter into the composition, nothing can truly be

created or subsist.


PROTARCHUS: Impossible.


SOCRATES:  Quite  impossible;  and  now  you  and  Philebus  must  tell  me

whether anything is still wanting in the mixture, for to my way of thinking

the argument is now completed, and may be compared to an incorporeal law,

which is going to hold fair rule over a living body.PROTARCHUS: I agree with you, Socrates.


SOCRATES:  And  may  we  not  say  with  reason  that  we  are  now  at  the

vestibule of the habitation of the good?


PROTARCHUS: I think that we are.


SOCRATES: What, then, is there in the mixture which is most precious, and

which is the principal cause why such a state is universally beloved by all?

When we have discovered it, we will proceed to ask whether this omnipresent

nature is more akin to pleasure or to mind.


PROTARCHUS: Quite right; in that way we shall be better able to judge.


SOCRATES: And there is no difficulty in seeing the cause which renders any

mixture either of the highest value or of none at all.


PROTARCHUS: What do you mean?


SOCRATES: Every man knows it.


PROTARCHUS: What?


SOCRATES:  He  knows  that  any  want  of  measure  and  symmetry  in  any

mixture whatever must always of necessity be fatal, both to the elements and

to the mixture, which is then not a mixture, but only a confused medley

which brings confusion on the possessor of it.


PROTARCHUS: Most true.


SOCRATES: And now the power of the good has retired into the region of

the beautiful; for measure and symmetry are beauty and virtue all the world

over.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: Also we said that truth was to form an element in the mixture.PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Then, if we are not able to hunt the good with one idea only,

with three we may catch our prey; Beauty, Symmetry, Truth are the three,

and these taken together we may regard as the single cause of the mixture,

and the mixture as being good by reason of the infusion of them.


PROTARCHUS: Quite right.


SOCRATES:  And  now,  Protarchus,  any  man  could  decide  well  enough

whether  pleasure  or  wisdom  is  more  akin  to  the  highest  good,  and  more

honourable among gods and men.


PROTARCHUS: Clearly, and yet perhaps the argument had better be pursued

to the end.


SOCRATES:  We  must  take  each  of  them  separately  in  their  relation  to

pleasure and mind, and pronounce upon them; for we ought to see to which

of the two they are severally most akin.


PROTARCHUS: You are speaking of beauty, truth, and measure?


SOCRATES: Yes, Protarchus, take truth first, and, after passing in review

mind,  truth,  pleasure,  pause  awhile  and  make  answer  to  yourself--as  to

whether pleasure or mind is more akin to truth.


PROTARCHUS: There is no need to pause, for the difference between them

is palpable; pleasure is the veriest impostor in the world; and it is said that in

the pleasures of love, which appear to be the greatest, perjury is excused by

the gods; for pleasures, like children, have not the least particle of reason in

them; whereas mind is either the same as truth, or the most like truth, and the

truest.


SOCRATES:  Shall  we  next  consider  measure,  in  like  manner,  and  ask

whether pleasure has more of this than wisdom, or wisdom than pleasure?


PROTARCHUS: Here is another question which may be easily answered; for

I imagine that nothing can ever be more immoderate than the transports ofpleasure, or more in conformity with measure than mind and knowledge.


SOCRATES: Very good; but there still remains the third test: Has mind a

greater share of beauty than pleasure, and is mind or pleasure the fairer of the

two?


PROTARCHUS: No one, Socrates, either awake or dreaming, ever saw or

imagined mind or wisdom to be in aught unseemly, at any time, past, present,

or future.


SOCRATES: Right.


PROTARCHUS: But when we see some one indulging in pleasures, perhaps

in the greatest of pleasures, the ridiculous or disgraceful nature of the action

makes us ashamed; and so we put them out of sight, and consign them to

darkness, under the idea that they ought not to meet the eye of day.


SOCRATES: Then, Protarchus, you will proclaim everywhere, by word of

mouth to this company, and by messengers bearing the tidings far and wide,

that pleasure is not the first of possessions, nor yet the second, but that in

measure, and the mean, and the suitable, and the like, the eternal nature has

been found.


PROTARCHUS: Yes, that seems to be the result of what has been now said.


SOCRATES: In the second class is contained the symmetrical and beautiful

and perfect or sufficient, and all which are of that family.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: And if you reckon in the third dass mind and wisdom, you will

not be far wrong, if I divine aright.


PROTARCHUS: I dare say.


SOCRATES: And would you not put in the fourth class the goods which we

were affirming to appertain specially to the soul--sciences and arts and true

opinions as we called them? These come after the third class, and form thefourth, as they are certainly more akin to good than pleasure is.


PROTARCHUS: Surely.


SOCRATES: The fifth class are the pleasures which were defined by us as

painless, being the pure pleasures of the soul herself, as we termed them,

which accompany, some the sciences, and some the senses.


PROTARCHUS: Perhaps.


SOCRATES: And now, as Orpheus says,


'With the sixth generation cease the glory of my song.'


Here, at the sixth award, let us make an end; all that remains is to set the

crown on our discourse.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES:  Then  let  us  sum  up  and  reassert  what  has  been  said,  thus

offering the third libation to the saviour Zeus.


PROTARCHUS: How?


SOCRATES: Philebus affirmed that pleasure was always and absolutely the

good.


PROTARCHUS:  I  understand;  this  third  libation,  Socrates,  of  which  you

spoke, meant a recapitulation.


SOCRATES: Yes, but listen to the sequel; convinced of what I have just been

saying, and feeling indignant at the doctrine, which is maintained, not by

Philebus only, but by thousands of others, I affirmed that mind was far better

and far more excellent, as an element of human life, than pleasure.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES: But, suspecting that there were other things which were alsobetter, I went on to say that if there was anything better than either, then I

would claim the second place for mind over pleasure, and pleasure would

lose the second place as well as the first.


PROTARCHUS: You did.


SOCRATES:  Nothing  could  be  more  satisfactorily  shown  than  the

unsatisfactory nature of both of them.


PROTARCHUS: Very true.


SOCRATES: The claims both of pleasure and mind to be the absolute good

have been entirely disproven in this argument, because they are both wanting

in self-sufficiency and also in adequacy and perfection.


PROTARCHUS: Most true.


SOCRATES: But, though they must both resign in favour of another, mind is

ten thousand times nearer and more akin to the nature of the conqueror than

pleasure.


PROTARCHUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And, according to the judgment which has now been given,

pleasure will rank fifth.


PROTARCHUS: True.


SOCRATES:  But  not  first;  no,  not  even  if  all  the  oxen  and  horses  and

animals in the world by their pursuit of enjoyment proclaim her to be so;--

although the many trusting in them, as diviners trust in birds, determine that

pleasures make up the good of life, and deem the lusts of animals to be better

witnesses than the inspirations of divine philosophy.


PROTARCHUS: And now, Socrates, we tell you that the truth of what you

have been saying is approved by the judgment of all of us.


SOCRATES: And will you let me go?PROTARCHUS: There is a little which yet remains, and I will remind you of

it, for I am sure that you will not be the first to go away from an argument.


THE END                        Protagoras Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    Beginning of ProtagorasIntroduction to Plato's Protagoras.


  The Protagoras, like several of the Dialogues of Plato, is put into the

mouth  of  Socrates,  who  describes  a  conversation  which  had  taken  place

between himself and the great Sophist at the house of Callias--'the man who

had spent more upon the Sophists than all the rest of the world'--and in which

the learned Hippias and the grammarian Prodicus had also shared, as well as

Alcibiades and Critias, both of whom said a few words--in the presence of a

distinguished company consisting of disciples of Protagoras and of leading

Athenians belonging to the Socratic circle. The dialogue commences with a

request on the part of Hippocrates that Socrates would introduce him to the

celebrated teacher. He has come before the dawn had risen--so fervid is his

zeal. Socrates moderates his excitement and advises him to find out 'what

Protagoras will make of him,' before he becomes his pupil.


  They go together to the house of Callias; and Socrates, after explaining

the purpose of their visit to Protagoras, asks the question, 'What he will make

of Hippocrates.' Protagoras answers, 'That he will make him a better and a

wiser man.' 'But in what will he be better?'--Socrates desires to have a more

precise answer. Protagoras replies, 'That he will teach him prudence in affairs

private and public; in short, the science or knowledge of human life.'


  This, as Socrates admits, is a noble profession; but he is or rather would

have been doubtful, whether such knowledge can be taught, if Protagoras had

not assured him of the fact, for two reasons: (1) Because the Athenian people,

who recognize in their assemblies the distinction between the skilled and the

unskilled in the arts, do not distinguish between the trained politician and the

untrained; (2) Because the wisest and best Athenian citizens do not teach

their sons political virtue. Will Protagoras answer these objections?


    Protagoras explains his views in the form of an apologue, in which, after

Prometheus had given men the arts, Zeus is represented as sending Hermes to

them, bearing with him Justice and Reverence. These are not, like the arts, to

be imparted to a few only, but all men are to be partakers of them. Therefore

the  Athenian  people  are  right  in  distinguishing  between  the  skilled  and

unskilled in the arts, and not between skilled and unskilled politicians. (1) Forall men have the political virtues to a certain degree, and are obliged to say

that they have them, whether they have them or not. A man would be thought

a madman who professed an art which he did not know; but he would be

equally thought a madman if he did not profess a virtue which he had not. (2)

And that the political virtues can be taught and acquired, in the opinion of the

Athenians, is proved by the fact that they punish evil-doers, with a view to

prevention, of course --mere retribution is for beasts, and not for men. (3)

Again, would parents who teach her sons lesser matters leave them ignorant

of the common duty of citizens? To the doubt of Socrates the best answer is

the fact, that the education of youth in virtue begins almost as soon as they

can speak, and is continued by the state when they pass out of the parental

control. (4) Nor need we wonder that wise and good fathers sometimes have

foolish  and  worthless  sons.  Virtue,  as  we  were  saying,  is  not  the  private

possession of any man, but is shared by all, only however to the extent of

which each individual is by nature capable. And, as a matter of fact, even the

worst of civilized mankind will appear virtuous and just, if we compare them

with savages. (5) The error of Socrates lies in supposing that there are no

teachers  of  virtue,  whereas  all  men  are  teachers  in  a  degree.  Some,  like

Protagoras,  are  better  than  others,  and  with  this  result  we  ought  to  be

satisfied.


  Socrates is highly delighted with the explanation of Protagoras. But he

has still a doubt lingering in his mind. Protagoras has spoken of the virtues:

are they many, or one? are they parts of a whole, or different names of the

same thing? Protagoras replies that they are parts, like the parts of a face,

which have their several functions, and no one part is like any other part. This

admission,  which  has  been  somewhat  hastily  made,  is  now  taken  up  and

cross-examined by Socrates:--


  'Is justice just, and is holiness holy? And are justice and holiness opposed

to one another?'--'Then justice is unholy.' Protagoras would rather say that

justice is different from holiness, and yet in a certain point of view nearly the

same. He does not, however, escape in this way from the cunning of Socrates,

who inveigles him into an admission that everything has but one opposite.

Folly,  for  example,  is  opposed  to  wisdom;  and  folly  is  also  opposed  to

temperance;  and  therefore  temperance  and  wisdom  are  the  same.  And

holiness  has  been  already  admitted  to  be  nearly  the  same  as  justice.Temperance, therefore, has now to be compared with justice.


  Protagoras, whose temper begins to get a little ruffled at the process to

which he has been subjected, is aware that he will soon be compelled by the

dialectics of Socrates to admit that the temperate is the just. He therefore

defends himself with his favourite weapon; that is to say, he makes a long

speech not much to the point, which elicits the applause of the audience.


  Here occurs a sort of interlude, which commences with a declaration on

the part of Socrates that he cannot follow a long speech, and therefore he

must  beg  Protagoras  to  speak  shorter.  As  Protagoras  declines  to

accommodate him, he rises to depart, but is detained by Callias, who thinks

him  unreasonable  in  not  allowing  Protagoras  the  liberty  which  he  takes

himself of speaking as he likes. But Alcibiades answers that the two cases are

not parallel. For Socrates admits his inability to speak long; will Protagoras in

like manner acknowledge his inability to speak short?


  Counsels of moderation are urged first in a few words by Critias, and then

by Prodicus in balanced and sententious language: and Hippias proposes an

umpire.  But  who  is  to  be  the  umpire?  rejoins  Socrates;  he  would  rather

suggest as a compromise that Protagoras shall ask and he will answer, and

that when Protagoras is tired of asking he himself will ask and Protagoras

shall answer. To this the latter yields a reluctant assent.


    Protagoras selects as his thesis a poem of Simonides of Ceos, in which he

professes to find a contradiction. First the poet says,


  'Hard is it to become good,'


  and then reproaches Pittacus for having said, 'Hard is it to be good.' How

is  this  to  be  reconciled?  Socrates,  who  is  familiar  with  the  poem,  is

embarrassed  at  first,  and  invokes  the  aid  of  Prodicus,  the  countryman  of

Simonides,  but  apparently  only  with  the  intention  of  flattering  him  into

absurdities. First a distinction is drawn between (Greek) to be, and (Greek) to

become:  to  become  good  is  difficult;  to  be  good  is  easy.  Then  the  word

difficult or hard is explained to mean 'evil' in the Cean dialect. To all this

Prodicus  assents;  but  when  Protagoras  reclaims,  Socrates  slily  withdrawsProdicus from the fray, under the pretence that his assent was only intended

to test the wits of his adversary. He then proceeds to give another and more

elaborate explanation of the whole passage. The explanation is as follows:--


  The Lacedaemonians are great philosophers (although this is a fact which

is not generally known); and the soul of their philosophy is brevity, which

was also the style of primitive antiquity and of the seven sages. Now Pittacus

had a saying, 'Hard is it to be good:' and Simonides, who was jealous of the

fame of this saying, wrote a poem which was designed to controvert it. No,

says he, Pittacus; not 'hard to be good,' but 'hard to become good.' Socrates

proceeds to argue in a highly impressive manner that the whole composition

is intended as an attack upon Pittacus. This, though manifestly absurd, is

accepted by the company, and meets with the special approval of Hippias,

who has however a favourite interpretation of his own, which he is requested

by Alcibiades to defer.


  The argument is now resumed, not without some disdainful remarks of

Socrates  on  the  practice  of  introducing  the  poets,  who  ought  not  to  be

allowed, any more than flute-girls, to come into good society. Men's own

thoughts  should  supply  them  with  the  materials  for  discussion.  A  few

soothing flatteries are addressed to Protagoras by Callias and Socrates, and

then the old question is repeated, 'Whether the virtues are one or many?' To

which Protagoras is now disposed to reply, that four out of the five virtues are

in some degree similar; but he still contends that the fifth, courage, is unlike

the rest. Socrates proceeds to undermine the last stronghold of the adversary,

first obtaining from him the admission that all virtue is in the highest degree

good:--


  The courageous are the confident; and the confident are those who know

their business or profession: those who have no such knowledge and are still

confident  are  madmen.  This  is  admitted.  Then,  says  Socrates,  courage  is

knowledge--an  inference  which  Protagoras  evades  by  drawing  a  futile

distinction between the courageous and the confident in a fluent speech.


  Socrates  renews  the  attack  from  another  side:  he  would  like  to  know

whether pleasure is not the only good, and pain the only evil? Protagoras

seems to doubt the morality or propriety of assenting to this; he would rathersay that 'some pleasures are good, some pains are evil,' which is also the

opinion of the generality of mankind. What does he think of knowledge?

Does he agree with the common opinion that knowledge is overcome by

passion? or does he hold that knowledge is power? Protagoras agrees that

knowledge is certainly a governing power.


  This, however, is not the doctrine of men in general, who maintain that

many  who  know  what  is  best,  act  contrary  to  their  knowledge  under  the

influence  of  pleasure.  But  this  opposition  of  good  and  evil  is  really  the

opposition  of  a  greater  or  lesser  amount  of  pleasure.  Pleasures  are  evils

because they end in pain, and pains are goods because they end in pleasures.

Thus pleasure is seen to be the only good; and the only evil is the preference

of  the  lesser  pleasure  to  the  greater.  But  then  comes  in  the  illusion  of

distance. Some art of mensuration is required in order to show us pleasures

and  pains  in  their  true  proportion.  This  art  of  mensuration  is  a  kind  of

knowledge, and knowledge is thus proved once more to be the governing

principle of human life, and ignorance the origin of all evil: for no one prefers

the less pleasure to the greater, or the greater pain to the less, except from

ignorance. The argument is drawn out in an imaginary 'dialogue within a

dialogue,' conducted by Socrates and Protagoras on the one part, and the rest

of the world on the other. Hippias and Prodicus, as well as Protagoras, admit

the soundness of the conclusion.


  Socrates then applies this new conclusion to the case of courage--the only

virtue which still holds out against the assaults of the Socratic dialectic. No

one  chooses  the  evil  or  refuses  the  good  except  through  ignorance.  This

explains  why  cowards  refuse  to  go  to  war:--because  they  form  a  wrong

estimate of good, and honour, and pleasure. And why are the courageous

willing to go to war?--because they form a right estimate of pleasures and

pains, of things terrible and not terrible. Courage then is knowledge, and

cowardice  is  ignorance.  And  the  five  virtues,  which  were  originally

maintained to have five different natures, after having been easily reduced to

two only, at last coalesce in one. The assent of Protagoras to this last position

is extracted with great difficulty.


  Socrates concludes by professing his disinterested love of the truth, and

remarks on the singular manner in which he and his adversary had changedsides.  Protagoras  began  by  asserting,  and  Socrates  by  denying,  the

teachableness of virtue, and now the latter ends by affirming that virtue is

knowledge, which is the most teachable of all things, while Protagoras has

been  striving  to  show  that  virtue  is  not  knowledge,  and  this  is  almost

equivalent to saying that virtue cannot be taught. He is not satisfied with the

result, and would like to renew the enquiry with the help of Protagoras in a

different  order,  asking  (1)  What  virtue  is,  and  (2)  Whether  virtue  can  be

taught. Protagoras declines this offer, but commends Socrates' earnestness

and his style of discussion.


  The  Protagoras  is  often  supposed  to  be  full  of  difficulties.  These  are

partly imaginary and partly real. The imaginary ones are (1) Chronological,--

which were pointed out in ancient times by Athenaeus, and are noticed by

Schleiermacher and others, and relate to the impossibility of all the persons in

the Dialogue meeting at any one time, whether in the year 425 B.C., or in any

other. But Plato, like all writers of fiction, aims only at the probable, and

shows in many Dialogues (e.g. the Symposium and Republic, and already in

the  Laches)  an  extreme  disregard  of  the  historical  accuracy  which  is

sometimes demanded of him. (2) The exact place of the Protagoras among

the Dialogues, and the date of composition, have also been much disputed.

But there are no criteria which afford any real grounds for determining the

date of composition; and the affinities of the Dialogues, when they are not

indicated by Plato himself, must always to a great extent remain uncertain.

(3)  There  is  another  class  of  difficulties,  which  may  be  ascribed  to

preconceived  notions  of  commentators,  who  imagine  that  Protagoras  the

Sophist ought always to be in the wrong, and his adversary Socrates in the

right;  or  that  in  this  or  that  passage--e.g.  in  the  explanation  of  good  as

pleasure--Plato  is  inconsistent  with  himself;  or  that  the  Dialogue  fails  in

unity, and has not a proper beginning, middle, and ending. They seem to

forget that Plato is a dramatic writer who throws his thoughts into both sides

of the argument, and certainly does not aim at any unity which is inconsistent

with freedom, and with a natural or even wild manner of treating his subject;

also that his mode of revealing the truth is by lights and shadows, and far-off

and  opposing  points  of  view,  and  not  by  dogmatic  statements  or  definite

results.


  The real difficulties arise out of the extreme subtlety of the work, which,as Socrates says of the poem of Simonides, is a most perfect piece of art.

There are dramatic contrasts and interests, threads of philosophy broken and

resumed, satirical reflections on mankind, veils thrown over truths which are

lightly  suggested,  and  all  woven  together  in  a  single  design,  and  moving

towards one end.


  In  the  introductory  scene  Plato  raises  the  expectation  that  a  'great

personage' is about to appear on the stage; perhaps with a further view of

showing that he is destined to be overthrown by a greater still, who makes no

pretensions. Before introducing Hippocrates to him, Socrates thinks proper to

warn  the  youth  against  the  dangers  of  'influence,'  of  which  the  invidious

nature is recognized by Protagoras himself. Hippocrates readily adopts the

suggestion  of  Socrates  that  he  shall  learn  of  Protagoras  only  the

accomplishments  which  befit  an  Athenian  gentleman,  and  let  alone  his

'sophistry.' There is nothing however in the introduction which leads to the

inference that Plato intended to blacken the character of the Sophists; he only

makes a little merry at their expense.


  The 'great personage' is somewhat ostentatious, but frank and honest. He

is introduced on a stage which is worthy of him--at the house of the rich

Callias, in which are congregated the noblest and wisest of the Athenians. He

considers openness to be the best policy, and particularly mentions his own

liberal  mode  of  dealing  with  his  pupils,  as  if  in  answer  to  the  favourite

accusation of the Sophists that they received pay. He is remarkable for the

good temper which he exhibits throughout the discussion under the trying and

often  sophistical  cross-examination  of  Socrates.  Although  once  or  twice

ruffled,  and  reluctant  to  continue  the  discussion,  he  parts  company  on

perfectly good terms, and appears to be, as he says of himself, the 'least

jealous of mankind.'


  Nor is there anything in the sentiments of Protagoras which impairs this

pleasing impression of the grave and weighty old man. His real defect is that

he  is  inferior  to  Socrates  in  dialectics.  The  opposition  between  him  and

Socrates is not the opposition of good and bad, true and false, but of the old

art of rhetoric and the new science of interrogation and argument; also of the

irony of Socrates and the self-assertion of the Sophists. There is quite as

much  truth  on  the  side  of  Protagoras  as  of  Socrates;  but  the  truth  ofProtagoras  is  based  on  common  sense  and  common  maxims  of  morality,

while that of Socrates is paradoxical or transcendental, and though full of

meaning  and  insight,  hardly  intelligible  to  the  rest  of  mankind.  Here  as

elsewhere is the usual contrast between the Sophists representing average

public  opinion  and  Socrates  seeking  for  increased  clearness  and  unity  of

ideas.  But  to  a  great  extent  Protagoras  has  the  best  of  the  argument  and

represents the better mind of man.


  For example: (1) one of the noblest statements to be found in antiquity

about the preventive nature of punishment is put into his mouth; (2) he is

clearly right also in maintaining that virtue can be taught (which Socrates

himself, at the end of the Dialogue, is disposed to concede); and also (3) in

his explanation of the phenomenon that good fathers have bad sons; (4) he is

right  also  in  observing  that  the  virtues  are  not  like  the  arts,  gifts  or

attainments  of  special  individuals,  but  the  common  property  of  all:  this,

which in all ages has been the strength and weakness of ethics and politics, is

deeply seated in human nature; (5) there is a sort of half- truth in the notion

that all civilized men are teachers of virtue; and more than a half-truth (6) in

ascribing to man, who in his outward conditions is more helpless than the

other  animals,  the  power  of  self-improvement;  (7)  the  religious  allegory

should be noticed, in which the arts are said to be given by Prometheus (who

stole them), whereas justice and reverence and the political virtues could only

be imparted by Zeus; (8) in the latter part of the Dialogue, when Socrates is

arguing  that  'pleasure  is  the  only  good,'  Protagoras  deems  it  more  in

accordance with his character to maintain that 'some pleasures only are good;'

and admits that 'he, above all other men, is bound to say "that wisdom and

knowledge are the highest of human things."'


  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  in  all  this  Plato  is  depicting  an

imaginary Protagoras; he seems to be showing us the teaching of the Sophists

under the milder aspect under which he once regarded them. Nor is there any

reason to doubt that Socrates is equally an historical character, paradoxical,

ironical, tiresome, but seeking for the unity of virtue and knowledge as for a

precious treasure; willing to rest this even on a calculation of pleasure, and

irresistible here, as everywhere in Plato, in his intellectual superiority.


  The aim of Socrates, and of the Dialogue, is to show the unity of virtue.In the determination of this question the identity of virtue and knowledge is

found to be involved. But if virtue and knowledge are one, then virtue can be

taught; the end of the Dialogue returns to the beginning. Had Protagoras been

allowed by Plato to make the Aristotelian distinction, and say that virtue is

not knowledge, but is accompanied with knowledge; or to point out with

Aristotle that the same quality may have more than one opposite; or with

Plato himself in the Phaedo to deny that good is a mere exchange of a greater

pleasure  for  a  less--the  unity  of  virtue  and  the  identity  of  virtue  and

knowledge would have required to be proved by other arguments.


  The victory of Socrates over Protagoras is in every way complete when

their minds are fairly brought together. Protagoras falls before him after two

or  three  blows.  Socrates  partially  gains  his  object  in  the  first  part  of  the

Dialogue,  and  completely  in  the  second.  Nor  does  he  appear  at  any

disadvantage when subjected to 'the question' by Protagoras. He succeeds in

making his two 'friends,' Prodicus and Hippias, ludicrous by the way; he also

makes a long speech in defence of the poem of Simonides, after the manner

of the Sophists, showing, as Alcibiades says, that he is only pretending to

have a bad memory, and that he and not Protagoras is really a master in the

two  styles  of  speaking;  and  that  he  can  undertake,  not  one  side  of  the

argument only, but both, when Protagoras begins to break down. Against the

authority  of  the  poets  with  whom  Protagoras  has  ingeniously  identified

himself at the commencement of the Dialogue, Socrates sets up the proverbial

philosophers and those masters of brevity the Lacedaemonians. The poets,

the Laconizers, and Protagoras are satirized at the same time.


  Not having the whole of this poem before us, it is impossible for us to

answer  certainly  the  question  of  Protagoras,  how  the  two  passages  of

Simonides are to be reconciled. We can only follow the indications given by

Plato himself. But it seems likely that the reconcilement offered by Socrates

is a caricature of the methods of interpretation which were practised by the

Sophists--for the following reasons: (1) The transparent irony of the previous

interpretations given by Socrates. (2) The ludicrous opening of the speech in

which  the  Lacedaemonians  are  described  as  the  true  philosophers,  and

Laconic brevity as the true form of philosophy, evidently with an allusion to

Protagoras'  long  speeches.  (3)  The  manifest  futility  and  absurdity  of  the

explanation  of  (Greek),  which  is  hardly  consistent  with  the  rationalinterpretation of the rest of the poem. The opposition of (Greek) and (Greek)

seems also intended to express the rival doctrines of Socrates and Protagoras,

and is a facetious commentary on their differences. (4) The general treatment

in Plato both of the Poets and the Sophists, who are their interpreters, and

whom he delights to identify with them. (5) The depreciating spirit in which

Socrates speaks of the introduction of the poets as a substitute for original

conversation, which is intended to contrast with Protagoras' exaltation of the

study of them-- this again is hardly consistent with the serious defence of

Simonides. (6) the marked approval of Hippias, who is supposed at once to

catch  the  familiar  sound,  just  as  in  the  previous  conversation  Prodicus  is

represented as ready to accept any distinctions of language however absurd.

At the same time Hippias is desirous of substituting a new interpretation of

his own; as if the words might really be made to mean anything, and were

only to be regarded as affording a field for the ingenuity of the interpreter.


  This curious passage is, therefore, to be regarded as Plato's satire on the

tedious and hypercritical arts of interpretation which prevailed in his own

day, and may be compared with his condemnation of the same arts when

applied to mythology in the Phaedrus, and with his other parodies, e.g. with

the two first speeches in the Phaedrus and with the Menexenus. Several lesser

touches of satire may be observed, such as the claim of philosophy advanced

for the Lacedaemonians, which is a parody of the claims advanced for the

Poets by Protagoras; the mistake of the Laconizing set in supposing that the

Lacedaemonians are a great nation because they bruise their ears; the far-

fetched notion, which is 'really too bad,' that Simonides uses the Lesbian (?)

word, (Greek), because he is addressing a Lesbian. The whole may also be

considered as a satire on those who spin pompous theories out of nothing. As

in the arguments of the Euthydemus and of the Cratylus, the veil of irony is

never withdrawn; and we are left in doubt at last how far in this interpretation

of Simonides Socrates is 'fooling,' how far he is in earnest.


  All the interests and contrasts of character in a great dramatic work like

the  Protagoras  are  not  easily  exhausted.  The  impressiveness  of  the  scene

should not be lost upon us, or the gradual substitution of Socrates in the

second  part  for  Protagoras  in  the  first.  The  characters  to  whom  we  are

introduced  at  the  beginning  of  the  Dialogue  all  play  a  part  more  or  less

conspicuous towards the end. There is Alcibiades, who is compelled by thenecessity of his nature to be a partisan, lending effectual aid to Socrates; there

is Critias assuming the tone of impartiality; Callias, here as always inclining

to the Sophists, but eager for any intellectual repast; Prodicus, who finds an

opportunity for displaying his distinctions of language, which are valueless

and  pedantic,  because  they  are  not  based  on  dialectic;  Hippias,  who  has

previously  exhibited  his  superficial  knowledge  of  natural  philosophy,  to

which,  as  in  both  the  Dialogues  called  by  his  name,  he  now  adds  the

profession of an interpreter of the Poets. The two latter personages have been

already damaged by the mock heroic description of them in the introduction.

It may be remarked that Protagoras is consistently presented to us throughout

as the teacher of moral and political virtue; there is no allusion to the theories

of sensation which are attributed to him in the Theaetetus and elsewhere, or

to his denial of the existence of the gods in a well-known fragment ascribed

to him; he is the religious rather than the irreligious teacher in this Dialogue.

Also  it  may  be  observed  that  Socrates  shows  him  as  much  respect  as  is

consistent with his own ironical character; he admits that the dialectic which

has overthrown Protagoras has carried himself round to a conclusion opposed

to  his  first  thesis.  The  force  of  argument,  therefore,  and  not  Socrates  or

Protagoras, has won the day.


  But is Socrates serious in maintaining (1) that virtue cannot be taught; (2)

that the virtues are one; (3) that virtue is the knowledge of pleasures and

pains present and future? These propositions to us have an appearance of

paradox--they are really moments or aspects of the truth by the help of which

we pass from the old conventional morality to a higher conception of virtue

and knowledge. That virtue cannot be taught is a paradox of the same sort as

the  profession  of  Socrates  that  he  knew  nothing.  Plato  means  to  say  that

virtue is not brought to a man, but must be drawn out of him; and cannot be

taught  by  rhetorical  discourses  or  citations  from  the  poets.  The  second

question, whether the virtues are one or many, though at first sight distinct, is

really a part of the same subject; for if the virtues are to be taught, they must

be reducible to a common principle; and this common principle is found to be

knowledge. Here, as Aristotle remarks, Socrates and Plato outstep the truth--

they  make  a  part  of  virtue  into  the  whole.  Further,  the  nature  of  this

knowledge,  which  is  assumed  to  be  a  knowledge  of  pleasures  and  pains,

appears to us too superficial and at variance with the spirit of Plato himself.

Yet, in this, Plato is only following the historical Socrates as he is depicted tous  in  Xenophon's  Memorabilia.  Like  Socrates,  he  finds  on  the  surface  of

human  life  one  common  bond  by  which  the  virtues  are  united,--their

tendency  to  produce  happiness,--though  such  a  principle  is  afterwards

repudiated by him.


  It remains to be considered in what relation the Protagoras stands to the

other  Dialogues  of  Plato.  That  it  is  one  of  the  earlier  or  purely  Socratic

works--perhaps the last, as it is certainly the greatest of them--is indicated by

the absence of any allusion to the doctrine of reminiscence; and also by the

different attitude assumed towards the teaching and persons of the Sophists in

some of the later Dialogues. The Charmides, Laches, Lysis, all touch on the

question of the relation of knowledge to virtue, and may be regarded, if not as

preliminary studies or sketches of the more important work, at any rate as

closely connected with it. The Io and the lesser Hippias contain discussions

of the Poets, which offer a parallel to the ironical criticism of Simonides, and

are conceived in a similar spirit. The affinity of the Protagoras to the Meno is

more doubtful. For there, although the same question is discussed, 'whether

virtue can be taught,' and the relation of Meno to the Sophists is much the

same as that of Hippocrates, the answer to the question is supplied out of the

doctrine of ideas; the real Socrates is already passing into the Platonic one. At

a later stage of the Platonic philosophy we shall find that both the paradox

and the solution of it appear to have been retracted. The Phaedo, the Gorgias,

and the Philebus offer further corrections of the teaching of the Protagoras; in

all of them the doctrine that virtue is pleasure, or that pleasure is the chief or

only good, is distinctly renounced.


  Thus after many preparations and oppositions, both of the characters of

men  and  aspects  of  the  truth,  especially  of  the  popular  and  philosophical

aspect; and after many interruptions and detentions by the way, which, as

Theodorus says in the Theaetetus, are quite as agreeable as the argument, we

arrive at the great Socratic thesis that virtue is knowledge. This is an aspect of

the truth which was lost almost as soon as it was found; and yet has to be

recovered by every one for himself who would pass the limits of proverbial

and popular philosophy. The moral and intellectual are always dividing, yet

they must be reunited, and in the highest conception of them are inseparable.

The thesis of Socrates is not merely a hasty assumption, but may be also

deemed  an  anticipation  of  some  'metaphysic  of  the  future,'  in  which  thedivided elements of human nature are reconciled.Protagoras


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettPERSONS  OF  THE  DIALOGUE: Socrates,  who  is  the  narrator  of  the

Dialogue to his Companion. Hippocrates, Alcibiades and Critias. Protagoras,

Hippias and Prodicus (Sophists). Callias, a wealthy Athenian.


SCENE: The House of Callias.


COMPANION: Where do you come from, Socrates? And yet I need hardly

ask  the  question,  for  I  know  that  you  have  been  in  chase  of  the  fair

Alcibiades. I saw him the day before yesterday; and he had got a beard like a

man,--and he is a man, as I may tell you in your ear. But I thought that he was

still very charming.


SOCRATES: What of his beard? Are you not of Homer's opinion, who says


'Youth is most charming when the beard first appears'?


And that is now the charm of Alcibiades.


COMPANION: Well, and how do matters proceed? Have you been visiting

him, and was he gracious to you?


SOCRATES: Yes, I thought that he was very gracious; and especially to-day,

for I have just come from him, and he has been helping me in an argument.

But shall I tell you a strange thing? I paid no attention to him, and several

times I quite forgot that he was present.


COMPANION:  What  is  the  meaning  of  this?  Has  anything  happened

between you and him? For surely you cannot have discovered a fairer love

than he is; certainly not in this city of Athens.


SOCRATES: Yes, much fairer.


COMPANION: What do you mean--a citizen or a foreigner?


SOCRATES: A foreigner.


COMPANION: Of what country?SOCRATES: Of Abdera.


COMPANION: And is this stranger really in your opinion a fairer love than

the son of Cleinias?


SOCRATES: And is not the wiser always the fairer, sweet friend?


COMPANION: But have you really met, Socrates, with some wise one?


SOCRATES: Say rather, with the wisest of all living men, if you are willing

to accord that title to Protagoras.


COMPANION: What! Is Protagoras in Athens?


SOCRATES: Yes; he has been here two days.


COMPANION: And do you just come from an interview with him?


SOCRATES: Yes; and I have heard and said many things.


COMPANION: Then, if you have no engagement, suppose that you sit down

and tell me what passed, and my attendant here shall give up his place to you.


SOCRATES: To be sure; and I shall be grateful to you for listening.


COMPANION: Thank you, too, for telling us.


SOCRATES: That is thank you twice over. Listen then:--


Last  night,  or  rather  very  early  this  morning,  Hippocrates,  the  son  of

Apollodorus and the brother of Phason, gave a tremendous thump with his

staff  at  my  door;  some  one  opened  to  him,  and  he  came  rushing  in  and

bawled out: Socrates, are you awake or asleep?


I knew his voice, and said: Hippocrates, is that you? and do you bring any

news?


Good news, he said; nothing but good.Delightful, I said; but what is the news? and why have you come hither at this

unearthly hour?


He drew nearer to me and said: Protagoras is come.


Yes, I replied; he came two days ago: have you only just heard of his arrival?


Yes, by the gods, he said; but not until yesterday evening.


At the same time he felt for the truckle-bed, and sat down at my feet, and then

he  said:  Yesterday  quite  late  in  the  evening,  on  my  return  from  Oenoe

whither I had gone in pursuit of my runaway slave Satyrus, as I meant to

have told you, if some other matter had not come in the way;--on my return,

when we had done supper and were about to retire to rest, my brother said to

me: Protagoras is come. I was going to you at once, and then I thought that

the night was far spent. But the moment sleep left me after my fatigue, I got

up and came hither direct.


I, who knew the very courageous madness of the man, said: What is the

matter? Has Protagoras robbed you of anything?


He replied, laughing: Yes, indeed he has, Socrates, of the wisdom which he

keeps from me.


But, surely, I said, if you give him money, and make friends with him, he will

make you as wise as he is himself.


Would to heaven, he replied, that this were the case! He might take all that I

have, and all that my friends have, if he pleased. But that is why I have come

to you now, in order that you may speak to him on my behalf; for I am

young, and also I have never seen nor heard him; (when he visited Athens

before I was but a child;) and all men praise him, Socrates; he is reputed to be

the most accomplished of speakers. There is no reason why we should not go

to him at once, and then we shall find him at home. He lodges, as I hear, with

Callias the son of Hipponicus: let us start.


I replied: Not yet, my good friend; the hour is too early. But let us rise andtake a turn in the court and wait about there until day-break; when the day

breaks, then we will go. For Protagoras is generally at home, and we shall be

sure to find him; never fear.


Upon this we got up and walked about in the court, and I thought that I would

make  trial  of  the  strength  of  his  resolution.  So  I  examined  him  and  put

questions to him. Tell me, Hippocrates, I said, as you are going to Protagoras,

and will be paying your money to him, what is he to whom you are going?

and what will he make of you? If, for example, you had thought of going to

Hippocrates of Cos, the Asclepiad, and were about to give him your money,

and some one had said to you: You are paying money to your namesake

Hippocrates, O Hippocrates; tell me, what is he that you give him money?

how would you have answered?


I should say, he replied, that I gave money to him as a physician.


And what will he make of you?


A physician, he said.


And if you were resolved to go to Polycleitus the Argive, or Pheidias the

Athenian, and were intending to give them money, and some one had asked

you:  What  are  Polycleitus  and  Pheidias?  and  why  do  you  give  them  this

money?--how would you have answered?


I should have answered, that they were statuaries.


And what will they make of you?


A statuary, of course.


Well now, I said, you and I are going to Protagoras, and we are ready to pay

him money on your behalf. If our own means are sufficient, and we can gain

him with these, we shall be only too glad; but if not, then we are to spend the

money  of  your  friends  as  well.  Now  suppose,  that  while  we  are  thus

enthusiastically pursuing our object some one were to say to us: Tell me,

Socrates, and you Hippocrates, what is Protagoras, and why are you going topay him money,--how should we answer? I know that Pheidias is a sculptor,

and that Homer is a poet; but what appellation is given to Protagoras? how is

he designated?


They call him a Sophist, Socrates, he replied.


Then we are going to pay our money to him in the character of a Sophist?


Certainly.


But  suppose  a  person  were  to  ask  this  further  question:  And  how  about

yourself? What will Protagoras make of you, if you go to see him?


He answered, with a blush upon his face (for the day was just beginning to

dawn, so that I could see him): Unless this differs in some way from the

former instances, I suppose that he will make a Sophist of me.


By the gods, I said, and are you not ashamed at having to appear before the

Hellenes in the character of a Sophist?


Indeed, Socrates, to confess the truth, I am.


But you should not assume, Hippocrates, that the instruction of Protagoras is

of this nature: may you not learn of him in the same way that you learned the

arts of the grammarian, or musician, or trainer, not with the view of making

any of them a profession, but only as a part of education, and because a

private gentleman and freeman ought to know them?


Just so, he said; and that, in my opinion, is a far truer account of the teaching

of Protagoras.


I said: I wonder whether you know what you are doing?


And what am I doing?


You are going to commit your soul to the care of a man whom you call a

Sophist. And yet I hardly think that you know what a Sophist is; and if not,

then  you  do  not  even  know  to  whom  you  are  committing  your  soul  andwhether the thing to which you commit yourself be good or evil.


I certainly think that I do know, he replied.


Then tell me, what do you imagine that he is?


I take him to be one who knows wise things, he replied, as his name implies.


And might you not, I said, affirm this of the painter and of the carpenter also:

Do not they, too, know wise things? But suppose a person were to ask us: In

what are the painters wise? We should answer: In what relates to the making

of likenesses, and similarly of other things. And if he were further to ask:

What is the wisdom of the Sophist, and what is the manufacture over which

he presides?--how should we answer him?


How should we answer him, Socrates? What other answer could there be but

that he presides over the art which makes men eloquent?


Yes, I replied, that is very likely true, but not enough; for in the answer a

further  question  is  involved:  Of  what  does  the  Sophist  make  a  man  talk

eloquently? The player on the lyre may be supposed to make a man talk

eloquently about that which he makes him understand, that is about playing

the lyre. Is not that true?


Yes.


Then about what does the Sophist make him eloquent? Must not he make him

eloquent in that which he understands?


Yes, that may be assumed.


And what is that which the Sophist knows and makes his disciple know?


Indeed, he said, I cannot tell.


Then I proceeded to say: Well, but are you aware of the danger which you are

incurring? If you were going to commit your body to some one, who might

do good or harm to it, would you not carefully consider and ask the opinionof your friends and kindred, and deliberate many days as to whether you

should give him the care of your body? But when the soul is in question,

which you hold to be of far more value than the body, and upon the good or

evil  of  which  depends  the  well-being  of  your  all,--about  this  you  never

consulted either with your father or with your brother or with any one of us

who are your companions. But no sooner does this foreigner appear, than you

instantly commit your soul to his keeping. In the evening, as you say, you

hear of him, and in the morning you go to him, never deliberating or taking

the opinion of any one as to whether you ought to intrust yourself to him or

not;--you have quite made up your mind that you will at all hazards be a pupil

of Protagoras, and are prepared to expend all the property of yourself and of

your friends in carrying out at any price this determination, although, as you

admit, you do not know him, and have never spoken with him: and you call

him a Sophist, but are manifestly ignorant of what a Sophist is; and yet you

are going to commit yourself to his keeping.


When he heard me say this, he replied: No other inference, Socrates, can be

drawn from your words.


I proceeded: Is not a Sophist, Hippocrates, one who deals wholesale or retail

in the food of the soul? To me that appears to be his nature.


And what, Socrates, is the food of the soul?


Surely, I said, knowledge is the food of the soul; and we must take care, my

friend, that the Sophist does not deceive us when he praises what he sells,

like the dealers wholesale or retail who sell the food of the body; for they

praise  indiscriminately  all  their  goods,  without  knowing  what  are  really

beneficial or hurtful: neither do their customers know, with the exception of

any trainer or physician who may happen to buy of them. In like manner

those who carry about the wares of knowledge, and make the round of the

cities, and sell or retail them to any customer who is in want of them, praise

them all alike; though I should not wonder, O my friend, if many of them

were really ignorant of their effect upon the soul; and their customers equally

ignorant, unless he who buys of them happens to be a physician of the soul.

If,  therefore,  you  have  understanding  of  what  is  good  and  evil,  you  may

safely buy knowledge of Protagoras or of any one; but if not, then, O myfriend, pause, and do not hazard your dearest interests at a game of chance.

For there is far greater peril in buying knowledge than in buying meat and

drink: the one you purchase of the wholesale or retail dealer, and carry them

away in other vessels, and before you receive them into the body as food, you

may deposit them at home and call in any experienced friend who knows

what is good to be eaten or drunken, and what not, and how much, and when;

and then the danger of purchasing them is not so great. But you cannot buy

the wares of knowledge and carry them away in another vessel; when you

have paid for them you must receive them into the soul and go your way,

either greatly harmed or greatly benefited; and therefore we should deliberate

and  take  counsel  with  our  elders;  for  we  are  still  young--too  young  to

determine such a matter. And now let us go, as we were intending, and hear

Protagoras; and when we have heard what he has to say, we may take counsel

of  others;  for  not  only  is  Protagoras  at  the  house  of  Callias,  but  there  is

Hippias of Elis, and, if I am not mistaken, Prodicus of Ceos, and several other

wise men.


To this we agreed, and proceeded on our way until we reached the vestibule

of the house; and there we stopped in order to conclude a discussion which

had arisen between us as we were going along; and we stood talking in the

vestibule until we had finished and come to an understanding. And I think

that the door-keeper, who was a eunuch, and who was probably annoyed at

the great inroad of the Sophists, must have heard us talking. At any rate,

when we knocked at the door, and he opened and saw us, he grumbled: They

are Sophists--he is not at home; and instantly gave the door a hearty bang

with both his hands. Again we knocked, and he answered without opening:

Did you not hear me say that he is not at home, fellows? But, my friend, I

said, you need not be alarmed; for we are not Sophists, and we are not come

to see Callias, but we want to see Protagoras; and I must request you to

announce us. At last, after a good deal of difficulty, the man was persuaded to

open the door.


When we entered, we found Protagoras taking a walk in the cloister; and next

to  him,  on  one  side,  were  walking  Callias,  the  son  of  Hipponicus,  and

Paralus, the son of Pericles, who, by the mother's side, is his half- brother,

and  Charmides,  the  son  of  Glaucon.  On  the  other  side  of  him  were

Xanthippus, the other son of Pericles, Philippides, the son of Philomelus; alsoAntimoerus of Mende, who of all the disciples of Protagoras is the most

famous, and intends to make sophistry his profession. A train of listeners

followed  him;  the  greater  part  of  them  appeared  to  be  foreigners,  whom

Protagoras had brought with him out of the various cities visited by him in

his journeys, he, like Orpheus, attracting them his voice, and they following

(Compare Rep.). I should mention also that there were some Athenians in the

company. Nothing delighted me more than the precision of their movements:

they never got into his way at all; but when he and those who were with him

turned back, then the band of listeners parted regularly on either side; he was

always in front, and they wheeled round and took their places behind him in

perfect order.


After him, as Homer says (Od.), 'I lifted up my eyes and saw' Hippias the

Elean sitting in the opposite cloister on a chair of state, and around him were

seated  on  benches  Eryximachus,  the  son  of  Acumenus,  and  Phaedrus  the

Myrrhinusian, and Andron the son of Androtion, and there were strangers

whom he had brought with him from his native city of Elis, and some others:

they were putting to Hippias certain physical and astronomical questions, and

he,  ex  cathedra,  was  determining  their  several  questions  to  them,  and

discoursing of them.


Also, 'my eyes beheld Tantalus (Od.);' for Prodicus the Cean was at Athens:

he  had  been  lodged  in  a  room  which,  in  the  days  of  Hipponicus,  was  a

storehouse; but, as the house was full, Callias had cleared this out and made

the room into a guest-chamber. Now Prodicus was still in bed, wrapped up in

sheepskins and bedclothes, of which there seemed to be a great heap; and

there  was  sitting  by  him  on  the  couches  near,  Pausanias  of  the  deme  of

Cerameis,  and  with  Pausanias  was  a  youth  quite  young,  who  is  certainly

remarkable for his good looks, and, if I am not mistaken, is also of a fair and

gentle nature. I thought that I heard him called Agathon, and my suspicion is

that he is the beloved of Pausanias. There was this youth, and also there were

the two Adeimantuses, one the son of Cepis, and the other of Leucolophides,

and some others. I was very anxious to hear what Prodicus was saying, for he

seems to me to be an all-wise and inspired man; but I was not able to get into

the inner circle, and his fine deep voice made an echo in the room which

rendered his words inaudible.No sooner had we entered than there followed us Alcibiades the beautiful, as

you say, and I believe you; and also Critias the son of Callaeschrus.


On entering we stopped a little, in order to look about us, and then walked up

to Protagoras, and I said: Protagoras, my friend Hippocrates and I have come

to see you.


Do you wish, he said, to speak with me alone, or in the presence of the

company?


Whichever you please, I said; you shall determine when you have heard the

purpose of our visit.


And what is your purpose? he said.


I must explain, I said, that my friend Hippocrates is a native Athenian; he is

the  son  of  Apollodorus,  and  of  a  great  and  prosperous  house,  and  he  is

himself in natural ability quite a match for anybody of his own age. I believe

that he aspires to political eminence; and this he thinks that conversation with

you is most likely to procure for him. And now you can determine whether

you would wish to speak to him of your teaching alone or in the presence of

the company.


Thank you, Socrates, for your consideration of me. For certainly a stranger

finding his way into great cities, and persuading the flower of the youth in

them to leave company of their kinsmen or any other acquaintances, old or

young, and live with him, under the idea that they will be improved by his

conversation, ought to be very cautious; great jealousies are aroused by his

proceedings, and he is the subject of many enmities and conspiracies. Now

the art of the Sophist is, as I believe, of great antiquity; but in ancient times

those who practised it, fearing this odium, veiled and disguised themselves

under  various  names,  some  under  that  of  poets,  as  Homer,  Hesiod,  and

Simonides, some, of hierophants and prophets, as Orpheus and Musaeus, and

some, as I observe, even under the name of gymnastic-masters, like Iccus of

Tarentum, or the more recently celebrated Herodicus, now of Selymbria and

formerly  of  Megara,  who  is  a  first-rate  Sophist.  Your  own  Agathocles

pretended  to  be  a  musician,  but  was  really  an  eminent  Sophist;  alsoPythocleides the Cean; and there were many others; and all of them, as I was

saying, adopted these arts as veils or disguises because they were afraid of

the odium which they would incur. But that is not my way, for I do not

believe  that  they  effected  their  purpose,  which  was  to  deceive  the

government, who were not blinded by them; and as to the people, they have

no understanding, and only repeat what their rulers are pleased to tell them.

Now to run away, and to be caught in running away, is the very height of

folly, and also greatly increases the exasperation of mankind; for they regard

him who runs away as a rogue, in addition to any other objections which they

have  to  him;  and  therefore  I  take  an  entirely  opposite  course,  and

acknowledge myself to be a Sophist and instructor of mankind; such an open

acknowledgement  appears  to  me  to  be  a  better  sort  of  caution  than

concealment. Nor do I neglect other precautions, and therefore I hope, as I

may  say,  by  the  favour  of  heaven  that  no  harm  will  come  of  the

acknowledgment that I am a Sophist. And I have been now many years in the

profession--for all my years when added up are many: there is no one here

present of whom I might not be the father. Wherefore I should much prefer

conversing with you, if you want to speak with me, in the presence of the

company.


As I suspected that he would like to have a little display and glorification in

the presence of Prodicus and Hippias, and would gladly show us to them in

the light of his admirers, I said: But why should we not summon Prodicus and

Hippias and their friends to hear us?


Very good, he said.


Suppose,  said  Callias,  that  we  hold  a  council  in  which  you  may  sit  and

discuss.--This was agreed upon, and great delight was felt at the prospect of

hearing  wise  men  talk;  we  ourselves  took  the  chairs  and  benches,  and

arranged them by Hippias, where the other benches had been already placed.

Meanwhile Callias and Alcibiades got Prodicus out of bed and brought in

him and his companions.


When  we  were  all  seated,  Protagoras  said:  Now  that  the  company  are

assembled, Socrates, tell me about the young man of whom you were just

now speaking.I replied: I will begin again at the same point, Protagoras, and tell you once

more the purport of my visit: this is my friend Hippocrates, who is desirous

of making your acquaintance; he would like to know what will happen to him

if he associates with you. I have no more to say.


Protagoras answered: Young man, if you associate with me, on the very first

day you will return home a better man than you came, and better on the

second day than on the first, and better every day than you were on the day

before.


When I heard this, I said: Protagoras, I do not at all wonder at hearing you

say this; even at your age, and with all your wisdom, if any one were to teach

you what you did not know before, you would become better no doubt: but

please to answer in a different way--I will explain how by an example. Let

me suppose that Hippocrates, instead of desiring your acquaintance, wished

to become acquainted with the young man Zeuxippus of Heraclea, who has

lately been in Athens, and he had come to him as he has come to you, and

had heard him say, as he has heard you say, that every day he would grow

and become better if he associated with him: and then suppose that he were to

ask him, 'In what shall I become better, and in what shall I grow?'--Zeuxippus

would  answer,  'In  painting.'  And  suppose  that  he  went  to  Orthagoras  the

Theban, and heard him say the same thing, and asked him, 'In what shall I

become better day by day?' he would reply, 'In flute-playing.' Now I want

you to make the same sort of answer to this young man and to me, who am

asking questions on his account. When you say that on the first day on which

he associates with you he will return home a better man, and on every day

will grow in like manner,--in what, Protagoras, will he be better? and about

what?


When Protagoras heard me say this, he replied: You ask questions fairly, and

I like to answer a question which is fairly put. If Hippocrates comes to me he

will not experience the sort of drudgery with which other Sophists are in the

habit of insulting their pupils; who, when they have just escaped from the

arts, are taken and driven back into them by these teachers, and made to learn

calculation,  and  astronomy,  and  geometry,  and  music  (he  gave  a  look  at

Hippias as he said this); but if he comes to me, he will learn that which he

comes to learn. And this is prudence in affairs private as well as public; hewill learn to order his own house in the best manner, and he will be able to

speak and act for the best in the affairs of the state.


Do I understand you, I said; and is your meaning that you teach the art of

politics, and that you promise to make men good citizens?


That, Socrates, is exactly the profession which I make.


Then, I said, you do indeed possess a noble art, if there is no mistake about

this; for I will freely confess to you, Protagoras, that I have a doubt whether

this art is capable of being taught, and yet I know not how to disbelieve your

assertion. And I ought to tell you why I am of opinion that this art cannot be

taught  or  communicated  by  man  to  man.  I  say  that  the  Athenians  are  an

understanding people, and indeed they are esteemed to be such by the other

Hellenes. Now I observe that when we are met together in the assembly, and

the matter in hand relates to building, the builders are summoned as advisers;

when the question is one of ship-building, then the ship-wrights; and the like

of other arts which they think capable of being taught and learned. And if

some person offers to give them advice who is not supposed by them to have

any skill in the art, even though he be good-looking, and rich, and noble, they

will not listen to him, but laugh and hoot at him, until either he is clamoured

down and retires of himself; or if he persist, he is dragged away or put out by

the constables at the command of the prytanes. This is their way of behaving

about professors of the arts. But when the question is an affair of state, then

everybody is free to have a say--carpenter, tinker, cobbler, sailor, passenger;

rich  and  poor,  high  and  low--any  one  who  likes  gets  up,  and  no  one

reproaches him, as in the former case, with not having learned, and having no

teacher,  and  yet  giving  advice;  evidently  because  they  are  under  the

impression that this sort of knowledge cannot be taught. And not only is this

true of the state, but of individuals; the best and wisest of our citizens are

unable to impart their political wisdom to others: as for example, Pericles, the

father of these young men, who gave them excellent instruction in all that

could  be  learned  from  masters,  in  his  own  department  of  politics  neither

taught them, nor gave them teachers; but they were allowed to wander at their

own free will in a sort of hope that they would light upon virtue of their own

accord. Or take another example: there was Cleinias the younger brother of

our friend Alcibiades, of whom this very same Pericles was the guardian; andhe being in fact under the apprehension that Cleinias would be corrupted by

Alcibiades, took him away, and placed him in the house of Ariphron to be

educated; but before six months had elapsed, Ariphron sent him back, not

knowing  what  to  do  with  him.  And  I  could  mention  numberless  other

instances of persons who were good themselves, and never yet made any one

else  good,  whether  friend  or  stranger.  Now  I,  Protagoras,  having  these

examples before me, am inclined to think that virtue cannot be taught. But

then again, when I listen to your words, I waver; and am disposed to think

that there must be something in what you say, because I know that you have

great experience, and learning, and invention. And I wish that you would, if

possible, show me a little more clearly that virtue can be taught. Will you be

so good?


That I will, Socrates, and gladly. But what would you like? Shall I, as an

elder, speak to you as younger men in an apologue or myth, or shall I argue

out the question?


To this several of the company answered that he should choose for himself.


Well, then, he said, I think that the myth will be more interesting.


Once upon a time there were gods only, and no mortal creatures. But when

the time came that these also should be created, the gods fashioned them out

of earth and fire and various mixtures of both elements in the interior of the

earth; and when they were about to bring them into the light of day, they

ordered Prometheus and Epimetheus to equip them, and to distribute to them

severally  their  proper  qualities.  Epimetheus  said  to  Prometheus:  'Let  me

distribute, and do you inspect.' This was agreed, and Epimetheus made the

distribution. There were some to whom he gave strength without swiftness,

while he equipped the weaker with swiftness; some he armed, and others he

left unarmed; and devised for the latter some other means of preservation,

making some large, and having their size as a protection, and others small,

whose nature was to fly in the air or burrow in the ground; this was to be their

way of escape. Thus did he compensate them with the view of preventing any

race  from  becoming  extinct.  And  when  he  had  provided  against  their

destruction by one another, he contrived also a means of protecting them

against the seasons of heaven; clothing them with close hair and thick skinssufficient  to  defend  them  against  the  winter  cold  and  able  to  resist  the

summer heat, so that they might have a natural bed of their own when they

wanted to rest; also he furnished them with hoofs and hair and hard and

callous skins under their feet. Then he gave them varieties of food,--herb of

the soil to some, to others fruits of trees, and to others roots, and to some

again he gave other animals as food. And some he made to have few young

ones, while those who were their prey were very prolific; and in this manner

the  race  was  preserved.  Thus  did  Epimetheus,  who,  not  being  very  wise,

forgot that he had distributed among the brute animals all the qualities which

he had to give,--and when he came to man, who was still unprovided, he was

terribly perplexed. Now while he was in this perplexity, Prometheus came to

inspect the distribution, and he found that the other animals were suitably

furnished, but that man alone was naked and shoeless, and had neither bed

nor arms of defence. The appointed hour was approaching when man in his

turn was to go forth into the light of day; and Prometheus, not knowing how

he could devise his salvation, stole the mechanical arts of Hephaestus and

Athene, and fire with them (they could neither have been acquired nor used

without fire), and gave them to man. Thus man had the wisdom necessary to

the  support  of  life,  but  political  wisdom  he  had  not;  for  that  was  in  the

keeping of Zeus, and the power of Prometheus did not extend to entering into

the citadel of heaven, where Zeus dwelt, who moreover had terrible sentinels;

but  he  did  enter  by  stealth  into  the  common  workshop  of  Athene  and

Hephaestus, in which they used to practise their favourite arts, and carried off

Hephaestus' art of working by fire, and also the art of Athene, and gave them

to  man.  And  in  this  way  man  was  supplied  with  the  means  of  life.  But

Prometheus is said to have been afterwards prosecuted for theft, owing to the

blunder of Epimetheus.


Now man, having a share of the divine attributes, was at first the only one of

the animals who had any gods, because he alone was of their kindred; and he

would  raise  altars  and  images  of  them.  He  was  not  long  in  inventing

articulate speech and names; and he also constructed houses and clothes and

shoes and beds, and drew sustenance from the earth. Thus provided, mankind

at first lived dispersed, and there were no cities. But the consequence was that

they  were  destroyed  by  the  wild  beasts,  for  they  were  utterly  weak  in

comparison of them, and their art was only sufficient to provide them with

the  means  of  life,  and  did  not  enable  them  to  carry  on  war  against  theanimals: food they had, but not as yet the art of government, of which the art

of war is a part. After a while the desire of self-preservation gathered them

into  cities;  but  when  they  were  gathered  together,  having  no  art  of

government, they evil intreated one another, and were again in process of

dispersion  and  destruction.  Zeus  feared  that  the  entire  race  would  be

exterminated, and so he sent Hermes to them, bearing reverence and justice to

be  the  ordering  principles  of  cities  and  the  bonds  of  friendship  and

conciliation. Hermes asked Zeus how he should impart justice and reverence

among men:--Should he distribute them as the arts are distributed; that is to

say,  to  a  favoured  few  only,  one  skilled  individual  having  enough  of

medicine  or  of  any  other  art  for  many  unskilled  ones?  'Shall  this  be  the

manner in which I am to distribute justice and reverence among men, or shall

I give them to all?' 'To all,' said Zeus; 'I should like them all to have a share;

for cities cannot exist, if a few only share in the virtues, as in the arts. And

further, make a law by my order, that he who has no part in reverence and

justice shall be put to death, for he is a plague of the state.'


And this is the reason, Socrates, why the Athenians and mankind in general,

when the question relates to carpentering or any other mechanical art, allow

but a few to share in their deliberations; and when any one else interferes,

then, as you say, they object, if he be not of the favoured few; which, as I

reply, is very natural. But when they meet to deliberate about political virtue,

which proceeds only by way of justice and wisdom, they are patient enough

of any man who speaks of them, as is also natural, because they think that

every man ought to share in this sort of virtue, and that states could not exist

if this were otherwise. I have explained to you, Socrates, the reason of this

phenomenon.


And that you may not suppose yourself to be deceived in thinking that all

men regard every man as having a share of justice or honesty and of every

other political virtue, let me give you a further proof, which is this. In other

cases, as you are aware, if a man says that he is a good flute- player, or skilful

in any other art in which he has no skill, people either laugh at him or are

angry with him, and his relations think that he is mad and go and admonish

him; but when honesty is in question, or some other political virtue, even if

they know that he is dishonest, yet, if the man comes publicly forward and

tells the truth about his dishonesty, then, what in the other case was held bythem to be good sense, they now deem to be madness. They say that all men

ought to profess honesty whether they are honest or not, and that a man is out

of his mind who says anything else. Their notion is, that a man must have

some degree of honesty; and that if he has none at all he ought not to be in

the world.


I  have  been  showing  that  they  are  right  in  admitting  every  man  as  a

counsellor about this sort of virtue, as they are of opinion that every man is a

partaker of it. And I will now endeavour to show further that they do not

conceive this virtue to be given by nature, or to grow spontaneously, but to be

a thing which may be taught; and which comes to a man by taking pains. No

one  would  instruct,  no  one  would  rebuke,  or  be  angry  with  those  whose

calamities they suppose to be due to nature or chance; they do not try to

punish or to prevent them from being what they are; they do but pity them.

Who is so foolish as to chastise or instruct the ugly, or the diminutive, or the

feeble? And for this reason. Because he knows that good and evil of this kind

is the work of nature and of chance; whereas if a man is wanting in those

good qualities which are attained by study and exercise and teaching, and has

only the contrary evil qualities, other men are angry with him, and punish and

reprove him--of these evil qualities one is impiety, another injustice, and they

may be described generally as the very opposite of political virtue. In such

cases  any  man  will  be  angry  with  another,  and  reprimand  him,--clearly

because he thinks that by study and learning, the virtue in which the other is

deficient  may  be  acquired.  If  you  will  think,  Socrates,  of  the  nature  of

punishment, you will see at once that in the opinion of mankind virtue may

be acquired; no one punishes the evil-doer under the notion, or for the reason,

that he has done wrong, --only the unreasonable fury of a beast acts in that

manner. But he who desires to inflict rational punishment does not retaliate

for a past wrong which cannot be undone; he has regard to the future, and is

desirous that the man who is punished, and he who sees him punished, may

be deterred from doing wrong again. He punishes for the sake of prevention,

thereby clearly implying that virtue is capable of being taught. This is the

notion of all who retaliate upon others either privately or publicly. And the

Athenians, too, your own citizens, like other men, punish and take vengeance

on all whom they regard as evil doers; and hence, we may infer them to be of

the number of those who think that virtue may be acquired and taught. Thus

far, Socrates, I have shown you clearly enough, if I am not mistaken, thatyour countrymen are right in admitting the tinker and the cobbler to advise

about politics, and also that they deem virtue to be capable of being taught

and acquired.


There yet remains one difficulty which has been raised by you about the sons

of  good  men.  What  is  the  reason  why  good  men  teach  their  sons  the

knowledge which is gained from teachers, and make them wise in that, but do

nothing towards improving them in the virtues which distinguish themselves?

And  here,  Socrates,  I  will  leave  the  apologue  and  resume  the  argument.

Please to consider: Is there or is there not some one quality of which all the

citizens must be partakers, if there is to be a city at all? In the answer to this

question is contained the only solution of your difficulty; there is no other.

For if there be any such quality, and this quality or unity is not the art of the

carpenter, or the smith, or the potter, but justice and temperance and holiness

and, in a word, manly virtue--if this is the quality of which all men must be

partakers, and which is the very condition of their learning or doing anything

else, and if he who is wanting in this, whether he be a child only or a grown-

up man or woman, must be taught and punished, until by punishment he

becomes  better,  and  he  who  rebels  against  instruction  and  punishment  is

either exiled or condemned to death under the idea that he is incurable--if

what I am saying be true, good men have their sons taught other things and

not this, do consider how extraordinary their conduct would appear to be. For

we have shown that they think virtue capable of being taught and cultivated

both in private and public; and, notwithstanding, they have their sons taught

lesser matters, ignorance of which does not involve the punishment of death:

but greater things, of which the ignorance may cause death and exile to those

who have no training or knowledge of them--aye, and confiscation as well as

death, and, in a word, may be the ruin of families--those things, I say, they

are supposed not to teach them,--not to take the utmost care that they should

learn. How improbable is this, Socrates!


Education and admonition commence in the first years of childhood, and last

to the very end of life. Mother and nurse and father and tutor are vying with

one another about the improvement of the child as soon as ever he is able to

understand what is being said to him: he cannot say or do anything without

their setting forth to him that this is just and that is unjust; this is honourable,

that is dishonourable; this is holy, that is unholy; do this and abstain fromthat. And if he obeys, well and good; if not, he is straightened by threats and

blows, like a piece of bent or warped wood. At a later stage they send him to

teachers, and enjoin them to see to his manners even more than to his reading

and music; and the teachers do as they are desired. And when the boy has

learned his letters and is beginning to understand what is written, as before he

understood only what was spoken, they put into his hands the works of great

poets, which he reads sitting on a bench at school; in these are contained

many  admonitions,  and  many  tales,  and  praises,  and  encomia  of  ancient

famous men, which he is required to learn by heart, in order that he may

imitate or emulate them and desire to become like them. Then, again, the

teachers of the lyre take similar care that their young disciple is temperate

and gets into no mischief; and when they have taught him the use of the lyre,

they introduce him to the poems of other excellent poets, who are the lyric

poets; and these they set to music, and make their harmonies and rhythms

quite familiar to the children's souls, in order that they may learn to be more

gentle, and harmonious, and rhythmical, and so more fitted for speech and

action; for the life of man in every part has need of harmony and rhythm.

Then they send them to the master of gymnastic, in order that their bodies

may better minister to the virtuous mind, and that they may not be compelled

through bodily weakness to play the coward in war or on any other occasion.

This is what is done by those who have the means, and those who have the

means are the rich; their children begin to go to school soonest and leave off

latest. When they have done with masters, the state again compels them to

learn the laws, and live after the pattern which they furnish, and not after their

own fancies; and just as in learning to write, the writing-master first draws

lines with a style for the use of the young beginner, and gives him the tablet

and makes him follow the lines, so the city draws the laws, which were the

invention of good lawgivers living in the olden time; these are given to the

young man, in order to guide him in his conduct whether he is commanding

or obeying; and he who transgresses them is to be corrected, or, in other

words, called to account, which is a term used not only in your country, but

also in many others, seeing that justice calls men to account. Now when there

is all this care about virtue private and public, why, Socrates, do you still

wonder and doubt whether virtue can be taught? Cease to wonder, for the

opposite would be far more surprising.


But why then do the sons of good fathers often turn out ill? There is nothingvery wonderful in this; for, as I have been saying, the existence of a state

implies that virtue is not any man's private possession. If so --and nothing can

be truer--then I will further ask you to imagine, as an illustration, some other

pursuit or branch of knowledge which may be assumed equally to be the

condition of the existence of a state. Suppose that there could be no state

unless  we  were  all  flute-players,  as  far  as  each  had  the  capacity,  and

everybody was freely teaching everybody the art, both in private and public,

and reproving the bad player as freely and openly as every man now teaches

justice and the laws, not concealing them as he would conceal the other arts,

but imparting them--for all of us have a mutual interest in the justice and

virtue of one another, and this is the reason why every one is so ready to

teach justice and the laws;--suppose, I say, that there were the same readiness

and  liberality  among  us  in  teaching  one  another  flute-playing,  do  you

imagine, Socrates, that the sons of good flute-players would be more likely to

be good than the sons of bad ones? I think not. Would not their sons grow up

to  be  distinguished  or  undistinguished  according  to  their  own  natural

capacities as flute-players, and the son of a good player would often turn out

to be a bad one, and the son of a bad player to be a good one, all flute-players

would  be  good  enough  in  comparison  of  those  who  were  ignorant  and

unacquainted with the art of flute-playing? In like manner I would have you

consider that he who appears to you to be the worst of those who have been

brought up in laws and humanities, would appear to be a just man and a

master of justice if he were to be compared with men who had no education,

or courts of justice, or laws, or any restraints upon them which compelled

them  to  practise  virtue--  with  the  savages,  for  example,  whom  the  poet

Pherecrates exhibited on the stage at the last year's Lenaean festival. If you

were living among men such as the man-haters in his Chorus, you would be

only  too  glad  to  meet  with  Eurybates  and  Phrynondas,  and  you  would

sorrowfully  long  to  revisit  the  rascality  of  this  part  of  the  world.  You,

Socrates, are discontented, and why? Because all men are teachers of virtue,

each one according to his ability; and you say Where are the teachers? You

might as well ask, Who teaches Greek? For of that too there will not be any

teachers found. Or you might ask, Who is to teach the sons of our artisans

this same art which they have learned of their fathers? He and his fellow-

workmen have taught them to the best of their ability,--but who will carry

them  further  in  their  arts?  And  you  would  certainly  have  a  difficulty,

Socrates, in finding a teacher of them; but there would be no difficulty infinding a teacher of those who are wholly ignorant. And this is true of virtue

or of anything else; if a man is better able than we are to promote virtue ever

so little, we must be content with the result. A teacher of this sort I believe

myself to be, and above all other men to have the knowledge which makes a

man noble and good; and I give my pupils their money's-worth, and even

more,  as  they  themselves  confess.  And  therefore  I  have  introduced  the

following mode of payment:--When a man has been my pupil, if he likes he

pays my price, but there is no compulsion; and if he does not like, he has only

to go into a temple and take an oath of the value of the instructions, and he

pays no more than he declares to be their value.


Such  is  my  Apologue,  Socrates,  and  such  is  the  argument  by  which  I

endeavour to show that virtue may be taught, and that this is the opinion of

the Athenians. And I have also attempted to show that you are not to wonder

at good fathers having bad sons, or at good sons having bad fathers, of which

the sons of Polycleitus afford an example, who are the companions of our

friends here, Paralus and Xanthippus, but are nothing in comparison with

their father; and this is true of the sons of many other artists. As yet I ought

not to say the same of Paralus and Xanthippus themselves, for they are young

and there is still hope of them.


Protagoras ended, and in my ear


'So charming left his voice, that I the while Thought him still speaking; still

stood fixed to hear (Borrowed by Milton, "Paradise Lost".).'


At length, when the truth dawned upon me, that he had really finished, not

without difficulty I began to collect myself, and looking at Hippocrates, I said

to him: O son of Apollodorus, how deeply grateful I am to you for having

brought me hither; I would not have missed the speech of Protagoras for a

great deal. For I used to imagine that no human care could make men good;

but I know better now. Yet I have still one very small difficulty which I am

sure that Protagoras will easily explain, as he has already explained so much.

If a man were to go and consult Pericles or any of our great speakers about

these matters, he might perhaps hear as fine a discourse; but then when one

has a question to ask of any of them, like books, they can neither answer nor

ask; and if any one challenges the least particular of their speech, they goringing on in a long harangue, like brazen pots, which when they are struck

continue to sound unless some one puts his hand upon them; whereas our

friend Protagoras can not only make a good speech, as he has already shown,

but when he is asked a question he can answer briefly; and when he asks he

will wait and hear the answer; and this is a very rare gift. Now I, Protagoras,

want to ask of you a little question, which if you will only answer, I shall be

quite satisfied. You were saying that virtue can be taught;--that I will take

upon your authority, and there is no one to whom I am more ready to trust.

But I marvel at one thing about which I should like to have my mind set at

rest. You were speaking of Zeus sending justice and reverence to men; and

several times while you were speaking, justice, and temperance, and holiness,

and all these qualities, were described by you as if together they made up

virtue. Now I want you to tell me truly whether virtue is one whole, of which

justice and temperance and holiness are parts; or whether all these are only

the names of one and the same thing: that is the doubt which still lingers in

my mind.


There is no difficulty, Socrates, in answering that the qualities of which you

are speaking are the parts of virtue which is one.


And are they parts, I said, in the same sense in which mouth, nose, and eyes,

and ears, are the parts of a face; or are they like the parts of gold, which differ

from the whole and from one another only in being larger or smaller?


I should say that they differed, Socrates, in the first way; they are related to

one another as the parts of a face are related to the whole face.


And do men have some one part and some another part of virtue? Or if a man

has one part, must he also have all the others?


By no means, he said; for many a man is brave and not just, or just and not

wise.


You would not deny, then, that courage and wisdom are also parts of virtue?


Most undoubtedly they are, he answered; and wisdom is the noblest of the

parts.And they are all different from one another? I said.


Yes.


And has each of them a distinct function like the parts of the face;--the eye,

for example, is not like the ear, and has not the same functions; and the other

parts are none of them like one another, either in their functions, or in any

other way? I want to know whether the comparison holds concerning the

parts of virtue. Do they also differ from one another in themselves and in

their functions? For that is clearly what the simile would imply.


Yes, Socrates, you are right in supposing that they differ.


Then, I said, no other part of virtue is like knowledge, or like justice, or like

courage, or like temperance, or like holiness?


No, he answered.


Well then, I said, suppose that you and I enquire into their natures. And first,

you would agree with me that justice is of the nature of a thing, would you

not? That is my opinion: would it not be yours also?


Mine also, he said.


And suppose that some one were to ask us, saying, 'O Protagoras, and you,

Socrates, what about this thing which you were calling justice, is it just or

unjust?'--and I were to answer, just: would you vote with me or against me?


With you, he said.


Thereupon I should answer to him who asked me, that justice is of the nature

of the just: would not you?


Yes, he said.


And suppose that he went on to say: 'Well now, is there also such a thing as

holiness?'--we should answer, 'Yes,' if I am not mistaken?Yes, he said.


Which you would also acknowledge to be a thing--should we not say so?


He assented.


'And is this a sort of thing which is of the nature of the holy, or of the nature

of the unholy?' I should be angry at his putting such a question, and should

say, 'Peace, man; nothing can be holy if holiness is not holy.' What would

you say? Would you not answer in the same way?


Certainly, he said.


And  then  after  this  suppose  that  he  came  and  asked  us,  'What  were  you

saying just now? Perhaps I may not have heard you rightly, but you seemed

to me to be saying that the parts of virtue were not the same as one another.' I

should reply, 'You certainly heard that said, but not, as you imagine, by me;

for I only asked the question; Protagoras gave the answer.' And suppose that

he turned to you and said, 'Is this true, Protagoras? and do you maintain that

one part of virtue is unlike another, and is this your position?'--how would

you answer him?


I could not help acknowledging the truth of what he said, Socrates.


Well  then,  Protagoras,  we  will  assume  this;  and  now  supposing  that  he

proceeded to say further, 'Then holiness is not of the nature of justice, nor

justice of the nature of holiness, but of the nature of unholiness; and holiness

is of the nature of the not just, and therefore of the unjust, and the unjust is

the unholy': how shall we answer him? I should certainly answer him on my

own behalf that justice is holy, and that holiness is just; and I would say in

like manner on your behalf also, if you would allow me, that justice is either

the same with holiness, or very nearly the same; and above all I would assert

that justice is like holiness and holiness is like justice; and I wish that you

would tell me whether I may be permitted to give this answer on your behalf,

and whether you would agree with me.


He replied, I cannot simply agree, Socrates, to the proposition that justice isholy  and  that  holiness  is  just,  for  there  appears  to  me  to  be  a  difference

between them. But what matter? if you please I please; and let us assume, if

you will I, that justice is holy, and that holiness is just.


Pardon me, I replied; I do not want this 'if you wish' or 'if you will' sort of

conclusion to be proven, but I want you and me to be proven: I mean to say

that the conclusion will be best proven if there be no 'if.'


Well, he said, I admit that justice bears a resemblance to holiness, for there is

always some point of view in which everything is like every other thing;

white  is  in  a  certain  way  like  black,  and  hard  is  like  soft,  and  the  most

extreme opposites have some qualities in common; even the parts of the face

which, as we were saying before, are distinct and have different functions, are

still in a certain point of view similar, and one of them is like another of

them. And you may prove that they are like one another on the same principle

that all things are like one another; and yet things which are like in some

particular ought not to be called alike, nor things which are unlike in some

particular, however slight, unlike.


And do you think, I said in a tone of surprise, that justice and holiness have

but a small degree of likeness?


Certainly not; any more than I agree with what I understand to be your view.


Well, I said, as you appear to have a difficulty about this, let us take another

of the examples which you mentioned instead. Do you admit the existence of

folly?


I do.


And is not wisdom the very opposite of folly?


That is true, he said.


And  when  men  act  rightly  and  advantageously  they  seem  to  you  to  be

temperate?


Yes, he said.And temperance makes them temperate?


Certainly.


And they who do not act rightly act foolishly, and in acting thus are not

temperate?


I agree, he said.


Then to act foolishly is the opposite of acting temperately?


He assented.


And foolish actions are done by folly, and temperate actions by temperance?


He agreed.


And that is done strongly which is done by strength, and that which is weakly

done, by weakness?


He assented.


And that which is done with swiftness is done swiftly, and that which is done

with slowness, slowly?


He assented again.


And that which is done in the same manner, is done by the same; and that

which is done in an opposite manner by the opposite?


He agreed.


Once more, I said, is there anything beautiful?


Yes.


To which the only opposite is the ugly?There is no other.


And is there anything good?


There is.


To which the only opposite is the evil?


There is no other.


And there is the acute in sound?


True.


To which the only opposite is the grave?


There is no other, he said, but that.


Then every opposite has one opposite only and no more?


He assented.


Then now, I said, let us recapitulate our admissions. First of all we admitted

that everything has one opposite and not more than one?


We did so.


And we admitted also that what was done in opposite ways was done by

opposites?


Yes.


And that which was done foolishly, as we further admitted, was done in the

opposite way to that which was done temperately?


Yes.


And  that  which  was  done  temperately  was  done  by  temperance,  and  thatwhich was done foolishly by folly?


He agreed.


And that which is done in opposite ways is done by opposites?


Yes.


And one thing is done by temperance, and quite another thing by folly?


Yes.


And in opposite ways?


Certainly.


And therefore by opposites:--then folly is the opposite of temperance?


Clearly.


And do you remember that folly has already been acknowledged by us to be

the opposite of wisdom?


He assented.


And we said that everything has only one opposite?


Yes.


Then, Protagoras, which of the two assertions shall we renounce? One says

that everything has but one opposite; the other that wisdom is distinct from

temperance, and that both of them are parts of virtue; and that they are not

only distinct, but dissimilar, both in themselves and in their functions, like the

parts of a face. Which of these two assertions shall we renounce? For both of

them together are certainly not in harmony; they do not accord or agree: for

how can they be said to agree if everything is assumed to have only one

opposite and not more than one, and yet folly, which is one, has clearly the

two opposites--wisdom and temperance? Is not that true, Protagoras? Whatelse would you say?


He assented, but with great reluctance.


Then temperance and wisdom are the same, as before justice and holiness

appeared to us to be nearly the same. And now, Protagoras, I said, we must

finish the enquiry, and not faint. Do you think that an unjust man can be

temperate in his injustice?


I  should  be  ashamed,  Socrates,  he  said,  to  acknowledge  this,  which

nevertheless many may be found to assert.


And shall I argue with them or with you? I replied.


I would rather, he said, that you should argue with the many first, if you will.


Whichever you please, if you will only answer me and say whether you are of

their opinion or not. My object is to test the validity of the argument; and yet

the result may be that I who ask and you who answer may both be put on our

trial.


Protagoras at first made a show of refusing, as he said that the argument was

not encouraging; at length, he consented to answer.


Now then, I said, begin at the beginning and answer me. You think that some

men are temperate, and yet unjust?


Yes, he said; let that be admitted.


And temperance is good sense?


Yes.


And good sense is good counsel in doing injustice?


Granted.


If they succeed, I said, or if they do not succeed?If they succeed.


And you would admit the existence of goods?


Yes.


And is the good that which is expedient for man?


Yes, indeed, he said: and there are some things which may be inexpedient,

and yet I call them good.


I thought that Protagoras was getting ruffled and excited; he seemed to be

setting himself in an attitude of war. Seeing this, I minded my business, and

gently said:--


When you say, Protagoras, that things inexpedient are good, do you mean

inexpedient for man only, or inexpedient altogether? and do you call the latter

good?


Certainly not the last, he replied; for I know of many things--meats, drinks,

medicines, and ten thousand other things, which are inexpedient for man, and

some  which  are  expedient;  and  some  which  are  neither  expedient  nor

inexpedient for man, but only for horses; and some for oxen only, and some

for dogs; and some for no animals, but only for trees; and some for the roots

of trees and not for their branches, as for example, manure, which is a good

thing when laid about the roots of a tree, but utterly destructive if thrown

upon the shoots and young branches; or I may instance olive oil, which is

mischievous to all plants, and generally most injurious to the hair of every

animal with the exception of man, but beneficial to human hair and to the

human  body  generally;  and  even  in  this  application  (so  various  and

changeable is the nature of the benefit), that which is the greatest good to the

outward parts of a man, is a very great evil to his inward parts: and for this

reason physicians always forbid their patients the use of oil in their food,

except in very small quantities, just enough to extinguish the disagreeable

sensation of smell in meats and sauces.


When  he  had  given  this  answer,  the  company  cheered  him.  And  I  said:Protagoras,  I  have  a  wretched  memory,  and  when  any  one  makes  a  long

speech to me I never remember what he is talking about. As then, if I had

been deaf, and you were going to converse with me, you would have had to

raise your voice; so now, having such a bad memory, I will ask you to cut

your answers shorter, if you would take me with you.


What do you mean? he said: how am I to shorten my answers? shall I make

them too short?


Certainly not, I said.


But short enough?


Yes, I said.


Shall I answer what appears to me to be short enough, or what appears to you

to be short enough?


I have heard, I said, that you can speak and teach others to speak about the

same things at such length that words never seemed to fail, or with such

brevity that no one could use fewer of them. Please therefore, if you talk with

me, to adopt the latter or more compendious method.


Socrates,  he  replied,  many  a  battle  of  words  have  I  fought,  and  if  I  had

followed the method of disputation which my adversaries desired, as you

want me to do, I should have been no better than another, and the name of

Protagoras would have been nowhere.


I saw that he was not satisfied with his previous answers, and that he would

not play the part of answerer any more if he could help; and I considered that

there was no call upon me to continue the conversation; so I said: Protagoras,

I do not wish to force the conversation upon you if you had rather not, but

when you are willing to argue with me in such a way that I can follow you,

then I will argue with you. Now you, as is said of you by others and as you

say of yourself, are able to have discussions in shorter forms of speech as

well as in longer, for you are a master of wisdom; but I cannot manage these

long speeches: I only wish that I could. You, on the other hand, who arecapable of either, ought to speak shorter as I beg you, and then we might

converse. But I see that you are disinclined, and as I have an engagement

which will prevent my staying to hear you at greater length (for I have to be

in another place), I will depart; although I should have liked to have heard

you.


Thus I spoke, and was rising from my seat, when Callias seized me by the

right hand, and in his left hand caught hold of this old cloak of mine. He said:

We cannot let you go, Socrates, for if you leave us there will be an end of our

discussions: I must therefore beg you to remain, as there is nothing in the

world that I should like better than to hear you and Protagoras discourse. Do

not deny the company this pleasure.


Now I had got up, and was in the act of departure. Son of Hipponicus, I

replied, I have always admired, and do now heartily applaud and love your

philosophical spirit, and I would gladly comply with your request, if I could.

But the truth is that I cannot. And what you ask is as great an impossibility to

me, as if you bade me run a race with Crison of Himera, when in his prime,

or with some one of the long or day course runners. To such a request I

should reply that I would fain ask the same of my own legs; but they refuse to

comply. And therefore if you want to see Crison and me in the same stadium,

you must bid him slacken his speed to mine, for I cannot run quickly, and he

can run slowly. And in like manner if you want to hear me and Protagoras

discoursing, you must ask him to shorten his answers, and keep to the point,

as he did at first; if not, how can there be any discussion? For discussion is

one thing, and making an oration is quite another, in my humble opinion.


But you see, Socrates, said Callias, that Protagoras may fairly claim to speak

in his own way, just as you claim to speak in yours.


Here Alcibiades interposed, and said: That, Callias, is not a true statement of

the case. For our friend Socrates admits that he cannot make a speech--in this

he  yields  the  palm  to  Protagoras:  but  I  should  be  greatly  surprised  if  he

yielded  to  any  living  man  in  the  power  of  holding  and  apprehending  an

argument. Now if Protagoras will make a similar admission, and confess that

he is inferior to Socrates in argumentative skill, that is enough for Socrates;

but if he claims a superiority in argument as well, let him ask and answer--not, when a question is asked, slipping away from the point, and instead of

answering, making a speech at such length that most of his hearers forget the

question at issue (not that Socrates is likely to forget--I will be bound for that,

although he may pretend in fun that he has a bad memory). And Socrates

appears to me to be more in the right than Protagoras; that is my view, and

every man ought to say what he thinks.


When Alcibiades had done speaking, some one--Critias, I believe--went on to

say:  O  Prodicus  and  Hippias,  Callias  appears  to  me  to  be  a  partisan  of

Protagoras: and this led Alcibiades, who loves opposition, to take the other

side. But we should not be partisans either of Socrates or of Protagoras; let us

rather unite in entreating both of them not to break up the discussion.


Prodicus added: That, Critias, seems to me to be well said, for those who are

present at such discussions ought to be impartial hearers of both the speakers;

remembering, however, that impartiality is not the same as equality, for both

sides  should  be  impartially  heard,  and  yet  an  equal  meed  should  not  be

assigned to both of them; but to the wiser a higher meed should be given, and

a lower to the less wise. And I as well as Critias would beg you, Protagoras

and Socrates, to grant our request, which is, that you will argue with one

another and not wrangle; for friends argue with friends out of good-will, but

only  adversaries  and  enemies  wrangle.  And  then  our  meeting  will  be

delightful; for in this way you, who are the speakers, will be most likely to

win esteem, and not praise only, among us who are your audience; for esteem

is a sincere conviction of the hearers' souls, but praise is often an insincere

expression of men uttering falsehoods contrary to their conviction. And thus

we who are the hearers will be gratified and not pleased; for gratification is of

the mind when receiving wisdom and knowledge, but pleasure is of the body

when eating or experiencing some other bodily delight. Thus spoke Prodicus,

and many of the company applauded his words.


Hippias the sage spoke next. He said: All of you who are here present I

reckon to be kinsmen and friends and fellow-citizens, by nature and not by

law; for by nature like is akin to like, whereas law is the tyrant of mankind,

and often compels us to do many things which are against nature. How great

would be the disgrace then, if we, who know the nature of things, and are the

wisest of the Hellenes, and as such are met together in this city, which is themetropolis of wisdom, and in the greatest and most glorious house of this

city, should have nothing to show worthy of this height of dignity, but should

only quarrel with one another like the meanest of mankind! I do pray and

advise you, Protagoras, and you, Socrates, to agree upon a compromise. Let

us be your peacemakers. And do not you, Socrates, aim at this precise and

extreme brevity in discourse, if Protagoras objects, but loosen and let go the

reins of speech, that your words may be grander and more becoming to you.

Neither do you, Protagoras, go forth on the gale with every sail set out of

sight of land into an ocean of words, but let there be a mean observed by both

of you. Do as I say. And let me also persuade you to choose an arbiter or

overseer or president; he will keep watch over your words and will prescribe

their proper length.


This proposal was received by the company with universal approval; Callias

said that he would not let me off, and they begged me to choose an arbiter.

But I said that to choose an umpire of discourse would be unseemly; for if the

person chosen was inferior, then the inferior or worse ought not to preside

over the better; or if he was equal, neither would that be well; for he who is

our equal will do as we do, and what will be the use of choosing him? And if

you say, 'Let us have a better then,'--to that I answer that you cannot have any

one who is wiser than Protagoras. And if you choose another who is not

really better, and whom you only say is better, to put another over him as

though he were an inferior person would be an unworthy reflection on him;

not that, as far as I am concerned, any reflection is of much consequence to

me. Let me tell you then what I will do in order that the conversation and

discussion may go on as you desire. If Protagoras is not disposed to answer,

let him ask and I will answer; and I will endeavour to show at the same time

how, as I maintain, he ought to answer: and when I have answered as many

questions as he likes to ask, let him in like manner answer me; and if he

seems to be not very ready at answering the precise question asked of him,

you and I will unite in entreating him, as you entreated me, not to spoil the

discussion.  And  this  will  require  no  special  arbiter--all  of  you  shall  be

arbiters.


This was generally approved, and Protagoras, though very much against his

will, was obliged to agree that he would ask questions; and when he had put a

sufficient number of them, that he would answer in his turn those which hewas asked in short replies. He began to put his questions as follows:--


I am of opinion, Socrates, he said, that skill in poetry is the principal part of

education; and this I conceive to be the power of knowing what compositions

of  the  poets  are  correct,  and  what  are  not,  and  how  they  are  to  be

distinguished, and of explaining when asked the reason of the difference. And

I propose to transfer the question which you and I have been discussing to the

domain of poetry; we will speak as before of virtue, but in reference to a

passage  of  a  poet.  Now  Simonides  says  to  Scopas  the  son  of  Creon  the

Thessalian:


'Hardly on the one hand can a man become truly good, built four-square in

hands and feet and mind, a work without a flaw.'


Do you know the poem? or shall I repeat the whole?


There is no need, I said; for I am perfectly well acquainted with the ode, --I

have made a careful study of it.


Very well, he said. And do you think that the ode is a good composition, and

true?


Yes, I said, both good and true.


But if there is a contradiction, can the composition be good or true?


No, not in that case, I replied.


And is there not a contradiction? he asked. Reflect.


Well, my friend, I have reflected.


And  does  not  the  poet  proceed  to  say,  'I  do  not  agree  with  the  word  of

Pittacus, albeit the utterance of a wise man: Hardly can a man be good'? Now

you will observe that this is said by the same poet.


I know it.And do you think, he said, that the two sayings are consistent?


Yes, I said, I think so (at the same time I could not help fearing that there

might be something in what he said). And you think otherwise?


Why, he said, how can he be consistent in both? First of all, premising as his

own thought, 'Hardly can a man become truly good'; and then a little further

on in the poem, forgetting, and blaming Pittacus and refusing to agree with

him, when he says, 'Hardly can a man be good,' which is the very same thing.

And yet when he blames him who says the same with himself, he blames

himself; so that he must be wrong either in his first or his second assertion.


Many of the audience cheered and applauded this. And I felt at first giddy

and faint, as if I had received a blow from the hand of an expert boxer, when

I heard his words and the sound of the cheering; and to confess the truth, I

wanted to get time to think what the meaning of the poet really was. So I

turned  to  Prodicus  and  called  him.  Prodicus,  I  said,  Simonides  is  a

countryman of yours, and you ought to come to his aid. I must appeal to you,

like  the  river  Scamander  in  Homer,  who,  when  beleaguered  by  Achilles,

summons the Simois to aid him, saying:


'Brother dear, let us both together stay the force of the hero (Il.).'


And I summon you, for I am afraid that Protagoras will make an end of

Simonides. Now is the time to rehabilitate Simonides, by the application of

your philosophy of synonyms, which enables you to distinguish 'will' and

'wish,' and make other charming distinctions like those which you drew just

now. And I should like to know whether you would agree with me; for I am

of opinion that there is no contradiction in the words of Simonides. And first

of all I wish that you would say whether, in your opinion, Prodicus, 'being' is

the same as 'becoming.'


Not the same, certainly, replied Prodicus.


Did not Simonides first set forth, as his own view, that 'Hardly can a man

become truly good'?Quite right, said Prodicus.


And then he blames Pittacus, not, as Protagoras imagines, for repeating that

which  he  says  himself,  but  for  saying  something  different  from  himself.

Pittacus does not say as Simonides says, that hardly can a man become good,

but hardly can a man be good: and our friend Prodicus would maintain that

being, Protagoras, is not the same as becoming; and if they are not the same,

then Simonides is not inconsistent with himself. I dare say that Prodicus and

many others would say, as Hesiod says,


'On the one hand, hardly can a man become good, For the gods have made

virtue the reward of toil, But on the other hand, when you have climbed the

height,  Then,  to  retain  virtue,  however  difficult  the  acquisition,  is  easy

(Works and Days).'


Prodicus heard and approved; but Protagoras said: Your correction, Socrates,

involves  a  greater  error  than  is  contained  in  the  sentence  which  you  are

correcting.


Alas! I said, Protagoras; then I am a sorry physician, and do but aggravate a

disorder which I am seeking to cure.


Such is the fact, he said.


How so? I asked.


The poet, he replied, could never have made such a mistake as to say that

virtue, which in the opinion of all men is the hardest of all things, can be

easily retained.


Well, I said, and how fortunate are we in having Prodicus among us, at the

right moment; for he has a wisdom, Protagoras, which, as I imagine, is more

than human and of very ancient date, and may be as old as Simonides or even

older. Learned as you are in many things, you appear to know nothing of this;

but I know, for I am a disciple of his. And now, if I am not mistaken, you do

not  understand  the  word  'hard'  (chalepon)  in  the  sense  which  Simonides

intended; and I must correct you, as Prodicus corrects me when I use theword 'awful' (deinon) as a term of praise. If I say that Protagoras or any one

else is an 'awfully' wise man, he asks me if I am not ashamed of calling that

which is good 'awful'; and then he explains to me that the term 'awful' is

always taken in a bad sense, and that no one speaks of being 'awfully' healthy

or wealthy, or of 'awful' peace, but of 'awful' disease, 'awful' war, 'awful'

poverty, meaning by the term 'awful,' evil. And I think that Simonides and his

countrymen the Ceans, when they spoke of 'hard' meant 'evil,' or something

which you do not understand. Let us ask Prodicus, for he ought to be able to

answer  questions  about  the  dialect  of  Simonides.  What  did  he  mean,

Prodicus, by the term 'hard'?


Evil, said Prodicus.


And therefore, I said, Prodicus, he blames Pittacus for saying, 'Hard is the

good,' just as if that were equivalent to saying, Evil is the good.


Yes, he said, that was certainly his meaning; and he is twitting Pittacus with

ignorance of the use of terms, which in a Lesbian, who has been accustomed

to speak a barbarous language, is natural.


Do you hear, Protagoras, I asked, what our friend Prodicus is saying? And

have you an answer for him?


You are entirely mistaken, Prodicus, said Protagoras; and I know very well

that Simonides in using the word 'hard' meant what all of us mean, not evil,

but that which is not easy--that which takes a great deal of trouble: of this I

am positive.


I said: I also incline to believe, Protagoras, that this was the meaning of

Simonides, of which our friend Prodicus was very well aware, but he thought

that he would make fun, and try if you could maintain your thesis; for that

Simonides could never have meant the other is clearly proved by the context,

in which he says that God only has this gift. Now he cannot surely mean to

say that to be good is evil, when he afterwards proceeds to say that God only

has this gift, and that this is the attribute of him and of no other. For if this be

his meaning, Prodicus would impute to Simonides a character of recklessness

which is very unlike his countrymen. And I should like to tell you, I said,what I imagine to be the real meaning of Simonides in this poem, if you will

test what, in your way of speaking, would be called my skill in poetry; or if

you would rather, I will be the listener.


To this proposal Protagoras replied: As you please;--and Hippias, Prodicus,

and the others told me by all means to do as I proposed.


Then now, I said, I will endeavour to explain to you my opinion about this

poem  of  Simonides.  There  is  a  very  ancient  philosophy  which  is  more

cultivated in Crete and Lacedaemon than in any other part of Hellas, and

there  are  more  philosophers  in  those  countries  than  anywhere  else  in  the

world. This, however, is a secret which the Lacedaemonians deny; and they

pretend to be ignorant, just because they do not wish to have it thought that

they rule the world by wisdom, like the Sophists of whom Protagoras was

speaking, and not by valour of arms; considering that if the reason of their

superiority were disclosed, all men would be practising their wisdom. And

this  secret  of  theirs  has  never  been  discovered  by  the  imitators  of

Lacedaemonian fashions in other cities, who go about with their ears bruised

in  imitation  of  them,  and  have  the  caestus  bound  on  their  arms,  and  are

always in training, and wear short cloaks; for they imagine that these are the

practices  which  have  enabled  the  Lacedaemonians  to  conquer  the  other

Hellenes.  Now  when  the  Lacedaemonians  want  to  unbend  and  hold  free

conversation with their wise men, and are no longer satisfied with mere secret

intercourse, they drive out all these laconizers, and any other foreigners who

may  happen  to  be  in  their  country,  and  they  hold  a  philosophical  seance

unknown to strangers; and they themselves forbid their young men to go out

into other cities--in this they are like the Cretans-- in order that they may not

unlearn the lessons which they have taught them. And in Lacedaemon and

Crete not only men but also women have a pride in their high cultivation.

And  hereby  you  may  know  that  I  am  right  in  attributing  to  the

Lacedaemonians  this  excellence  in  philosophy  and  speculation:  If  a  man

converses with the most ordinary Lacedaemonian, he will find him seldom

good for much in general conversation, but at any point in the discourse he

will  be  darting  out  some  notable  saying,  terse  and  full  of  meaning,  with

unerring aim; and the person with whom he is talking seems to be like a child

in his hands. And many of our own age and of former ages have noted that

the true Lacedaemonian type of character has the love of philosophy evenstronger than the love of gymnastics; they are conscious that only a perfectly

educated man is capable of uttering such expressions. Such were Thales of

Miletus, and Pittacus of Mitylene, and Bias of Priene, and our own Solon,

and  Cleobulus  the  Lindian,  and  Myson  the  Chenian;  and  seventh  in  the

catalogue of wise men was the Lacedaemonian Chilo. All these were lovers

and emulators and disciples of the culture of the Lacedaemonians, and any

one may perceive that their wisdom was of this character; consisting of short

memorable sentences, which they severally uttered. And they met together

and dedicated in the temple of Apollo at Delphi, as the first-fruits of their

wisdom, the far-famed inscriptions, which are in all men's mouths--'Know

thyself,' and 'Nothing too much.'


Why do I say all this? I am explaining that this Lacedaemonian brevity was

the style of primitive philosophy. Now there was a saying of Pittacus which

was privately circulated and received the approbation of the wise, 'Hard is it

to be good.' And Simonides, who was ambitious of the fame of wisdom, was

aware that if he could overthrow this saying, then, as if he had won a victory

over  some  famous  athlete,  he  would  carry  off  the  palm  among  his

contemporaries. And if I am not mistaken, he composed the entire poem with

the secret intention of damaging Pittacus and his saying.


Let us all unite in examining his words, and see whether I am speaking the

truth. Simonides must have been a lunatic, if, in the very first words of the

poem, wanting to say only that to become good is hard, he inserted (Greek)

'on the one hand' ('on the one hand to become good is hard'); there would be

no reason for the introduction of (Greek), unless you suppose him to speak

with a hostile reference to the words of Pittacus. Pittacus is saying 'Hard is it

to be good,' and he, in refutation of this thesis, rejoins that the truly hard

thing, Pittacus, is to become good, not joining 'truly' with 'good,' but with

'hard.' Not, that the hard thing is to be truly good, as though there were some

truly good men, and there were others who were good but not truly good (this

would be a very simple observation, and quite unworthy of Simonides); but

you  must  suppose  him  to  make  a  trajection  of  the  word  'truly'  (Greek),

construing  the  saying  of  Pittacus  thus  (and  let  us  imagine  Pittacus  to  be

speaking and Simonides answering him): 'O my friends,' says Pittacus, 'hard

is it to be good,' and Simonides answers, 'In that, Pittacus, you are mistaken;

the difficulty is not to be good, but on the one hand, to become good, four-square in hands and feet and mind, without a flaw--that is hard truly.' This

way of reading the passage accounts for the insertion of (Greek) 'on the one

hand,' and for the position at the end of the clause of the word 'truly,' and all

that follows shows this to be the meaning. A great deal might be said in

praise of the details of the poem, which is a charming piece of workmanship,

and  very  finished,  but  such  minutiae  would  be  tedious.  I  should  like,

however, to point out the general intention of the poem, which is certainly

designed in every part to be a refutation of the saying of Pittacus. For he

speaks in what follows a little further on as if he meant to argue that although

there is a difficulty in becoming good, yet this is possible for a time, and only

for a time. But having become good, to remain in a good state and be good,

as you, Pittacus, affirm, is not possible, and is not granted to man; God only

has  this  blessing;  'but  man  cannot  help  being  bad  when  the  force  of

circumstances overpowers him.' Now whom does the force of circumstance

overpower in the command of a vessel?-- not the private individual, for he is

always  overpowered;  and  as  one  who  is  already  prostrate  cannot  be

overthrown, and only he who is standing upright but not he who is prostrate

can be laid prostrate, so the force of circumstances can only overpower him

who, at some time or other, has resources, and not him who is at all times

helpless. The descent of a great storm may make the pilot helpless, or the

severity of the season the husbandman or the physician; for the good may

become bad, as another poet witnesses:--


'The good are sometimes good and sometimes bad.'


But the bad does not become bad; he is always bad. So that when the force of

circumstances overpowers the man of resources and skill and virtue, then he

cannot help being bad. And you, Pittacus, are saying, 'Hard is it to be good.'

Now there is a difficulty in becoming good; and yet this is possible: but to be

good is an impossibility--


'For he who does well is the good man, and he who does ill is the bad.'


But what sort of doing is good in letters? and what sort of doing makes a man

good in letters? Clearly the knowing of them. And what sort of well- doing

makes a man a good physician? Clearly the knowledge of the art of healing

the sick. 'But he who does ill is the bad.' Now who becomes a bad physician?Clearly he who is in the first place a physician, and in the second place a

good physician; for he may become a bad one also: but none of us unskilled

individuals can by any amount of doing ill become physicians, any more than

we can become carpenters or anything of that sort; and he who by doing ill

cannot become a physician at all, clearly cannot become a bad physician. In

like manner the good may become deteriorated by time, or toil, or disease, or

other accident (the only real doing ill is to be deprived of knowledge), but the

bad man will never become bad, for he is always bad; and if he were to

become bad, he must previously have been good. Thus the words of the poem

tend to show that on the one hand a man cannot be continuously good, but

that he may become good and may also become bad; and again that


'They are the best for the longest time whom the gods love.'


All this relates to Pittacus, as is further proved by the sequel. For he adds:--


'Therefore I will not throw away my span of life to no purpose in searching

after the impossible, hoping in vain to find a perfectly faultless man among

those who partake of the fruit of the broad-bosomed earth: if I find him, I will

send you word.'


(this  is  the  vehement  way  in  which  he  pursues  his  attack  upon  Pittacus

throughout the whole poem):


'But him who does no evil, voluntarily I praise and love;--not even the gods

war against necessity.'


All this has a similar drift, for Simonides was not so ignorant as to say that he

praised those who did no evil voluntarily, as though there were some who did

evil voluntarily. For no wise man, as I believe, will allow that any human

being errs voluntarily, or voluntarily does evil and dishonourable actions; but

they are very well aware that all who do evil and dishonourable things do

them against their will. And Simonides never says that he praises him who

does no evil voluntarily; the word 'voluntarily' applies to himself. For he was

under the impression that a good man might often compel himself to love and

praise another, and to be the friend and approver of another; and that there

might be an involuntary love, such as a man might feel to an unnatural fatheror  mother,  or  country,  or  the  like.  Now  bad  men,  when  their  parents  or

country have any defects, look on them with malignant joy, and find fault

with them and expose and denounce them to others, under the idea that the

rest of mankind will be less likely to take themselves to task and accuse them

of neglect; and they blame their defects far more than they deserve, in order

that the odium which is necessarily incurred by them may be increased: but

the good man dissembles his feelings, and constrains himself to praise them;

and if they have wronged him and he is angry, he pacifies his anger and is

reconciled, and compels himself to love and praise his own flesh and blood.

And Simonides, as is probable, considered that he himself had often had to

praise and magnify a tyrant or the like, much against his will, and he also

wishes  to  imply  to  Pittacus  that  he  does  not  censure  him  because  he  is

censorious.


'For I am satisfied' he says, 'when a man is neither bad nor very stupid; and

when he knows justice (which is the health of states), and is of sound mind, I

will find no fault with him, for I am not given to finding fault, and there are

innumerable fools'


(implying that if he delighted in censure he might have abundant opportunity

of finding fault).


'All things are good with which evil is unmingled.'


In these latter words he does not mean to say that all things are good which

have no evil in them, as you might say 'All things are white which have no

black in them,' for that would be ridiculous; but he means to say that he

accepts and finds no fault with the moderate or intermediate state.


('I do not hope' he says, 'to find a perfectly blameless man among those who

partake of the fruits of the broad-bosomed earth (if I find him, I will send you

word); in this sense I praise no man. But he who is moderately good, and

does no evil, is good enough for me, who love and approve every one')


(and here observe that he uses a Lesbian word, epainemi (approve), because

he is addressing Pittacus,'Who love and APPROVE every one VOLUNTARILY, who does no evil:'


and that the stop should be put after 'voluntarily'); 'but there are some whom I

involuntarily praise and love. And you, Pittacus, I would never have blamed,

if you had spoken what was moderately good and true; but I do blame you

because, putting on the appearance of truth, you are speaking falsely about

the highest matters.'--And this, I said, Prodicus and Protagoras, I take to be

the meaning of Simonides in this poem.


Hippias said: I think, Socrates, that you have given a very good explanation

of the poem; but I have also an excellent interpretation of my own which I

will propound to you, if you will allow me.


Nay, Hippias, said Alcibiades; not now, but at some other time. At present we

must  abide  by  the  compact  which  was  made  between  Socrates  and

Protagoras, to the effect that as long as Protagoras is willing to ask, Socrates

should answer; or that if he would rather answer, then that Socrates should

ask.


I said: I wish Protagoras either to ask or answer as he is inclined; but I would

rather have done with poems and odes, if he does not object, and come back

to the question about which I was asking you at first, Protagoras, and by your

help  make  an  end  of  that.  The  talk  about  the  poets  seems  to  me  like  a

commonplace entertainment to which a vulgar company have recourse; who,

because they are not able to converse or amuse one another, while they are

drinking, with the sound of their own voices and conversation, by reason of

their stupidity, raise the price of flute-girls in the market, hiring for a great

sum the voice of a flute instead of their own breath, to be the medium of

intercourse among them: but where the company are real gentlemen and men

of education, you will see no flute-girls, nor dancing- girls, nor harp-girls;

and they have no nonsense or games, but are contented with one another's

conversation, of which their own voices are the medium, and which they

carry on by turns and in an orderly manner, even though they are very liberal

in their potations. And a company like this of ours, and men such as we

profess to be, do not require the help of another's voice, or of the poets whom

you cannot interrogate about the meaning of what they are saying; people

who cite them declaring, some that the poet has one meaning, and others thathe has another, and the point which is in dispute can never be decided. This

sort of entertainment they decline, and prefer to talk with one another, and

put one another to the proof in conversation. And these are the models which

I desire that you and I should imitate. Leaving the poets, and keeping to

ourselves, let us try the mettle of one another and make proof of the truth in

conversation. If you have a mind to ask, I am ready to answer; or if you

would rather, do you answer, and give me the opportunity of resuming and

completing our unfinished argument.


I  made  these  and  some  similar  observations;  but  Protagoras  would  not

distinctly say which he would do. Thereupon Alcibiades turned to Callias,

and said:--Do you think, Callias, that Protagoras is fair in refusing to say

whether he will or will not answer? for I certainly think that he is unfair; he

ought either to proceed with the argument, or distinctly refuse to proceed,

that we may know his intention; and then Socrates will be able to discourse

with some one else, and the rest of the company will be free to talk with one

another.


I  think  that  Protagoras  was  really  made  ashamed  by  these  words  of

Alcibiades,  and  when  the  prayers  of  Callias  and  the  company  were

superadded, he was at last induced to argue, and said that I might ask and he

would answer.


So I said: Do not imagine, Protagoras, that I have any other interest in asking

questions of you but that of clearing up my own difficulties. For I think that

Homer was very right in saying that


'When two go together, one sees before the other (Il.),'


for all men who have a companion are readier in deed, word, or thought; but

if a man


'Sees a thing when he is alone,'


he goes about straightway seeking until he finds some one to whom he may

show his discoveries, and who may confirm him in them. And I would rather

hold discourse with you than with any one, because I think that no man has abetter understanding of most things which a good man may be expected to

understand, and in particular of virtue. For who is there, but you?--who not

only claim to be a good man and a gentleman, for many are this, and yet have

not  the  power  of  making  others  good--whereas  you  are  not  only  good

yourself, but also the cause of goodness in others. Moreover such confidence

have you in yourself, that although other Sophists conceal their profession,

you proclaim in the face of Hellas that you are a Sophist or teacher of virtue

and education, and are the first who demanded pay in return. How then can I

do otherwise than invite you to the examination of these subjects, and ask

questions and consult with you? I must, indeed. And I should like once more

to have my memory refreshed by you about the questions which I was asking

you at first, and also to have your help in considering them. If I am not

mistaken the question was this: Are wisdom and temperance and courage and

justice and holiness five names of the same thing? or has each of the names a

separate  underlying  essence  and  corresponding  thing  having  a  peculiar

function, no one of them being like any other of them? And you replied that

the five names were not the names of the same thing, but that each of them

had a separate object, and that all these objects were parts of virtue, not in the

same way that the parts of gold are like each other and the whole of which

they are parts, but as the parts of the face are unlike the whole of which they

are parts and one another, and have each of them a distinct function. I should

like to know whether this is still your opinion; or if not, I will ask you to

define your meaning, and I shall not take you to task if you now make a

different statement. For I dare say that you may have said what you did only

in order to make trial of me.


I answer, Socrates, he said, that all these qualities are parts of virtue, and that

four out of the five are to some extent similar, and that the fifth of them,

which is courage, is very different from the other four, as I prove in this way:

You  may  observe  that  many  men  are  utterly  unrighteous,  unholy,

intemperate, ignorant, who are nevertheless remarkable for their courage.


Stop, I said; I should like to think about that. When you speak of brave men,

do you mean the confident, or another sort of nature?


Yes, he said; I mean the impetuous, ready to go at that which others are afraid

to approach.In the next place, you would affirm virtue to be a good thing, of which good

thing you assert yourself to be a teacher.


Yes, he said; I should say the best of all things, if I am in my right mind.


And is it partly good and partly bad, I said, or wholly good?


Wholly good, and in the highest degree.


Tell me then; who are they who have confidence when diving into a well?


I should say, the divers.


And the reason of this is that they have knowledge?


Yes, that is the reason.


And who have confidence when fighting on horseback--the skilled horseman

or the unskilled?


The skilled.


And who when fighting with light shields--the peltasts or the nonpeltasts?


The peltasts. And that is true of all other things, he said, if that is your point:

those  who  have  knowledge  are  more  confident  than  those  who  have  no

knowledge, and they are more confident after they have learned than before.


And have you not seen persons utterly ignorant, I said, of these things, and

yet confident about them?


Yes, he said, I have seen such persons far too confident.


And are not these confident persons also courageous?


In that case, he replied, courage would be a base thing, for the men of whom

we are speaking are surely madmen.Then who are the courageous? Are they not the confident?


Yes, he said; to that statement I adhere.


And those, I said, who are thus confident without knowledge are really not

courageous, but mad; and in that case the wisest are also the most confident,

and being the most confident are also the bravest, and upon that view again

wisdom will be courage.


Nay, Socrates, he replied, you are mistaken in your remembrance of what

was said by me. When you asked me, I certainly did say that the courageous

are  the  confident;  but  I  was  never  asked  whether  the  confident  are  the

courageous; if you had asked me, I should have answered 'Not all of them':

and  what  I  did  answer  you  have  not  proved  to  be  false,  although  you

proceeded to show that those who have knowledge are more courageous than

they were before they had knowledge, and more courageous than others who

have no knowledge, and were then led on to think that courage is the same as

wisdom. But in this way of arguing you might come to imagine that strength

is wisdom. You might begin by asking whether the strong are able, and I

should say 'Yes'; and then whether those who know how to wrestle are not

more able to wrestle than those who do not know how to wrestle, and more

able after than before they had learned, and I should assent. And when I had

admitted this, you might use my admissions in such a way as to prove that

upon my view wisdom is strength; whereas in that case I should not have

admitted, any more than in the other, that the able are strong, although I have

admitted that the strong are able. For there is a difference between ability and

strength; the former is given by knowledge as well as by madness or rage, but

strength  comes  from  nature  and  a  healthy  state  of  the  body.  And  in  like

manner I say of confidence and courage, that they are not the same; and I

argue that the courageous are confident, but not all the confident courageous.

For confidence may be given to men by art, and also, like ability, by madness

and rage; but courage comes to them from nature and the healthy state of the

soul.


I said: You would admit, Protagoras, that some men live well and others ill?


He assented.And do you think that a man lives well who lives in pain and grief?


He does not.


But if he lives pleasantly to the end of his life, will he not in that case have

lived well?


He will.


Then to live pleasantly is a good, and to live unpleasantly an evil?


Yes, he said, if the pleasure be good and honourable.


And do you, Protagoras, like the rest of the world, call some pleasant things

evil  and  some  painful  things  good?--for  I  am  rather  disposed  to  say  that

things are good in as far as they are pleasant, if they have no consequences of

another sort, and in as far as they are painful they are bad.


I  do  not  know,  Socrates,  he  said,  whether  I  can  venture  to  assert  in  that

unqualified manner that the pleasant is the good and the painful the evil.

Having regard not only to my present answer, but also to the whole of my

life, I shall be safer, if I am not mistaken, in saying that there are some

pleasant things which are not good, and that there are some painful things

which are good, and some which are not good, and that there are some which

are neither good nor evil.


And you would call pleasant, I said, the things which participate in pleasure

or create pleasure?


Certainly, he said.


Then my meaning is, that in as far as they are pleasant they are good; and my

question would imply that pleasure is a good in itself.


According to your favourite mode of speech, Socrates, 'Let us reflect about

this,' he said; and if the reflection is to the point, and the result proves that

pleasure and good are really the same, then we will agree; but if not, then we

will argue.And would you wish to begin the enquiry? I said; or shall I begin?


You ought to take the lead, he said; for you are the author of the discussion.


May I employ an illustration? I said. Suppose some one who is enquiring into

the health or some other bodily quality of another:--he looks at his face and at

the tips of his fingers, and then he says, Uncover your chest and back to me

that I may have a better view:--that is the sort of thing which I desire in this

speculation. Having seen what your opinion is about good and pleasure, I am

minded to say to you: Uncover your mind to me, Protagoras, and reveal your

opinion about knowledge, that I may know whether you agree with the rest of

the world. Now the rest of the world are of opinion that knowledge is a

principle not of strength, or of rule, or of command: their notion is that a man

may have knowledge, and yet that the knowledge which is in him may be

overmastered by anger, or pleasure, or pain, or love, or perhaps by fear,--just

as if knowledge were a slave, and might be dragged about anyhow. Now is

that your view? or do you think that knowledge is a noble and commanding

thing, which cannot be overcome, and will not allow a man, if he only knows

the  difference  of  good  and  evil,  to  do  anything  which  is  contrary  to

knowledge, but that wisdom will have strength to help him?


I agree with you, Socrates, said Protagoras; and not only so, but I, above all

other men, am bound to say that wisdom and knowledge are the highest of

human things.


Good, I said, and true. But are you aware that the majority of the world are of

another  mind;  and  that  men  are  commonly  supposed  to  know  the  things

which are best, and not to do them when they might? And most persons

whom I have asked the reason of this have said that when men act contrary to

knowledge  they  are  overcome  by  pain,  or  pleasure,  or  some  of  those

affections which I was just now mentioning.


Yes, Socrates, he replied; and that is not the only point about which mankind

are in error.


Suppose, then, that you and I endeavour to instruct and inform them what is

the nature of this affection which they call 'being overcome by pleasure,' andwhich they affirm to be the reason why they do not always do what is best.

When we say to them: Friends, you are mistaken, and are saying what is not

true, they would probably reply: Socrates and Protagoras, if this affection of

the soul is not to be called 'being overcome by pleasure,' pray, what is it, and

by what name would you describe it?


But  why,  Socrates,  should  we  trouble  ourselves  about  the  opinion  of  the

many, who just say anything that happens to occur to them?


I  believe,  I  said,  that  they  may  be  of  use  in  helping  us  to  discover  how

courage is related to the other parts of virtue. If you are disposed to abide by

our agreement, that I should show the way in which, as I think, our recent

difficulty is most likely to be cleared up, do you follow; but if not, never

mind.


You are quite right, he said; and I would have you proceed as you have

begun.


Well  then,  I  said,  let  me  suppose  that  they  repeat  their  question,  What

account do you give of that which, in our way of speaking, is termed being

overcome by pleasure? I should answer thus: Listen, and Protagoras and I

will endeavour to show you. When men are overcome by eating and drinking

and other sensual desires which are pleasant, and they, knowing them to be

evil,  nevertheless  indulge  in  them,  would  you  not  say  that  they  were

overcome by pleasure? They will not deny this. And suppose that you and I

were to go on and ask them again: 'In what way do you say that they are evil,-

-in that they are pleasant and give pleasure at the moment, or because they

cause disease and poverty and other like evils in the future? Would they still

be evil, if they had no attendant evil consequences, simply because they give

the consciousness of pleasure of whatever nature?'--Would they not answer

that they are not evil on account of the pleasure which is immediately given

by them, but on account of the after consequences--diseases and the like?


I believe, said Protagoras, that the world in general would answer as you do.


And in causing diseases do they not cause pain? and in causing poverty do

they not cause pain;--they would agree to that also, if I am not mistaken?Protagoras assented.


Then I should say to them, in my name and yours: Do you think them evil for

any  other  reason,  except  because  they  end  in  pain  and  rob  us  of  other

pleasures:--there again they would agree?


We both of us thought that they would.


And then I should take the question from the opposite point of view, and say:

'Friends, when you speak of goods being painful, do you not mean remedial

goods, such as gymnastic exercises, and military service, and the physician's

use of burning, cutting, drugging, and starving? Are these the things which

are good but painful?'--they would assent to me?


He agreed.


'And do you call them good because they occasion the greatest immediate

suffering  and  pain;  or  because,  afterwards,  they  bring  health  and

improvement of the bodily condition and the salvation of states and power

over others and wealth?'--they would agree to the latter alternative, if I am

not mistaken?


He assented.


'Are these things good for any other reason except that they end in pleasure,

and get rid of and avert pain? Are you looking to any other standard but

pleasure and pain when you call them good?'--they would acknowledge that

they were not?


I think so, said Protagoras.


'And do you not pursue after pleasure as a good, and avoid pain as an evil?'


He assented.


'Then you think that pain is an evil and pleasure is a good: and even pleasure

you deem an evil, when it robs you of greater pleasures than it gives, or

causes pains greater than the pleasure. If, however, you call pleasure an evilin relation to some other end or standard, you will be able to show us that

standard. But you have none to show.'


I do not think that they have, said Protagoras.


'And have you not a similar way of speaking about pain? You call pain a

good  when  it  takes  away  greater  pains  than  those  which  it  has,  or  gives

pleasures greater than the pains: then if you have some standard other than

pleasure and pain to which you refer when you call actual pain a good, you

can show what that is. But you cannot.'


True, said Protagoras.


Suppose again, I said, that the world says to me: 'Why do you spend many

words and speak in many ways on this subject?' Excuse me, friends, I should

reply; but in the first place there is a difficulty in explaining the meaning of

the expression 'overcome by pleasure'; and the whole argument turns upon

this.  And  even  now,  if  you  see  any  possible  way  in  which  evil  can  be

explained as other than pain, or good as other than pleasure, you may still

retract. Are you satisfied, then, at having a life of pleasure which is without

pain? If you are, and if you are unable to show any good or evil which does

not end in pleasure and pain, hear the consequences:--If what you say is true,

then  the  argument  is  absurd  which  affirms  that  a  man  often  does  evil

knowingly, when he might abstain, because he is seduced and overpowered

by pleasure; or again, when you say that a man knowingly refuses to do what

is good because he is overcome at the moment by pleasure. And that this is

ridiculous will be evident if only we give up the use of various names, such

as pleasant and painful, and good and evil. As there are two things, let us call

them  by  two  names--  first,  good  and  evil,  and  then  pleasant  and  painful.

Assuming this, let us go on to say that a man does evil knowing that he does

evil.  But  some  one  will  ask,  Why?  Because  he  is  overcome,  is  the  first

answer. And by what is he overcome? the enquirer will proceed to ask. And

we shall not be able to reply 'By pleasure,' for the name of pleasure has been

exchanged for that of good. In our answer, then, we shall only say that he is

overcome. 'By what?' he will reiterate. By the good, we shall have to reply;

indeed we shall. Nay, but our questioner will rejoin with a laugh, if he be one

of the swaggering sort, 'That is too ridiculous, that a man should do what heknows to be evil when he ought not, because he is overcome by good. Is that,

he will ask, because the good was worthy or not worthy of conquering the

evil'? And in answer to that we shall clearly reply, Because it was not worthy;

for if it had been worthy, then he who, as we say, was overcome by pleasure,

would  not  have  been  wrong.  'But  how,'  he  will  reply,  'can  the  good  be

unworthy of the evil, or the evil of the good'? Is not the real explanation that

they are out of proportion to one another, either as greater and smaller, or

more  and  fewer?  This  we  cannot  deny.  And  when  you  speak  of  being

overcome--'what do you mean,' he will say, 'but that you choose the greater

evil  in  exchange  for  the  lesser  good?'  Admitted.  And  now  substitute  the

names of pleasure and pain for good and evil, and say, not as before, that a

man does what is evil knowingly, but that he does what is painful knowingly,

and because he is overcome by pleasure, which is unworthy to overcome.

What measure is there of the relations of pleasure to pain other than excess

and defect, which means that they become greater and smaller, and more and

fewer,  and  differ  in  degree?  For  if  any  one  says:  'Yes,  Socrates,  but

immediate pleasure differs widely from future pleasure and pain'--To that I

should reply: And do they differ in anything but in pleasure and pain? There

can be no other measure of them. And do you, like a skilful weigher, put into

the balance the pleasures and the pains, and their nearness and distance, and

weigh them, and then say which outweighs the other. If you weigh pleasures

against pleasures, you of course take the more and greater; or if you weigh

pains against pains, you take the fewer and the less; or if pleasures against

pains, then you choose that course of action in which the painful is exceeded

by the pleasant, whether the distant by the near or the near by the distant; and

you avoid that course of action in which the pleasant is exceeded by the

painful. Would you not admit, my friends, that this is true? I am confident

that they cannot deny this.


He agreed with me.


Well then, I shall say, if you agree so far, be so good as to answer me a

question: Do not the same magnitudes appear larger to your sight when near,

and smaller when at a distance? They will acknowledge that. And the same

holds of thickness and number; also sounds, which are in themselves equal,

are greater when near, and lesser when at a distance. They will grant that

also. Now suppose happiness to consist in doing or choosing the greater, andin not doing or in avoiding the less, what would be the saving principle of

human life? Would not the art of measuring be the saving principle; or would

the power of appearance? Is not the latter that deceiving art which makes us

wander up and down and take the things at one time of which we repent at

another, both in our actions and in our choice of things great and small? But

the art of measurement would do away with the effect of appearances, and,

showing the truth, would fain teach the soul at last to find rest in the truth,

and would thus save our life. Would not mankind generally acknowledge that

the art which accomplishes this result is the art of measurement?


Yes, he said, the art of measurement.


Suppose, again, the salvation of human life to depend on the choice of odd

and even, and on the knowledge of when a man ought to choose the greater

or less, either in reference to themselves or to each other, and whether near or

at a distance; what would be the saving principle of our lives? Would not

knowledge?--a knowledge of measuring, when the question is one of excess

and defect, and a knowledge of number, when the question is of odd and

even? The world will assent, will they not?


Protagoras himself thought that they would.


Well then, my friends, I say to them; seeing that the salvation of human life

has been found to consist in the right choice of pleasures and pains, --in the

choice of the more and the fewer, and the greater and the less, and the nearer

and remoter, must not this measuring be a consideration of their excess and

defect and equality in relation to each other?


This is undeniably true.


And this, as possessing measure, must undeniably also be an art and science?


They will agree, he said.


The nature of that art or science will be a matter of future consideration; but

the  existence  of  such  a  science  furnishes  a  demonstrative  answer  to  the

question which you asked of me and Protagoras. At the time when you askedthe  question,  if  you  remember,  both  of  us  were  agreeing  that  there  was

nothing mightier than knowledge, and that knowledge, in whatever existing,

must have the advantage over pleasure and all other things; and then you said

that pleasure often got the advantage even over a man who has knowledge;

and we refused to allow this, and you rejoined: O Protagoras and Socrates,

what is the meaning of being overcome by pleasure if not this?--tell us what

you  call  such  a  state:--if  we  had  immediately  and  at  the  time  answered

'Ignorance,' you would have laughed at us. But now, in laughing at us, you

will be laughing at yourselves: for you also admitted that men err in their

choice of pleasures and pains; that is, in their choice of good and evil, from

defect of knowledge; and you admitted further, that they err, not only from

defect of knowledge in general, but of that particular knowledge which is

called measuring. And you are also aware that the erring act which is done

without knowledge is done in ignorance. This, therefore, is the meaning of

being  overcome  by  pleasure;  --ignorance,  and  that  the  greatest.  And  our

friends  Protagoras  and  Prodicus  and  Hippias  declare  that  they  are  the

physicians of ignorance; but you, who are under the mistaken impression that

ignorance is not the cause, and that the art of which I am speaking cannot be

taught, neither go yourselves, nor send your children, to the Sophists, who are

the teachers of these things--you take care of your money and give them

none; and the result is, that you are the worse off both in public and private

life:--Let us suppose this to be our answer to the world in general: And now I

should like to ask you, Hippias, and you, Prodicus, as well as Protagoras (for

the argument is to be yours as well as ours), whether you think that I am

speaking the truth or not?


They all thought that what I said was entirely true.


Then you agree, I said, that the pleasant is the good, and the painful evil. And

here  I  would  beg  my  friend  Prodicus  not  to  introduce  his  distinction  of

names,  whether  he  is  disposed  to  say  pleasurable,  delightful,  joyful.

However, by whatever name he prefers to call them, I will ask you, most

excellent Prodicus, to answer in my sense of the words.


Prodicus laughed and assented, as did the others.


Then, my friends, what do you say to this? Are not all actions honourable anduseful,  of  which  the  tendency  is  to  make  life  painless  and  pleasant?  The

honourable work is also useful and good?


This was admitted.


Then, I said, if the pleasant is the good, nobody does anything under the idea

or conviction that some other thing would be better and is also attainable,

when  he  might  do  the  better.  And  this  inferiority  of  a  man  to  himself  is

merely ignorance, as the superiority of a man to himself is wisdom.


They all assented.


And is not ignorance the having a false opinion and being deceived about

important matters?


To this also they unanimously assented.


Then, I said, no man voluntarily pursues evil, or that which he thinks to be

evil.  To  prefer  evil  to  good  is  not  in  human  nature;  and  when  a  man  is

compelled to choose one of two evils, no one will choose the greater when he

may have the less.


All of us agreed to every word of this.


Well, I said, there is a certain thing called fear or terror; and here, Prodicus, I

should  particularly  like  to  know  whether  you  would  agree  with  me  in

defining this fear or terror as expectation of evil.


Protagoras and Hippias agreed, but Prodicus said that this was fear and not

terror.


Never mind, Prodicus, I said; but let me ask whether, if our former assertions

are true, a man will pursue that which he fears when he is not compelled?

Would  not  this  be  in  flat  contradiction  to  the  admission  which  has  been

already made, that he thinks the things which he fears to be evil; and no one

will pursue or voluntarily accept that which he thinks to be evil?


That also was universally admitted.Then, I said, these, Hippias and Prodicus, are our premisses; and I would beg

Protagoras to explain to us how he can be right in what he said at first. I do

not mean in what he said quite at first, for his first statement, as you may

remember, was that whereas there were five parts of virtue none of them was

like  any  other  of  them;  each  of  them  had  a  separate  function.  To  this,

however, I am not referring, but to the assertion which he afterwards made

that of the five virtues four were nearly akin to each other, but that the fifth,

which was courage, differed greatly from the others. And of this he gave me

the following proof. He said: You will find, Socrates, that some of the most

impious, and unrighteous, and intemperate, and ignorant of men are among

the most courageous; which proves that courage is very different from the

other parts of virtue. I was surprised at his saying this at the time, and I am

still more surprised now that I have discussed the matter with you. So I asked

him whether by the brave he meant the confident. Yes, he replied, and the

impetuous  or  goers.  (You  may  remember,  Protagoras,  that  this  was  your

answer.)


He assented.


Well then, I said, tell us against what are the courageous ready to go-- against

the same dangers as the cowards?


No, he answered.


Then against something different?


Yes, he said.


Then do cowards go where there is safety, and the courageous where there is

danger?


Yes, Socrates, so men say.


Very  true,  I  said.  But  I  want  to  know  against  what  do  you  say  that  the

courageous are ready to go--against dangers, believing them to be dangers, or

not against dangers?No, said he; the former case has been proved by you in the previous argument

to be impossible.


That, again, I replied, is quite true. And if this has been rightly proven, then

no one goes to meet what he thinks to be dangers, since the want of self-

control, which makes men rush into dangers, has been shown to be ignorance.


He assented.


And yet the courageous man and the coward alike go to meet that about

which they are confident; so that, in this point of view, the cowardly and the

courageous go to meet the same things.


And  yet,  Socrates,  said  Protagoras,  that  to  which  the  coward  goes  is  the

opposite of that to which the courageous goes; the one, for example, is ready

to go to battle, and the other is not ready.


And is going to battle honourable or disgraceful? I said.


Honourable, he replied.


And if honourable, then already admitted by us to be good; for all honourable

actions we have admitted to be good.


That is true; and to that opinion I shall always adhere.


True, I said. But which of the two are they who, as you say, are unwilling to

go to war, which is a good and honourable thing?


The cowards, he replied.


And what is good and honourable, I said, is also pleasant?


It has certainly been acknowledged to be so, he replied.


And do the cowards knowingly refuse to go to the nobler, and pleasanter, and

better?The admission of that, he replied, would belie our former admissions.


But does not the courageous man also go to meet the better, and pleasanter,

and nobler?


That must be admitted.


And the courageous man has no base fear or base confidence?


True, he replied.


And if not base, then honourable?


He admitted this.


And if honourable, then good?


Yes.


But the fear and confidence of the coward or foolhardy or madman, on the

contrary, are base?


He assented.


And  these  base  fears  and  confidences  originate  in  ignorance  and

uninstructedness?


True, he said.


Then as to the motive from which the cowards act, do you call it cowardice

or courage?


I should say cowardice, he replied.


And have they not been shown to be cowards through their ignorance of

dangers?


Assuredly, he said.And because of that ignorance they are cowards?


He assented.


And the reason why they are cowards is admitted by you to be cowardice?


He again assented.


Then the ignorance of what is and is not dangerous is cowardice?


He nodded assent.


But surely courage, I said, is opposed to cowardice?


Yes.


Then the wisdom which knows what are and are not dangers is opposed to

the ignorance of them?


To that again he nodded assent.


And the ignorance of them is cowardice?


To that he very reluctantly nodded assent.


And the knowledge of that which is and is not dangerous is courage, and is

opposed to the ignorance of these things?


At this point he would no longer nod assent, but was silent.


And why, I said, do you neither assent nor dissent, Protagoras?


Finish the argument by yourself, he said.


I only want to ask one more question, I said. I want to know whether you still

think that there are men who are most ignorant and yet most courageous?


You  seem  to  have  a  great  ambition  to  make  me  answer,  Socrates,  andtherefore I will gratify you, and say, that this appears to me to be impossible

consistently with the argument.


My only object, I said, in continuing the discussion, has been the desire to

ascertain the nature and relations of virtue; for if this were clear, I am very

sure that the other controversy which has been carried on at great length by

both of us--you affirming and I denying that virtue can be taught--would also

become clear. The result of our discussion appears to me to be singular. For if

the argument had a human voice, that voice would be heard laughing at us

and saying: 'Protagoras and Socrates, you are strange beings; there are you,

Socrates, who were saying that virtue cannot be taught, contradicting yourself

now by your attempt to prove that all things are knowledge, including justice,

and temperance, and courage,-- which tends to show that virtue can certainly

be taught; for if virtue were other than knowledge, as Protagoras attempted to

prove,  then  clearly  virtue  cannot  be  taught;  but  if  virtue  is  entirely

knowledge, as you are seeking to show, then I cannot but suppose that virtue

is capable of being taught. Protagoras, on the other hand, who started by

saying that it might be taught, is now eager to prove it to be anything rather

than knowledge; and if this is true, it must be quite incapable of being taught.'

Now I, Protagoras, perceiving this terrible confusion of our ideas, have a

great desire that they should be cleared up. And I should like to carry on the

discussion until we ascertain what virtue is, whether capable of being taught

or  not,  lest  haply  Epimetheus  should  trip  us  up  and  deceive  us  in  the

argument,  as  he  forgot  us  in  the  story;  I  prefer  your  Prometheus  to  your

Epimetheus,  for  of  him  I  make  use,  whenever  I  am  busy  about  these

questions, in Promethean care of my own life. And if you have no objection,

as I said at first, I should like to have your help in the enquiry.


Protagoras replied: Socrates, I am not of a base nature, and I am the last man

in  the  world  to  be  envious.  I  cannot  but  applaud  your  energy  and  your

conduct of an argument. As I have often said, I admire you above all men

whom I know, and far above all men of your age; and I believe that you will

become very eminent in philosophy. Let us come back to the subject at some

future time; at present we had better turn to something else.


By all means, I said, if that is your wish; for I too ought long since to have

kept the engagement of which I spoke before, and only tarried because Icould not refuse the request of the noble Callias. So the conversation ended,

and we went our way.


THE END                      The Republic Table of Contents




    Introduction

    BOOK I

    BOOK II

    BOOK III

    BOOK IV

    BOOK V

    BOOK VI

    BOOK VII

    BOOK VIII

    BOOK IX

    BOOK X



Introduction to Plato's Republic.


  The Republic of Plato is the longest of his works with the exception of

the Laws, and is certainly the greatest of them. There are nearer approaches

to modern metaphysics in the Philebus and in the Sophist; the Politicus or

Statesman  is  more  ideal;  the  form  and  institutions  of  the  State  are  more

clearly  drawn  out  in  the  Laws;  as  works  of  art,  the  Symposium  and  the

Protagoras are of higher excellence. But no other Dialogue of Plato has the

same largeness of view and the same perfection of style; no other shows an

equal knowledge of the world, or contains more of those thoughts which are

new as well as old, and not of one age only but of all. Nowhere in Plato is

there  a  deeper  irony  or  a  greater  wealth  of  humour  or  imagery,  or  more

dramatic  power.  Nor  in  any  other  of  his  writings  is  the  attempt  made  to

interweave life and speculation, or to connect politics with philosophy. The

Republic is the centre around which the other Dialogues may be grouped;

here philosophy reaches the highest point (cp, especially in Books V, VI, VII)

to which ancient thinkers ever attained. Plato among the Greeks, like Bacon

among the moderns, was the first who conceived a method of knowledge,

although neither of them always distinguished the bare outline or form fromthe substance of truth; and both of them had to be content with an abstraction

of  science  which  was  not  yet  realized.  He  was  the  greatest  metaphysical

genius whom the world has seen; and in him, more than in any other ancient

thinker, the germs of future knowledge are contained. The sciences of logic

and  psychology,  which  have  supplied  so  many  instruments  of  thought  to

after-ages, are based upon the analyses of Socrates and Plato. The principles

of definition, the law of contradiction, the fallacy of arguing in a circle, the

distinction between the essence and accidents of a thing or notion, between

means and ends, between causes and conditions; also the division of the mind

into the rational, concupiscent, and irascible elements, or of pleasures and

desires  into  necessary  and  unnecessary--these  and  other  great  forms  of

thought are all of them to be found in the Republic, and were probably first

invented by Plato. The greatest of all logical truths, and the one of which

writers  on  philosophy  are  most  apt  to  lose  sight,  the  difference  between

words and things, has been most strenuously insisted on by him (cp. Rep.;

Polit.; Cratyl), although he has not always avoided the confusion of them in

his  own  writings  (e.g.  Rep.).  But  he  does  not  bind  up  truth  in  logical

formulae,--  logic  is  still  veiled  in  metaphysics;  and  the  science  which  he

imagines to 'contemplate all truth and all existence' is very unlike the doctrine

of the syllogism which Aristotle claims to have discovered (Soph. Elenchi).


  Neither must we forget that the Republic is but the third part of a still

larger design which was to have included an ideal history of Athens, as well

as a political and physical philosophy. The fragment of the Critias has given

birth to a world-famous fiction, second only in importance to the tale of Troy

and the legend of Arthur; and is said as a fact to have inspired some of the

early navigators of the sixteenth century. This mythical tale, of which the

subject  was  a  history  of  the  wars  of  the  Athenians  against  the  Island  of

Atlantis, is supposed to be founded upon an unfinished poem of Solon, to

which  it  would  have  stood  in  the  same  relation  as  the  writings  of  the

logographers to the poems of Homer. It would have told of a struggle for

Liberty (cp. Tim.), intended to represent the conflict of Persia and Hellas. We

may judge from the noble commencement of the Timaeus, from the fragment

of the Critias itself, and from the third book of the Laws, in what manner

Plato would have treated this high argument. We can only guess why the

great design was abandoned; perhaps because Plato became sensible of some

incongruity in a fictitious history, or because he had lost his interest in it, orbecause advancing years forbade the completion of it; and we may please

ourselves with the fancy that had this imaginary narrative ever been finished,

we  should  have  found  Plato  himself  sympathising  with  the  struggle  for

Hellenic independence (cp. Laws), singing a hymn of triumph over Marathon

and  Salamis,  perhaps  making  the  reflection  of  Herodotus  where  he

contemplates  the  growth  of  the  Athenian  empire--'How  brave  a  thing  is

freedom of speech, which has made the Athenians so far exceed every other

state of Hellas in greatness!' or, more probably, attributing the victory to the

ancient good order of Athens and to the favor of Apollo and Athene (cp.

Introd. to Critias).


  Again, Plato may be regarded as the 'captain' ('arhchegoz') or leader of a

goodly band of followers; for in the Republic is to be found the original of

Cicero's De Republica, of St. Augustine's City of God, of the Utopia of Sir

Thomas More, and of the numerous other imaginary States which are framed

upon the same model. The extent to which Aristotle or the Aristotelian school

were  indebted  to  him  in  the  Politics  has  been  little  recognised,  and  the

recognition is the more necessary because it is not made by Aristotle himself.

The two philosophers had more in common than they were conscious of; and

probably  some  elements  of  Plato  remain  still  undetected  in  Aristotle.  In

English philosophy too, many affinities may be traced, not only in the works

of the Cambridge Platonists, but in great original writers like Berkeley or

Coleridge, to Plato and his ideas. That there is a truth higher than experience,

of which the mind bears witness to herself, is a conviction which in our own

generation has been enthusiastically asserted, and is perhaps gaining ground.

Of the Greek authors who at the Renaissance brought a new life into the

world Plato has had the greatest influence. The Republic of Plato is also the

first  treatise  upon  education,  of  which  the  writings  of  Milton  and  Locke,

Rousseau, Jean Paul, and Goethe are the legitimate descendants. Like Dante

or Bunyan, he has a revelation of another life; like Bacon, he is profoundly

impressed with the unity of knowledge; in the early Church he exercised a

real influence on theology, and at the Revival of Literature on politics. Even

the fragments of his words when 'repeated at second-hand' (Symp.) have in

all ages ravished the hearts of men, who have seen reflected in them their

own higher nature. He is the father of idealism in philosophy, in politics, in

literature.  And  many  of  the  latest  conceptions  of  modern  thinkers  and

statesmen, such as the unity of knowledge, the reign of law, and the equalityof the sexes, have been anticipated in a dream by him.


  The argument of the Republic is the search after Justice, the nature of

which is first hinted at by Cephalus, the just and blameless old man--then

discussed on the basis of proverbial morality by Socrates and Polemarchus--

then  caricatured  by  Thrasymachus  and  partially  explained  by  Socrates--

reduced to an abstraction by Glaucon and Adeimantus, and having become

invisible  in  the  individual  reappears  at  length  in  the  ideal  State  which  is

constructed by Socrates. The first care of the rulers is to be education, of

which an outline is drawn after the old Hellenic model, providing only for an

improved religion and morality, and more simplicity in music and gymnastic,

a manlier strain of poetry, and greater harmony of the individual and the

State. We are thus led on to the conception of a higher State, in which 'no

man  calls  anything  his  own,'  and  in  which  there  is  neither  'marrying  nor

giving in marriage,' and 'kings are philosophers' and 'philosophers are kings;'

and there is another and higher education, intellectual as well as moral and

religious, of science as well as of art, and not of youth only but of the whole

of  life.  Such  a  State  is  hardly  to  be  realized  in  this  world  and  quickly

degenerates. To the perfect ideal succeeds the government of the soldier and

the lover of honour, this again declining into democracy, and democracy into

tyranny, in an imaginary but regular order having not much resemblance to

the actual facts. When 'the wheel has come full circle' we do not begin again

with a new period of human life; but we have passed from the best to the

worst, and there we end. The subject is then changed and the old quarrel of

poetry  and  philosophy  which  had  been  more  lightly  treated  in  the  earlier

books of the Republic is now resumed and fought out to a conclusion. Poetry

is discovered to be an imitation thrice removed from the truth, and Homer, as

well as the dramatic poets, having been condemned as an imitator, is sent into

banishment along with them. And the idea of the State is supplemented by

the revelation of a future life.


  The division into books, like all similar divisions (Cp. Sir G.C. Lewis in

the Classical Museum.), is probably later than the age of Plato. The natural

divisions are five in number;--(1) Book I and the first half of Book II down to

the paragraph beginning, 'I had always admired the genius of Glaucon and

Adeimantus,' which is introductory; the first book containing a refutation of

the popular and sophistical notions of justice, and concluding, like some ofthe  earlier  Dialogues,  without  arriving  at  any  definite  result.  To  this  is

appended a restatement of the nature of justice according to common opinion,

and  an  answer  is  demanded  to  the  question--What  is  justice,  stripped  of

appearances? The second division (2) includes the remainder of the second

and the whole of the third and fourth books, which are mainly occupied with

the construction of the first State and the first education. The third division

(3) consists of the fifth, sixth, and seventh books, in which philosophy rather

than justice is the subject of enquiry, and the second State is constructed on

principles of communism and ruled by philosophers, and the contemplation

of the idea of good takes the place of the social and political virtues. In the

eighth and ninth books (4) the perversions of States and of the individuals

who  correspond  to  them  are  reviewed  in  succession;  and  the  nature  of

pleasure and the principle of tyranny are further analysed in the individual

man. The tenth book (5) is the conclusion of the whole, in which the relations

of  philosophy  to  poetry  are  finally  determined,  and  the  happiness  of  the

citizens in this life, which has now been assured, is crowned by the vision of

another.


  Or  a  more  general  division  into  two  parts  may  be  adopted;  the  first

(Books  I  -  IV)  containing  the  description  of  a  State  framed  generally  in

accordance  with  Hellenic  notions  of  religion  and  morality,  while  in  the

second (Books V - X) the Hellenic State is transformed into an ideal kingdom

of philosophy, of which all other governments are the perversions. These two

points of view are really opposed, and the opposition is only veiled by the

genius  of  Plato.  The  Republic,  like  the  Phaedrus  (see  Introduction  to

Phaedrus),  is  an  imperfect  whole;  the  higher  light  of  philosophy  breaks

through the regularity of the Hellenic temple, which at last fades away into

the  heavens.  Whether  this  imperfection  of  structure  arises  from  an

enlargement of the plan; or from the imperfect reconcilement in the writer's

own mind of the struggling elements of thought which are now first brought

together by him; or, perhaps, from the composition of the work at different

times--are  questions,  like  the  similar  question  about  the  Iliad  and  the

Odyssey, which are worth asking, but which cannot have a distinct answer. In

the age of Plato there was no regular mode of publication, and an author

would have the less scruple in altering or adding to a work which was known

only to a few of his friends. There is no absurdity in supposing that he may

have laid his labours aside for a time, or turned from one work to another;and such interruptions would be more likely to occur in the case of a long

than of a short writing. In all attempts to determine the chronological order of

the Platonic writings on internal evidence, this uncertainty about any single

Dialogue being composed at one time is a disturbing element, which must be

admitted to affect longer works, such as the Republic and the Laws, more

than shorter ones. But, on the other hand, the seeming discrepancies of the

Republic may only arise out of the discordant elements which the philosopher

has attempted to unite in a single whole, perhaps without being himself able

to recognise the inconsistency which is obvious to us. For there is a judgment

of after ages which few great writers have ever been able to anticipate for

themselves.  They  do  not  perceive  the  want  of  connexion  in  their  own

writings, or the gaps in their systems which are visible enough to those who

come after them. In the beginnings of literature and philosophy, amid the first

efforts of thought and language, more inconsistencies occur than now, when

the paths of speculation are well worn and the meaning of words precisely

defined. For consistency, too, is the growth of time; and some of the greatest

creations of the human mind have been wanting in unity. Tried by this test,

several of the Platonic Dialogues, according to our modern ideas, appear to

be  defective,  but  the  deficiency  is  no  proof  that  they  were  composed  at

different times or by different hands. And the supposition that the Republic

was written uninterruptedly and by a continuous effort is in some degree

confirmed by the numerous references from one part of the work to another.


  The  second  title,  'Concerning  Justice,'  is  not  the  one  by  which  the

Republic is quoted, either by Aristotle or generally in antiquity, and, like the

other second titles of the Platonic Dialogues, may therefore be assumed to be

of later date. Morgenstern and others have asked whether the definition of

justice, which is the professed aim, or the construction of the State is the

principal argument of the work. The answer is, that the two blend in one, and

are two faces of the same truth; for justice is the order of the State, and the

State is the visible embodiment of justice under the conditions of human

society. The one is the soul and the other is the body, and the Greek ideal of

the State, as of the individual, is a fair mind in a fair body. In Hegelian

phraseology the state is the reality of which justice is the idea. Or, described

in Christian language, the kingdom of God is within, and yet developes into a

Church or external kingdom; 'the house not made with hands, eternal in the

heavens,' is reduced to the proportions of an earthly building. Or, to use aPlatonic image, justice and the State are the warp and the woof which run

through  the  whole  texture.  And  when  the  constitution  of  the  State  is

completed, the conception of justice is not dismissed, but reappears under the

same or different names throughout the work, both as the inner law of the

individual soul, and finally as the principle of rewards and punishments in

another life. The virtues are based on justice, of which common honesty in

buying and selling is the shadow, and justice is based on the idea of good,

which is the harmony of the world, and is reflected both in the institutions of

states and in motions of the heavenly bodies (cp. Tim.). The Timaeus, which

takes  up  the  political  rather  than  the  ethical  side  of  the  Republic,  and  is

chiefly occupied with hypotheses concerning the outward world, yet contains

many indications that the same law is supposed to reign over the State, over

nature, and over man.


  Too much, however, has been made of this question both in ancient and

modern times. There is a stage of criticism in which all works, whether of

nature or of art, are referred to design. Now in ancient writings, and indeed in

literature  generally,  there  remains  often  a  large  element  which  was  not

comprehended in the original design. For the plan grows under the author's

hand; new thoughts occur to him in the act of writing; he has not worked out

the argument to the end before he begins. The reader who seeks to find some

one idea under which the whole may be conceived, must necessarily seize on

the vaguest and most general. Thus Stallbaum, who is dissatisfied with the

ordinary explanations of the argument of the Republic, imagines himself to

have found the true argument 'in the representation of human life in a State

perfected by justice, and governed according to the idea of good.' There may

be  some  use  in  such  general  descriptions,  but  they  can  hardly  be  said  to

express the design of the writer. The truth is, that we may as well speak of

many designs as of one; nor need anything be excluded from the plan of a

great work to which the mind is naturally led by the association of ideas, and

which does not interfere with the general purpose. What kind or degree of

unity is to be sought after in a building, in the plastic arts, in poetry, in prose,

is a problem which has to be determined relatively to the subject-matter. To

Plato himself, the enquiry 'what was the intention of the writer,' or 'what was

the principal argument of the Republic' would have been hardly intelligible,

and therefore had better be at once dismissed (cp. the Introduction to the

Phaedrus).  Is not the Republic the vehicle of three or four great truths which, to

Plato's own mind, are most naturally represented in the form of the State?

Just as in the Jewish prophets the reign of Messiah, or 'the day of the Lord,' or

the suffering Servant or people of God, or the 'Sun of righteousness with

healing in his wings' only convey, to us at least, their great spiritual ideals, so

through the Greek State Plato reveals to us his own thoughts about divine

perfection, which is the idea of good--like the sun in the visible world;--about

human perfection, which is justice--about education beginning in youth and

continuing in later years--about poets and sophists and tyrants who are the

false teachers and evil rulers of mankind --about 'the world' which is the

embodiment of them--about a kingdom which exists nowhere upon earth but

is laid up in heaven to be the pattern and rule of human life. No such inspired

creation is at unity with itself, any more than the clouds of heaven when the

sun pierces through them. Every shade of light and dark, of truth, and of

fiction which is the veil of truth, is allowable in a work of philosophical

imagination. It is not all on the same plane; it easily passes from ideas to

myths and fancies, from facts to figures of speech. It is not prose but poetry,

at least a great part of it, and ought not to be judged by the rules of logic or

the probabilities of history. The writer is not fashioning his ideas into an

artistic whole; they take possession of him and are too much for him. We

have no need therefore to discuss whether a State such as Plato has conceived

is practicable or not, or whether the outward form or the inward life came

first into the mind of the writer. For the practicability of his ideas has nothing

to do with their truth; and the highest thoughts to which he attains may be

truly  said  to  bear  the  greatest  'marks  of  design'--  justice  more  than  the

external frame-work of the State, the idea of good more than justice. The

great science of dialectic or the organisation of ideas has no real content; but

is only a type of the method or spirit in which the higher knowledge is to be

pursued by the spectator of all time and all existence. It is in the fifth, sixth,

and seventh books that Plato reaches the 'summit of speculation,' and these,

although  they  fail  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  a  modern  thinker,  may

therefore  be  regarded  as  the  most  important,  as  they  are  also  the  most

original, portions of the work.


  It is not necessary to discuss at length a minor question which has been

raised by Boeckh, respecting the imaginary date at which the conversation

was held (the year 411 B.C. which is proposed by him will do as well as anyother);  for  a  writer  of  fiction,  and  especially  a  writer  who,  like  Plato,  is

notoriously  careless  of  chronology  (cp.  Rep.,  Symp.,  etc.),  only  aims  at

general probability. Whether all the persons mentioned in the Republic could

ever have met at any one time is not a difficulty which would have occurred

to an Athenian reading the work forty years later, or to Plato himself at the

time of writing (any more than to Shakespeare respecting one of his own

dramas); and need not greatly trouble us now. Yet this may be a question

having  no  answer  'which  is  still  worth  asking,'  because  the  investigation

shows that we cannot argue historically from the dates in Plato; it would be

useless  therefore  to  waste  time  in  inventing  far-fetched  reconcilements  of

them in order to avoid chronological difficulties, such, for example, as the

conjecture  of  C.F.  Hermann,  that  Glaucon  and  Adeimantus  are  not  the

brothers but the uncles of Plato (cp. Apol.), or the fancy of Stallbaum that

Plato intentionally left anachronisms indicating the dates at which some of

his Dialogues were written.


  The  principal  characters  in  the  Republic  are  Cephalus,  Polemarchus,

Thrasymachus, Socrates, Glaucon, and Adeimantus. Cephalus appears in the

introduction only, Polemarchus drops at the end of the first argument, and

Thrasymachus is reduced to silence at the close of the first book. The main

discussion is carried on by Socrates, Glaucon, and Adeimantus. Among the

company are Lysias (the orator) and Euthydemus, the sons of Cephalus and

brothers of Polemarchus, an unknown Charmantides--these are mute auditors;

also  there  is  Cleitophon,  who  once  interrupts,  where,  as  in  the  Dialogue

which bears his name, he appears as the friend and ally of Thrasymachus.


  Cephalus, the patriarch of the house, has been appropriately engaged in

offering a sacrifice. He is the pattern of an old man who has almost done with

life, and is at peace with himself and with all mankind. He feels that he is

drawing nearer to the world below, and seems to linger around the memory

of the past. He is eager that Socrates should come to visit him, fond of the

poetry of the last generation, happy in the consciousness of a well-spent life,

glad  at  having  escaped  from  the  tyranny  of  youthful  lusts.  His  love  of

conversation, his affection, his indifference to riches, even his garrulity, are

interesting traits of character. He is not one of those who have nothing to say,

because  their  whole  mind  has  been  absorbed  in  making  money.  Yet  he

acknowledges  that  riches  have  the  advantage  of  placing  men  above  thetemptation to dishonesty or falsehood. The respectful attention shown to him

by Socrates, whose love of conversation, no less than the mission imposed

upon him by the Oracle, leads him to ask questions of all men, young and old

alike, should also be noted. Who better suited to raise the question of justice

than  Cephalus,  whose  life  might  seem  to  be  the  expression  of  it?  The

moderation with which old age is pictured by Cephalus as a very tolerable

portion of existence is characteristic, not only of him, but of Greek feeling

generally, and contrasts with the exaggeration of Cicero in the De Senectute.

The evening of life is described by Plato in the most expressive manner, yet

with the fewest possible touches. As Cicero remarks (Ep. ad Attic.), the aged

Cephalus would have been out of place in the discussion which follows, and

which he could neither have understood nor taken part in without a violation

of dramatic propriety (cp. Lysimachus in the Laches).


  His 'son and heir' Polemarchus has the frankness and impetuousness of

youth; he is for detaining Socrates by force in the opening scene, and will not

'let  him  off'  on  the  subject  of  women  and  children.  Like  Cephalus,  he  is

limited in his point of view, and represents the proverbial stage of morality

which has rules of life rather than principles; and he quotes Simonides (cp.

Aristoph. Clouds) as his father had quoted Pindar. But after this he has no

more to say; the answers which he makes are only elicited from him by the

dialectic of Socrates. He has not yet experienced the influence of the Sophists

like Glaucon and Adeimantus, nor is he sensible of the necessity of refuting

them; he belongs to the pre-Socratic or pre-dialectical age. He is incapable of

arguing, and is bewildered by Socrates to such a degree that he does not

know what he is saying. He is made to admit that justice is a thief, and that

the virtues follow the analogy of the arts. From his brother Lysias (contra

Eratosth.) we learn that he fell a victim to the Thirty Tyrants, but no allusion

is here made to his fate, nor to the circumstance that Cephalus and his family

were of Syracusan origin, and had migrated from Thurii to Athens.


  The 'Chalcedonian giant,' Thrasymachus, of whom we have already heard

in the Phaedrus, is the personification of the Sophists, according to Plato's

conception of them, in some of their worst characteristics. He is vain and

blustering, refusing to discourse unless he is paid, fond of making an oration,

and hoping thereby to escape the inevitable Socrates; but a mere child in

argument,  and  unable  to  foresee  that  the  next  'move'  (to  use  a  Platonicexpression) will 'shut him up.' He has reached the stage of framing general

notions, and in this respect is in advance of Cephalus and Polemarchus. But

he is incapable of defending them in a discussion, and vainly tries to cover

his  confusion  with  banter  and  insolence.  Whether  such  doctrines  as  are

attributed to him by Plato were really held either by him or by any other

Sophist  is  uncertain;  in  the  infancy  of  philosophy  serious  errors  about

morality  might  easily  grow  up--they  are  certainly  put  into  the  mouths  of

speakers  in  Thucydides;  but  we  are  concerned  at  present  with  Plato's

description of him, and not with the historical reality. The inequality of the

contest adds greatly to the humour of the scene. The pompous and empty

Sophist is utterly helpless in the hands of the great master of dialectic, who

knows how to touch all the springs of vanity and weakness in him. He is

greatly irritated by the irony of Socrates, but his noisy and imbecile rage only

lays  him  more  and  more  open  to  the  thrusts  of  his  assailant.  His

determination to cram down their throats, or put 'bodily into their souls' his

own words, elicits a cry of horror from Socrates. The state of his temper is

quite as worthy of remark as the process of the argument. Nothing is more

amusing than his complete submission when he has been once thoroughly

beaten. At first he seems to continue the discussion with reluctance, but soon

with apparent good-will, and he even testifies his interest at a later stage by

one or two occasional remarks. When attacked by Glaucon he is humorously

protected by Socrates 'as one who has never been his enemy and is now his

friend.' From Cicero and Quintilian and from Aristotle's Rhetoric we learn

that the Sophist whom Plato has made so ridiculous was a man of note whose

writings were preserved in later ages. The play on his name which was made

by his contemporary Herodicus (Aris. Rhet.), 'thou wast ever bold in battle,'

seems to show that the description of him is not devoid of verisimilitude.


  When Thrasymachus has been silenced, the two principal respondents,

Glaucon and Adeimantus, appear on the scene: here, as in Greek tragedy (cp.

Introd. to Phaedo), three actors are introduced. At first sight the two sons of

Ariston may seem to wear a family likeness, like the two friends Simmias

and Cebes in the Phaedo. But on a nearer examination of them the similarity

vanishes,  and  they  are  seen  to  be  distinct  characters.  Glaucon  is  the

impetuous  youth  who  can  'just  never  have  enough  of  fechting'  (cp.  the

character of him in Xen. Mem. iii. 6); the man of pleasure who is acquainted

with  the  mysteries  of  love;  the  'juvenis  qui  gaudet  canibus,'  and  whoimproves the breed of animals; the lover of art and music who has all the

experiences of youthful life. He is full of quickness and penetration, piercing

easily below the clumsy platitudes of Thrasymachus to the real difficulty; he

turns out to the light the seamy side of human life, and yet does not lose faith

in  the  just  and  true.  It  is  Glaucon  who  seizes  what  may  be  termed  the

ludicrous  relation  of  the  philosopher  to  the  world,  to  whom  a  state  of

simplicity is 'a city of pigs,' who is always prepared with a jest when the

argument offers him an opportunity, and who is ever ready to second the

humour  of  Socrates  and  to  appreciate  the  ridiculous,  whether  in  the

connoisseurs  of  music,  or  in  the  lovers  of  theatricals,  or  in  the  fantastic

behaviour of the citizens of democracy. His weaknesses are several times

alluded to by Socrates, who, however, will not allow him to be attacked by

his  brother  Adeimantus.  He  is  a  soldier,  and,  like  Adeimantus,  has  been

distinguished  at  the  battle  of  Megara  (anno  456?)...The  character  of

Adeimantus  is  deeper  and  graver,  and  the  profounder  objections  are

commonly put into his mouth. Glaucon is more demonstrative, and generally

opens the game. Adeimantus pursues the argument further. Glaucon has more

of the liveliness and quick sympathy of youth; Adeimantus has the maturer

judgment of a grown-up man of the world. In the second book, when Glaucon

insists that justice and injustice shall be considered without regard to their

consequences,  Adeimantus  remarks  that  they  are  regarded  by  mankind  in

general only for the sake of their consequences; and in a similar vein of

reflection he urges at the beginning of the fourth book that Socrates fails in

making his citizens happy, and is answered that happiness is not the first but

the second thing, not the direct aim but the indirect consequence of the good

government  of  a  State.  In  the  discussion  about  religion  and  mythology,

Adeimantus is the respondent, but Glaucon breaks in with a slight jest, and

carries on the conversation in a lighter tone about music and gymnastic to the

end  of  the  book.  It  is  Adeimantus  again  who  volunteers  the  criticism  of

common sense on the Socratic method of argument, and who refuses to let

Socrates  pass  lightly  over  the  question  of  women  and  children.  It  is

Adeimantus who is the respondent in the more argumentative, as Glaucon in

the  lighter  and  more  imaginative  portions  of  the  Dialogue.  For  example,

throughout the greater part of the sixth book, the causes of the corruption of

philosophy  and  the  conception  of  the  idea  of  good  are  discussed  with

Adeimantus. Glaucon resumes his place of principal respondent; but he has a

difficulty in apprehending the higher education of Socrates, and makes somefalse hits in the course of the discussion. Once more Adeimantus returns with

the allusion to his brother Glaucon whom he compares to the contentious

State; in the next book he is again superseded, and Glaucon continues to the

end.


  Thus in a succession of characters Plato represents the successive stages

of morality, beginning with the Athenian gentleman of the olden time, who is

followed by the practical man of that day regulating his life by proverbs and

saws;  to  him  succeeds  the  wild  generalization  of  the  Sophists,  and  lastly

come  the  young  disciples  of  the  great  teacher,  who  know  the  sophistical

arguments but will not be convinced by them, and desire to go deeper into the

nature of things. These too, like Cephalus, Polemarchus, Thrasymachus, are

clearly distinguished from one another. Neither in the Republic, nor in any

other Dialogue of Plato, is a single character repeated.


  The delineation of Socrates in the Republic is not wholly consistent. In

the first book we have more of the real Socrates, such as he is depicted in the

Memorabilia  of  Xenophon,  in  the  earliest  Dialogues  of  Plato,  and  in  the

Apology.  He  is  ironical,  provoking,  questioning,  the  old  enemy  of  the

Sophists, ready to put on the mask of Silenus as well as to argue seriously.

But  in  the  sixth  book  his  enmity  towards  the  Sophists  abates;  he

acknowledges that they are the representatives rather than the corrupters of

the world. He also becomes more dogmatic and constructive, passing beyond

the range either of the political or the speculative ideas of the real Socrates. In

one passage Plato himself seems to intimate that the time had now come for

Socrates,  who  had  passed  his  whole  life  in  philosophy,  to  give  his  own

opinion and not to be always repeating the notions of other men. There is no

evidence that either the idea of good or the conception of a perfect state were

comprehended  in  the  Socratic  teaching,  though  he  certainly  dwelt  on  the

nature of the universal and of final causes (cp. Xen. Mem.; Phaedo); and a

deep thinker like him, in his thirty or forty years of public teaching, could

hardly have failed to touch on the nature of family relations, for which there

is  also  some  positive  evidence  in  the  Memorabilia  (Mem.)  The  Socratic

method is nominally retained; and every inference is either put into the mouth

of  the  respondent  or  represented  as  the  common  discovery  of  him  and

Socrates.  But  any  one  can  see  that  this  is  a  mere  form,  of  which  the

affectation grows wearisome as the work advances. The method of enquiryhas passed into a method of teaching in which by the help of interlocutors the

same  thesis  is  looked  at  from  various  points  of  view.  The  nature  of  the

process is truly characterized by Glaucon, when he describes himself as a

companion who is not good for much in an investigation, but can see what he

is shown, and may, perhaps, give the answer to a question more fluently than

another.


  Neither  can  we  be  absolutely  certain  that  Socrates  himself  taught  the

immortality of the soul, which is unknown to his disciple Glaucon in the

Republic (cp. Apol.); nor is there any reason to suppose that he used myths or

revelations of another world as a vehicle of instruction, or that he would have

banished poetry or have denounced the Greek mythology. His favorite oath is

retained, and a slight mention is made of the daemonium, or internal sign,

which is alluded to by Socrates as a phenomenon peculiar to himself. A real

element of Socratic teaching, which is more prominent in the Republic than

in any of the other Dialogues of Plato, is the use of example and illustration

(Greek): 'Let us apply the test of common instances.' 'You,' says Adeimantus,

ironically, in the sixth book, 'are so unaccustomed to speak in images.' And

this use of examples or images, though truly Socratic in origin, is enlarged by

the genius of Plato into the form of an allegory or parable, which embodies in

the concrete what has been already described, or is about to be described, in

the abstract. Thus the figure of the cave in Book VII is a recapitulation of the

divisions of knowledge in Book VI. The composite animal in Book IX is an

allegory of the parts of the soul. The noble captain and the ship and the true

pilot in Book VI are a figure of the relation of the people to the philosophers

in the State which has been described. Other figures, such as the dog, or the

marriage of the portionless maiden, or the drones and wasps in the eighth and

ninth books, also form links of connexion in long passages, or are used to

recall previous discussions.


  Plato is most true to the character of his master when he describes him as

'not of this world.' And with this representation of him the ideal state and the

other paradoxes of the Republic are quite in accordance, though they cannot

be shown to have been speculations of Socrates. To him, as to other great

teachers  both  philosophical  and  religious,  when  they  looked  upward,  the

world seemed to be the embodiment of error and evil. The common sense of

mankind has revolted against this view, or has only partially admitted it. Andeven  in  Socrates  himself  the  sterner  judgement  of  the  multitude  at  times

passes into a sort of ironical pity or love. Men in general are incapable of

philosophy,  and  are  therefore  at  enmity  with  the  philosopher;  but  their

misunderstanding of him is unavoidable: for they have never seen him as he

truly is in his own image; they are only acquainted with artificial systems

possessing  no  native  force  of  truth--  words  which  admit  of  many

applications. Their leaders have nothing to measure with, and are therefore

ignorant of their own stature. But they are to be pitied or laughed at, not to be

quarrelled with; they mean well with their nostrums, if they could only learn

that they are cutting off a Hydra's head. This moderation towards those who

are  in  error  is  one  of  the  most  characteristic  features  of  Socrates  in  the

Republic.  In  all  the  different  representations  of  Socrates,  whether  of

Xenophon or Plato, and amid the differences of the earlier or later Dialogues,

he always retains the character of the unwearied and disinterested seeker after

truth, without which he would have ceased to be Socrates.


  Leaving the characters we may now analyse the contents of the Republic,

and then proceed to consider (1) The general aspects of this Hellenic ideal of

the State, (2) The modern lights in which the thoughts of Plato may be read.


  BOOK  I.  The  Republic  opens  with  a  truly  Greek  scene--a  festival  in

honour of the goddess Bendis which is held in the Piraeus; to this is added the

promise  of  an  equestrian  torch-race  in  the  evening.  The  whole  work  is

supposed to be recited by Socrates on the day after the festival to a small

party, consisting of Critias, Timaeus, Hermocrates, and another; this we learn

from the first words of the Timaeus.


  When the rhetorical advantage of reciting the Dialogue has been gained,

the attention is not distracted by any reference to the audience; nor is the

reader further reminded of the extraordinary length of the narrative. Of the

numerous company, three only take any serious part in the discussion; nor are

we informed whether in the evening they went to the torch-race, or talked, as

in the Symposium, through the night. The manner in which the conversation

has arisen is described as follows:--Socrates and his companion Glaucon are

about  to  leave  the  festival  when  they  are  detained  by  a  message  from

Polemarchus, who speedily appears accompanied by Adeimantus, the brother

of Glaucon, and with playful violence compels them to remain, promisingthem not only the torch-race, but the pleasure of conversation with the young,

which  to  Socrates  is  a  far  greater  attraction.  They  return  to  the  house  of

Cephalus, Polemarchus' father, now in extreme old age, who is found sitting

upon  a  cushioned  seat  crowned  for  a  sacrifice.  'You  should  come  to  me

oftener, Socrates, for I am too old to go to you; and at my time of life, having

lost other pleasures, I care the more for conversation.' Socrates asks him what

he  thinks  of  age,  to  which  the  old  man  replies,  that  the  sorrows  and

discontents of age are to be attributed to the tempers of men, and that age is a

time of peace in which the tyranny of the passions is no longer felt. Yes,

replies Socrates, but the world will say, Cephalus, that you are happy in old

age because you are rich. 'And there is something in what they say, Socrates,

but not so much as they imagine--as Themistocles replied to the Seriphian,

"Neither you, if you had been an Athenian, nor I, if I had been a Seriphian,

would ever have been famous," I might in like manner reply to you, Neither a

good  poor  man  can  be  happy  in  age,  nor  yet  a  bad  rich  man.'  Socrates

remarks that Cephalus appears not to care about riches, a quality which he

ascribes to his having inherited, not acquired them, and would like to know

what he considers to be the chief advantage of them. Cephalus answers that

when you are old the belief in the world below grows upon you, and then to

have done justice and never to have been compelled to do injustice through

poverty,  and  never  to  have  deceived  anyone,  are  felt  to  be  unspeakable

blessings. Socrates, who is evidently preparing for an argument, next asks,

What is the meaning of the word justice? To tell the truth and pay your debts?

No more than this? Or must we admit exceptions? Ought I, for example, to

put back into the hands of my friend, who has gone mad, the sword which I

borrowed of him when he was in his right mind? 'There must be exceptions.'

'And yet,' says Polemarchus, 'the definition which has been given has the

authority of Simonides.' Here Cephalus retires to look after the sacrifices, and

bequeaths, as Socrates facetiously remarks, the possession of the argument to

his heir, Polemarchus...


  The description of old age is finished, and Plato, as his manner is, has

touched the key-note of the whole work in asking for the definition of justice,

first suggesting the question which Glaucon afterwards pursues respecting

external goods, and preparing for the concluding mythus of the world below

in the slight allusion of Cephalus. The portrait of the just man is a natural

frontispiece or introduction to the long discourse which follows, and mayperhaps imply that in all our perplexity about the nature of justice, there is no

difficulty in discerning 'who is a just man.' The first explanation has been

supported by a saying of Simonides; and now Socrates has a mind to show

that the resolution of justice into two unconnected precepts, which have no

common principle, fails to satisfy the demands of dialectic.


  ...He proceeds: What did Simonides mean by this saying of his? Did he

mean that I was to give back arms to a madman? 'No, not in that case, not if

the parties are friends, and evil would result. He meant that you were to do

what  was  proper,  good  to  friends  and  harm  to  enemies.'  Every  act  does

something to somebody; and following this analogy, Socrates asks, What is

this due and proper thing which justice does, and to whom? He is answered

that justice does good to friends and harm to enemies. But in what way good

or harm? 'In making alliances with the one, and going to war with the other.'

Then in time of peace what is the good of justice? The answer is that justice

is of use in contracts, and contracts are money partnerships. Yes; but how in

such partnerships is the just man of more use than any other man? 'When you

want to have money safely kept and not used.' Then justice will be useful

when money is useless. And there is another difficulty: justice, like the art of

war  or  any  other  art,  must  be  of  opposites,  good  at  attack  as  well  as  at

defence, at stealing as well as at guarding. But then justice is a thief, though a

hero notwithstanding, like Autolycus, the Homeric hero, who was 'excellent

above all men in theft and perjury'--to such a pass have you and Homer and

Simonides brought us; though I do not forget that the thieving must be for the

good  of  friends  and  the  harm  of  enemies.  And  still  there  arises  another

question: Are friends to be interpreted as real or seeming; enemies as real or

seeming? And are our friends to be only the good, and our enemies to be the

evil? The answer is, that we must do good to our seeming and real good

friends, and evil to our seeming and real evil enemies--good to the good, evil

to the evil. But ought we to render evil for evil at all, when to do so will only

make men more evil? Can justice produce injustice any more than the art of

horsemanship  can  make  bad  horsemen,  or  heat  produce  cold?  The  final

conclusion is, that no sage or poet ever said that the just return evil for evil;

this was a maxim of some rich and mighty man, Periander, Perdiccas, or

Ismenias the Theban (about B.C. 398-381)...


  Thus the first stage of aphoristic or unconscious morality is shown to beinadequate to the wants of the age; the authority of the poets is set aside, and

through the winding mazes of dialectic we make an approach to the Christian

precept of forgiveness of injuries. Similar words are applied by the Persian

mystic poet to the Divine being when the questioning spirit is stirred within

him:--'If because I do evil, Thou punishest me by evil, what is the difference

between Thee and me?' In this both Plato and Kheyam rise above the level of

many Christian (?) theologians. The first definition of justice easily passes

into the second; for the simple words 'to speak the truth and pay your debts' is

substituted the more abstract 'to do good to your friends and harm to your

enemies.' Either of these explanations gives a sufficient rule of life for plain

men, but they both fall short of the precision of philosophy. We may note in

passing the antiquity of casuistry, which not only arises out of the conflict of

established principles in particular cases, but also out of the effort to attain

them, and is prior as well as posterior to our fundamental notions of morality.

The 'interrogation' of moral ideas; the appeal to the authority of Homer; the

conclusion  that  the  maxim,  'Do  good  to  your  friends  and  harm  to  your

enemies,' being erroneous, could not have been the word of any great man,

are all of them very characteristic of the Platonic Socrates.


  ...Here Thrasymachus, who has made several attempts to interrupt, but

has hitherto been kept in order by the company, takes advantage of a pause

and  rushes  into  the  arena,  beginning,  like  a  savage  animal,  with  a  roar.

'Socrates,' he says, 'what folly is this?--Why do you agree to be vanquished

by one another in a pretended argument?' He then prohibits all the ordinary

definitions of justice; to which Socrates replies that he cannot tell how many

twelve is, if he is forbidden to say 2 x 6, or 3 x 4, or 6 x 2, or 4 x 3. At first

Thrasymachus is reluctant to argue; but at length, with a promise of payment

on the part of the company and of praise from Socrates, he is induced to open

the  game.  'Listen,'  he  says,  'my  answer  is  that  might  is  right,  justice  the

interest of the stronger: now praise me.' Let me understand you first. Do you

mean that because Polydamas the wrestler, who is stronger than we are, finds

the eating of beef for his interest, the eating of beef is also for our interest,

who are not so strong? Thrasymachus is indignant at the illustration, and in

pompous words, apparently intended to restore dignity to the argument, he

explains his meaning to be that the rulers make laws for their own interests.

But suppose, says Socrates, that the ruler or stronger makes a mistake--then

the interest of the stronger is not his interest. Thrasymachus is saved fromthis speedy downfall by his disciple Cleitophon, who introduces the word

'thinks;'--not the actual interest of the ruler, but what he thinks or what seems

to be his interest, is justice. The contradiction is escaped by the unmeaning

evasion: for though his real and apparent interests may differ, what the ruler

thinks to be his interest will always remain what he thinks to be his interest.


  Of course this was not the original assertion, nor is the new interpretation

accepted by Thrasymachus himself. But Socrates is not disposed to quarrel

about words, if, as he significantly insinuates, his adversary has changed his

mind. In what follows Thrasymachus does in fact withdraw his admission

that the ruler may make a mistake, for he affirms that the ruler as a ruler is

infallible. Socrates is quite ready to accept the new position, which he equally

turns against Thrasymachus by the help of the analogy of the arts. Every art

or science has an interest, but this interest is to be distinguished from the

accidental interest of the artist, and is only concerned with the good of the

things or persons which come under the art. And justice has an interest which

is the interest not of the ruler or judge, but of those who come under his

sway.


    Thrasymachus  is  on  the  brink  of  the  inevitable  conclusion,  when  he

makes a bold diversion. 'Tell me, Socrates,' he says, 'have you a nurse?' What

a question! Why do you ask? 'Because, if you have, she neglects you and lets

you go about drivelling, and has not even taught you to know the shepherd

from the sheep. For you fancy that shepherds and rulers never think of their

own interest, but only of their sheep or subjects, whereas the truth is that they

fatten them for their use, sheep and subjects alike. And experience proves

that in every relation of life the just man is the loser and the unjust the gainer,

especially where injustice is on the grand scale, which is quite another thing

from the petty rogueries of swindlers and burglars and robbers of temples.

The language of men proves this--our 'gracious' and 'blessed' tyrant and the

like--all which tends to show (1) that justice is the interest of the stronger;

and (2) that injustice is more profitable and also stronger than justice.'


    Thrasymachus, who is better at a speech than at a close argument, having

deluged the company with words, has a mind to escape. But the others will

not let him go, and Socrates adds a humble but earnest request that he will

not desert them at such a crisis of their fate. 'And what can I do more foryou?' he says; 'would you have me put the words bodily into your souls?' God

forbid! replies Socrates; but we want you to be consistent in the use of terms,

and not to employ 'physician' in an exact sense, and then again 'shepherd' or

'ruler' in an inexact,--if the words are strictly taken, the ruler and the shepherd

look only to the good of their people or flocks and not to their own: whereas

you insist that rulers are solely actuated by love of office. 'No doubt about it,'

replies Thrasymachus. Then why are they paid? Is not the reason, that their

interest  is  not  comprehended  in  their  art,  and  is  therefore  the  concern  of

another  art,  the  art  of  pay,  which  is  common  to  the  arts  in  general,  and

therefore not identical with any one of them? Nor would any man be a ruler

unless he were induced by the hope of reward or the fear of punishment;--the

reward is money or honour, the punishment is the necessity of being ruled by

a man worse than himself. And if a State (or Church) were composed entirely

of good men, they would be affected by the last motive only; and there would

be as much 'nolo episcopari' as there is at present of the opposite...


  The  satire  on  existing  governments  is  heightened  by  the  simple  and

apparently incidental manner in which the last remark is introduced. There is

a similar irony in the argument that the governors of mankind do not like

being in office, and that therefore they demand pay.


    ...Enough  of  this:  the  other  assertion  of  Thrasymachus  is  far  more

important--that the unjust life is more gainful than the just. Now, as you and

I, Glaucon, are not convinced by him, we must reply to him; but if we try to

compare their respective gains we shall want a judge to decide for us; we had

better therefore proceed by making mutual admissions of the truth to one

another.


    Thrasymachus had asserted that perfect injustice was more gainful than

perfect justice, and after a little hesitation he is induced by Socrates to admit

the  still  greater  paradox  that  injustice  is  virtue  and  justice  vice.  Socrates

praises his frankness, and assumes the attitude of one whose only wish is to

understand the meaning of his opponents. At the same time he is weaving a

net  in  which  Thrasymachus  is  finally  enclosed.  The  admission  is  elicited

from him that the just man seeks to gain an advantage over the unjust only,

but not over the just, while the unjust would gain an advantage over either.

Socrates, in order to test this statement, employs once more the favouriteanalogy of the arts. The musician, doctor, skilled artist of any sort, does not

seek to gain more than the skilled, but only more than the unskilled (that is to

say, he works up to a rule, standard, law, and does not exceed it), whereas the

unskilled makes random efforts at excess. Thus the skilled falls on the side of

the good, and the unskilled on the side of the evil, and the just is the skilled,

and the unjust is the unskilled.


  There was great difficulty in bringing Thrasymachus to the point; the day

was hot and he was streaming with perspiration, and for the first time in his

life he was seen to blush. But his other thesis that injustice was stronger than

justice  has  not  yet  been  refuted,  and  Socrates  now  proceeds  to  the

consideration of this, which, with the assistance of Thrasymachus, he hopes

to clear up; the latter is at first churlish, but in the judicious hands of Socrates

is soon restored to good-humour: Is there not honour among thieves? Is not

the strength of injustice only a remnant of justice? Is not absolute injustice

absolute weakness also? A house that is divided against itself cannot stand;

two men who quarrel detract from one another's strength, and he who is at

war  with  himself  is  the  enemy  of  himself  and  the  gods.  Not  wickedness

therefore, but semi-wickedness flourishes in states, --a remnant of good is

needed in order to make union in action possible,-- there is no kingdom of

evil in this world.


  Another question has not been answered: Is the just or the unjust the

happier? To this we reply, that every art has an end and an excellence or

virtue by which the end is accomplished. And is not the end of the soul

happiness,  and  justice  the  excellence  of  the  soul  by  which  happiness  is

attained?  Justice  and  happiness  being  thus  shown  to  be  inseparable,  the

question whether the just or the unjust is the happier has disappeared.


    Thrasymachus replies: 'Let this be your entertainment, Socrates, at the

festival  of  Bendis.'  Yes;  and  a  very  good  entertainment  with  which  your

kindness has supplied me, now that you have left off scolding. And yet not a

good  entertainment--but  that  was  my  own  fault,  for  I  tasted  of  too  many

things. First of all the nature of justice was the subject of our enquiry, and

then whether justice is virtue and wisdom, or evil and folly; and then the

comparative advantages of just and unjust: and the sum of all is that I know

not what justice is; how then shall I know whether the just is happy or not?...  Thus the sophistical fabric has been demolished, chiefly by appealing to

the  analogy  of  the  arts.  'Justice  is  like  the  arts  (1)  in  having  no  external

interest, and (2) in not aiming at excess, and (3) justice is to happiness what

the implement of the workman is to his work.' At this the modern reader is

apt to stumble, because he forgets that Plato is writing in an age when the arts

and  the  virtues,  like  the  moral  and  intellectual  faculties,  were  still

undistinguished. Among early enquirers into the nature of human action the

arts helped to fill up the void of speculation; and at first the comparison of the

arts and the virtues was not perceived by them to be fallacious. They only

saw the points of agreement in them and not the points of difference. Virtue,

like art, must take means to an end; good manners are both an art and a

virtue; character is naturally described under the image of a statue; and there

are many other figures of speech which are readily transferred from art to

morals. The next generation cleared up these perplexities; or at least supplied

after ages with a further analysis of them. The contemporaries of Plato were

in  a  state  of  transition,  and  had  not  yet  fully  realized  the  common-sense

distinction  of  Aristotle,  that  'virtue  is  concerned  with  action,  art  with

production'  (Nic.  Eth.),  or  that  'virtue  implies  intention  and  constancy  of

purpose,' whereas 'art requires knowledge only'. And yet in the absurdities

which follow from some uses of the analogy, there seems to be an intimation

conveyed  that  virtue  is  more  than  art.  This  is  implied  in  the  reductio  ad

absurdum that 'justice is a thief,' and in the dissatisfaction which Socrates

expresses at the final result.


  The expression 'an art of pay' which is described as 'common to all the

arts'  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  ordinary  use  of  language.  Nor  is  it

employed  elsewhere  either  by  Plato  or  by  any  other  Greek  writer.  It  is

suggested by the argument, and seems to extend the conception of art to

doing as well as making. Another flaw or inaccuracy of language may be

noted in the words 'men who are injured are made more unjust.' For those

who  are  injured  are  not  necessarily  made  worse,  but  only  harmed  or  ill-

treated.


  The second of the three arguments, 'that the just does not aim at excess,'

has a real meaning, though wrapped up in an enigmatical form. That the good

is of the nature of the finite is a peculiarly Hellenic sentiment, which may be

compared with the language of those modern writers who speak of virtue asfitness, and of freedom as obedience to law. The mathematical or logical

notion  of  limit  easily  passes  into  an  ethical  one,  and  even  finds  a

mythological expression in the conception of envy (Greek). Ideas of measure,

equality, order, unity, proportion, still linger in the writings of moralists; and

the  true  spirit  of  the  fine  arts  is  better  conveyed  by  such  terms  than  by

superlatives.


  'When workmen strive to do better than well, They do confound their skill

in covetousness.' (King John.)


  The harmony of the soul and body, and of the parts of the soul with one

another, a harmony 'fairer than that of musical notes,' is the true Hellenic

mode of conceiving the perfection of human nature.


  In what may be called the epilogue of the discussion with Thrasymachus,

Plato  argues  that  evil  is  not  a  principle  of  strength,  but  of  discord  and

dissolution,  just  touching  the  question  which  has  been  often  treated  in

modern times by theologians and philosophers, of the negative nature of evil.

In the last argument we trace the germ of the Aristotelian doctrine of an end

and a virtue directed towards the end, which again is suggested by the arts.

The  final  reconcilement  of  justice  and  happiness  and  the  identity  of  the

individual and the State are also intimated. Socrates reassumes the character

of a 'know-nothing;' at the same time he appears to be not wholly satisfied

with  the  manner  in  which  the  argument  has  been  conducted.  Nothing  is

concluded; but the tendency of the dialectical process, here as always, is to

enlarge our conception of ideas, and to widen their application to human life.


  BOOK II. Thrasymachus is pacified, but the intrepid Glaucon insists on

continuing  the  argument.  He  is  not  satisfied  with  the  indirect  manner  in

which, at the end of the last book, Socrates had disposed of the question

'Whether the just or the unjust is the happier.' He begins by dividing goods

into  three  classes:--first,  goods  desirable  in  themselves;  secondly,  goods

desirable in themselves and for their results; thirdly, goods desirable for their

results only. He then asks Socrates in which of the three classes he would

place justice. In the second class, replies Socrates, among goods desirable for

themselves and also for their results. 'Then the world in general are of another

mind, for they say that justice belongs to the troublesome class of goodswhich are desirable for their results only. Socrates answers that this is the

doctrine  of  Thrasymachus  which  he  rejects.  Glaucon  thinks  that

Thrasymachus  was  too  ready  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  the  charmer,  and

proposes to consider the nature of justice and injustice in themselves and

apart from the results and rewards of them which the world is always dinning

in  his  ears.  He  will  first  of  all  speak  of  the  nature  and  origin  of  justice;

secondly, of the manner in which men view justice as a necessity and not a

good; and thirdly, he will prove the reasonableness of this view.


  'To do injustice is said to be a good; to suffer injustice an evil. As the evil

is discovered by experience to be greater than the good, the sufferers, who

cannot also be doers, make a compact that they will have neither, and this

compact or mean is called justice, but is really the impossibility of doing

injustice. No one would observe such a compact if he were not obliged. Let

us suppose that the just and unjust have two rings, like that of Gyges in the

well-known story, which make them invisible, and then no difference will

appear in them, for every one will do evil if he can. And he who abstains will

be regarded by the world as a fool for his pains. Men may praise him in

public out of fear for themselves, but they will laugh at him in their hearts

(Cp. Gorgias.)


  'And now let us frame an ideal of the just and unjust. Imagine the unjust

man to be master of his craft, seldom making mistakes and easily correcting

them; having gifts of money, speech, strength--the greatest villain bearing the

highest character: and at his side let us place the just in his nobleness and

simplicity--being,  not  seeming--without  name  or  reward--  clothed  in  his

justice only--the best of men who is thought to be the worst, and let him die

as he has lived. I might add (but I would rather put the rest into the mouth of

the  panegyrists  of  injustice--they  will  tell  you)  that  the  just  man  will  be

scourged,  racked,  bound,  will  have  his  eyes  put  out,  and  will  at  last  be

crucified (literally impaled)--and all this because he ought to have preferred

seeming  to  being.  How  different  is  the  case  of  the  unjust  who  clings  to

appearance as the true reality! His high character makes him a ruler; he can

marry where he likes, trade where he likes, help his friends and hurt his

enemies; having got rich by dishonesty he can worship the gods better, and

will therefore be more loved by them than the just.'  I was thinking what to answer, when Adeimantus joined in the already

unequal fray. He considered that the most important point of all had been

omitted:--'Men  are  taught  to  be  just  for  the  sake  of  rewards;  parents  and

guardians make reputation the incentive to virtue. And other advantages are

promised by them of a more solid kind, such as wealthy marriages and high

offices. There are the pictures in Homer and Hesiod of fat sheep and heavy

fleeces, rich corn-fields and trees toppling with fruit, which the gods provide

in this life for the just. And the Orphic poets add a similar picture of another.

The  heroes  of  Musaeus  and  Eumolpus  lie  on  couches  at  a  festival,  with

garlands on their heads, enjoying as the meed of virtue a paradise of immortal

drunkenness. Some go further, and speak of a fair posterity in the third and

fourth generation. But the wicked they bury in a slough and make them carry

water in a sieve: and in this life they attribute to them the infamy which

Glaucon was assuming to be the lot of the just who are supposed to be unjust.


  'Take another kind of argument which is found both in poetry and prose:--

"Virtue,"  as  Hesiod  says,  "is  honourable  but  difficult,  vice  is  easy  and

profitable."  You  may  often  see  the  wicked  in  great  prosperity  and  the

righteous afflicted by the will of heaven. And mendicant prophets knock at

rich men's doors, promising to atone for the sins of themselves or their fathers

in an easy fashion with sacrifices and festive games, or with charms and

invocations to get rid of an enemy good or bad by divine help and at a small

charge;--they  appeal  to  books  professing  to  be  written  by  Musaeus  and

Orpheus, and carry away the minds of whole cities, and promise to "get souls

out of purgatory;" and if we refuse to listen to them, no one knows what will

happen to us.


  'When a lively-minded ingenuous youth hears all this, what will be his

conclusion?  "Will  he,"  in  the  language  of  Pindar,  "make  justice  his  high

tower, or fortify himself with crooked deceit?" Justice, he reflects, without

the appearance of justice, is misery and ruin; injustice has the promise of a

glorious  life.  Appearance  is  master  of  truth  and  lord  of  happiness.  To

appearance then I will turn,--I will put on the show of virtue and trail behind

me the fox of Archilochus. I hear some one saying that "wickedness is not

easily concealed," to which I reply that "nothing great is easy." Union and

force and rhetoric will do much; and if men say that they cannot prevail over

the gods, still how do we know that there are gods? Only from the poets, whoacknowledge that they may be appeased by sacrifices. Then why not sin and

pay for indulgences out of your sin? For if the righteous are only unpunished,

still they have no further reward, while the wicked may be unpunished and

have the pleasure of sinning too. But what of the world below? Nay, says the

argument, there are atoning powers who will set that matter right, as the

poets, who are the sons of the gods, tell us; and this is confirmed by the

authority of the State.


  'How  can  we  resist  such  arguments  in  favour  of  injustice?  Add  good

manners, and, as the wise tell us, we shall make the best of both worlds. Who

that  is  not  a  miserable  caitiff  will  refrain  from  smiling  at  the  praises  of

justice? Even if a man knows the better part he will not be angry with others;

for he knows also that more than human virtue is needed to save a man, and

that he only praises justice who is incapable of injustice.


  'The origin of the evil is that all men from the beginning, heroes, poets,

instructors of youth, have always asserted "the temporal dispensation," the

honours and profits of justice. Had we been taught in early youth the power

of justice and injustice inherent in the soul, and unseen by any human or

divine eye, we should not have needed others to be our guardians, but every

one would have been the guardian of himself. This is what I want you to

show, Socrates;--other men use arguments which rather tend to strengthen the

position of Thrasymachus that "might is right;" but from you I expect better

things. And please, as Glaucon said, to exclude reputation; let the just be

thought unjust and the unjust just, and do you still prove to us the superiority

of justice'...


  The  thesis,  which  for  the  sake  of  argument  has  been  maintained  by

Glaucon, is the converse of that of Thrasymachus--not right is the interest of

the stronger, but right is the necessity of the weaker. Starting from the same

premises he carries the analysis of society a step further back;--might is still

right,  but  the  might  is  the  weakness  of  the  many  combined  against  the

strength of the few.


  There have been theories in modern as well as in ancient times which

have a family likeness to the speculations of Glaucon; e.g. that power is the

foundation of right; or that a monarch has a divine right to govern well or ill;or that virtue is self-love or the love of power; or that war is the natural state

of man; or that private vices are public benefits. All such theories have a kind

of  plausibility  from  their  partial  agreement  with  experience.  For  human

nature oscillates between good and evil, and the motives of actions and the

origin of institutions may be explained to a certain extent on either hypothesis

according  to  the  character  or  point  of  view  of  a  particular  thinker.  The

obligation of maintaining authority under all circumstances and sometimes by

rather questionable means is felt strongly and has become a sort of instinct

among  civilized  men.  The  divine  right  of  kings,  or  more  generally  of

governments,  is  one  of  the  forms  under  which  this  natural  feeling  is

expressed. Nor again is there any evil which has not some accompaniment of

good or pleasure; nor any good which is free from some alloy of evil; nor any

noble or generous thought which may not be attended by a shadow or the

ghost of a shadow of self-interest or of self- love. We know that all human

actions are imperfect; but we do not therefore attribute them to the worse

rather than to the better motive or principle. Such a philosophy is both foolish

and false, like that opinion of the clever rogue who assumes all other men to

be like himself. And theories of this sort do not represent the real nature of

the State, which is based on a vague sense of right gradually corrected and

enlarged by custom and law (although capable also of perversion), any more

than they describe the origin of society, which is to be sought in the family

and in the social and religious feelings of man. Nor do they represent the

average  character  of  individuals,  which  cannot  be  explained  simply  on  a

theory of evil, but has always a counteracting element of good. And as men

become  better  such  theories  appear  more  and  more  untruthful  to  them,

because  they  are  more  conscious  of  their  own  disinterestedness.  A  little

experience may make a man a cynic; a great deal will bring him back to a

truer and kindlier view of the mixed nature of himself and his fellow men.


  The two brothers ask Socrates to prove to them that the just is happy

when  they  have  taken  from  him  all  that  in  which  happiness  is  ordinarily

supposed to consist. Not that there is (1) any absurdity in the attempt to frame

a notion of justice apart from circumstances. For the ideal must always be a

paradox when compared with the ordinary conditions of human life. Neither

the Stoical ideal nor the Christian ideal is true as a fact, but they may serve as

a basis of education, and may exercise an ennobling influence. An ideal is

none the worse because 'some one has made the discovery' that no such idealwas ever realized. And in a few exceptional individuals who are raised above

the ordinary level of humanity, the ideal of happiness may be realized in

death  and  misery.  This  may  be  the  state  which  the  reason  deliberately

approves, and which the utilitarian as well as every other moralist may be

bound in certain cases to prefer.


  Nor again, (2) must we forget that Plato, though he agrees generally with

the view implied in the argument of the two brothers, is not expressing his

own final conclusion, but rather seeking to dramatize one of the aspects of

ethical truth. He is developing his idea gradually in a series of positions or

situations. He is exhibiting Socrates for the first time undergoing the Socratic

interrogation.  Lastly,  (3)  the  word  'happiness'  involves  some  degree  of

confusion  because  associated  in  the  language  of  modern  philosophy  with

conscious pleasure or satisfaction, which was not equally present to his mind.


  Glaucon has been drawing a picture of the misery of the just and the

happiness of the unjust, to which the misery of the tyrant in Book IX is the

answer and parallel. And still the unjust must appear just; that is 'the homage

which vice pays to virtue.' But now Adeimantus, taking up the hint which had

been  already  given  by  Glaucon,  proceeds  to  show  that  in  the  opinion  of

mankind justice is regarded only for the sake of rewards and reputation, and

points  out  the  advantage  which  is  given  to  such  arguments  as  those  of

Thrasymachus and Glaucon by the conventional morality of mankind. He

seems to feel the difficulty of 'justifying the ways of God to man.' Both the

brothers  touch  upon  the  question,  whether  the  morality  of  actions  is

determined by their consequences; and both of them go beyond the position

of  Socrates,  that  justice  belongs  to  the  class  of  goods  not  desirable  for

themselves only, but desirable for themselves and for their results, to which

he recalls them. In their attempt to view justice as an internal principle, and in

their condemnation of the poets, they anticipate him. The common life of

Greece is not enough for them; they must penetrate deeper into the nature of

things.


  It has been objected that justice is honesty in the sense of Glaucon and

Adeimantus, but is taken by Socrates to mean all virtue. May we not more

truly say that the old-fashioned notion of justice is enlarged by Socrates, and

becomes equivalent to universal order or well-being, first in the State, andsecondly in the individual? He has found a new answer to his old question

(Protag.), 'whether the virtues are one or many,' viz. that one is the ordering

principle of the three others. In seeking to establish the purely internal nature

of justice, he is met by the fact that man is a social being, and he tries to

harmonise  the  two  opposite  theses  as  well  as  he  can.  There  is  no  more

inconsistency in this than was inevitable in his age and country; there is no

use in turning upon him the cross lights of modern philosophy, which, from

some other point of view, would appear equally inconsistent. Plato does not

give the final solution of philosophical questions for us; nor can he be judged

of by our standard.


  The remainder of the Republic is developed out of the question of the

sons of Ariston. Three points are deserving of remark in what immediately

follows:--First, that the answer of Socrates is altogether indirect. He does not

say that happiness consists in the contemplation of the idea of justice, and

still less will he be tempted to affirm the Stoical paradox that the just man can

be happy on the rack. But first he dwells on the difficulty of the problem and

insists on restoring man to his natural condition, before he will answer the

question at all. He too will frame an ideal, but his ideal comprehends not only

abstract justice, but the whole relations of man. Under the fanciful illustration

of the large letters he implies that he will only look for justice in society, and

that from the State he will proceed to the individual. His answer in substance

amounts to this,--that under favourable conditions, i.e. in the perfect State,

justice  and  happiness  will  coincide,  and  that  when  justice  has  been  once

found, happiness may be left to take care of itself. That he falls into some

degree of inconsistency, when in the tenth book he claims to have got rid of

the rewards and honours of justice, may be admitted; for he has left those

which exist in the perfect State. And the philosopher 'who retires under the

shelter of a wall' can hardly have been esteemed happy by him, at least not in

this world. Still he maintains the true attitude of moral action. Let a man do

his duty first, without asking whether he will be happy or not, and happiness

will be the inseparable accident which attends him. 'Seek ye first the kingdom

of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.'


  Secondly, it may be remarked that Plato preserves the genuine character

of  Greek  thought  in  beginning  with  the  State  and  in  going  on  to  the

individual.  First  ethics,  then  politics--this  is  the  order  of  ideas  to  us;  thereverse is the order of history. Only after many struggles of thought does the

individual assert his right as a moral being. In early ages he is not ONE, but

one of many, the citizen of a State which is prior to him; and he has no notion

of good or evil apart from the law of his country or the creed of his church.

And to this type he is constantly tending to revert, whenever the influence of

custom, or of party spirit, or the recollection of the past becomes too strong

for him.


    Thirdly, we may observe the confusion or identification of the individual

and the State, of ethics and politics, which pervades early Greek speculation,

and even in modern times retains a certain degree of influence. The subtle

difference between the collective and individual action of mankind seems to

have escaped early thinkers, and we too are sometimes in danger of forgetting

the conditions of united human action, whenever we either elevate politics

into ethics, or lower ethics to the standard of politics. The good man and the

good citizen only coincide in the perfect State; and this perfection cannot be

attained  by  legislation  acting  upon  them  from  without,  but,  if  at  all,  by

education fashioning them from within.


  ...Socrates praises the sons of Ariston, 'inspired offspring of the renowned

hero,' as the elegiac poet terms them; but he does not understand how they

can argue so eloquently on behalf of injustice while their character shows that

they are uninfluenced by their own arguments. He knows not how to answer

them,  although  he  is  afraid  of  deserting  justice  in  the  hour  of  need.  He

therefore makes a condition, that having weak eyes he shall be allowed to

read the large letters first and then go on to the smaller, that is, he must look

for  justice  in  the  State  first,  and  will  then  proceed  to  the  individual.

Accordingly he begins to construct the State.


  Society arises out of the wants of man. His first want is food; his second a

house;  his  third  a  coat.  The  sense  of  these  needs  and  the  possibility  of

satisfying them by exchange, draw individuals together on the same spot; and

this is the beginning of a State, which we take the liberty to invent, although

necessity is the real inventor. There must be first a husbandman, secondly a

builder, thirdly a weaver, to which may be added a cobbler. Four or five

citizens at least are required to make a city. Now men have different natures,

and one man will do one thing better than many; and business waits for noman. Hence there must be a division of labour into different employments;

into wholesale and retail trade; into workers, and makers of workmen's tools;

into shepherds and husbandmen. A city which includes all this will have far

exceeded the limit of four or five, and yet not be very large. But then again

imports will be required, and imports necessitate exports, and this implies

variety of produce in order to attract the taste of purchasers; also merchants

and ships. In the city too we must have a market and money and retail trades;

otherwise buyers and sellers will never meet, and the valuable time of the

producers will be wasted in vain efforts at exchange. If we add hired servants

the  State  will  be  complete.  And  we  may  guess  that  somewhere  in  the

intercourse of the citizens with one another justice and injustice will appear.


  Here follows a rustic picture of their way of life. They spend their days in

houses which they have built for themselves; they make their own clothes

and produce their own corn and wine. Their principal food is meal and flour,

and they drink in moderation. They live on the best of terms with each other,

and take care not to have too many children. 'But,' said Glaucon, interposing,

'are they not to have a relish?' Certainly; they will have salt and olives and

cheese, vegetables and fruits, and chestnuts to roast at the fire. ''Tis a city of

pigs, Socrates.' Why, I replied, what do you want more? 'Only the comforts

of life,--sofas and tables, also sauces and sweets.' I see; you want not only a

State, but a luxurious State; and possibly in the more complex frame we may

sooner find justice and injustice. Then the fine arts must go to work--every

conceivable instrument and ornament of luxury will be wanted. There will be

dancers, painters, sculptors, musicians, cooks, barbers, tire-women, nurses,

artists; swineherds and neatherds too for the animals, and physicians to cure

the disorders of which luxury is the source. To feed all these superfluous

mouths we shall need a part of our neighbour's land, and they will want a part

of ours. And this is the origin of war, which may be traced to the same causes

as other political evils. Our city will now require the slight addition of a

camp, and the citizen will be converted into a soldier. But then again our old

doctrine of the division of labour must not be forgotten. The art of war cannot

be learned in a day, and there must be a natural aptitude for military duties.

There will be some warlike natures who have this aptitude--dogs keen of

scent, swift of foot to pursue, and strong of limb to fight. And as spirit is the

foundation of courage, such natures, whether of men or animals, will be full

of spirit. But these spirited natures are apt to bite and devour one another; theunion of gentleness to friends and fierceness against enemies appears to be an

impossibility, and the guardian of a State requires both qualities. Who then

can be a guardian? The image of the dog suggests an answer. For dogs are

gentle  to  friends  and  fierce  to  strangers.  Your  dog  is  a  philosopher  who

judges by the rule of knowing or not knowing; and philosophy, whether in

man or beast, is the parent of gentleness. The human watchdogs must be

philosophers or lovers of learning which will make them gentle. And how are

they to be learned without education?


  But what shall their education be? Is any better than the old-fashioned

sort which is comprehended under the name of music and gymnastic? Music

includes literature, and literature is of two kinds, true and false. 'What do you

mean?'  he  said.  I  mean  that  children  hear  stories  before  they  learn

gymnastics, and that the stories are either untrue, or have at most one or two

grains of truth in a bushel of falsehood. Now early life is very impressible,

and children ought not to learn what they will have to unlearn when they

grow up; we must therefore have a censorship of nursery tales, banishing

some and keeping others. Some of them are very improper, as we may see in

the great instances of Homer and Hesiod, who not only tell lies but bad lies;

stories about Uranus and Saturn, which are immoral as well as false, and

which should never be spoken of to young persons, or indeed at all; or, if at

all, then in a mystery, after the sacrifice, not of an Eleusinian pig, but of some

unprocurable animal. Shall our youth be encouraged to beat their fathers by

the example of Zeus, or our citizens be incited to quarrel by hearing or seeing

representations of strife among the gods? Shall they listen to the narrative of

Hephaestus binding his mother, and of Zeus sending him flying for helping

her  when  she  was  beaten?  Such  tales  may  possibly  have  a  mystical

interpretation, but the young are incapable of understanding allegory. If any

one asks what tales are to be allowed, we will answer that we are legislators

and not book-makers; we only lay down the principles according to which

books are to be written; to write them is the duty of others.


  And our first principle is, that God must be represented as he is; not as the

author of all things, but of good only. We will not suffer the poets to say that

he is the steward of good and evil, or that he has two casks full of destinies;--

or that Athene and Zeus incited Pandarus to break the treaty; or that God

caused the sufferings of Niobe, or of Pelops, or the Trojan war; or that hemakes men sin when he wishes to destroy them. Either these were not the

actions  of  the  gods,  or  God  was  just,  and  men  were  the  better  for  being

punished.  But  that  the  deed  was  evil,  and  God  the  author,  is  a  wicked,

suicidal fiction which we will allow no one, old or young, to utter. This is our

first and great principle--God is the author of good only.


  And the second principle is like unto it:--With God is no variableness or

change of form. Reason teaches us this; for if we suppose a change in God,

he must be changed either by another or by himself. By another?--but the best

works of nature and art and the noblest qualities of mind are least liable to be

changed by any external force. By himself?--but he cannot change for the

better; he will hardly change for the worse. He remains for ever fairest and

best in his own image. Therefore we refuse to listen to the poets who tell us

of Here begging in the likeness of a priestess or of other deities who prowl

about at night in strange disguises; all that blasphemous nonsense with which

mothers fool the manhood out of their children must be suppressed. But some

one will say that God, who is himself unchangeable, may take a form in

relation to us. Why should he? For gods as well as men hate the lie in the

soul, or principle of falsehood; and as for any other form of lying which is

used for a purpose and is regarded as innocent in certain exceptional cases--

what need have the gods of this? For they are not ignorant of antiquity like

the poets, nor are they afraid of their enemies, nor is any madman a friend of

theirs. God then is true, he is absolutely true; he changes not, he deceives not,

by day or night, by word or sign. This is our second great principle--God is

true.  Away  with  the  lying  dream  of  Agamemnon  in  Homer,  and  the

accusation of Thetis against Apollo in Aeschylus...


  In order to give clearness to his conception of the State, Plato proceeds to

trace  the  first  principles  of  mutual  need  and  of  division  of  labour  in  an

imaginary  community  of  four  or  five  citizens.  Gradually  this  community

increases;  the  division  of  labour  extends  to  countries;  imports  necessitate

exports; a medium of exchange is required, and retailers sit in the market-

place to save the time of the producers. These are the steps by which Plato

constructs the first or primitive State, introducing the elements of political

economy by the way. As he is going to frame a second or civilized State, the

simple naturally comes before the complex. He indulges, like Rousseau, in a

picture  of  primitive  life--an  idea  which  has  indeed  often  had  a  powerfulinfluence on the imagination of mankind, but he does not seriously mean to

say that one is better than the other (Politicus); nor can any inference be

drawn from the description of the first state taken apart from the second, such

as Aristotle appears to draw in the Politics. We should not interpret a Platonic

dialogue any more than a poem or a parable in too literal or matter-of-fact a

style. On the other hand, when we compare the lively fancy of Plato with the

dried-up abstractions of modern treatises on philosophy, we are compelled to

say with Protagoras, that the 'mythus is more interesting' (Protag.)


  Several interesting remarks which in modern times would have a place in

a treatise on Political Economy are scattered up and down the writings of

Plato:  especially  Laws,  Population;  Free  Trade;  Adulteration;  Wills  and

Bequests;  Begging;  Eryxias,  (though  not  Plato's),  Value  and  Demand;

Republic, Division of Labour. The last subject, and also the origin of Retail

Trade, is treated with admirable lucidity in the second book of the Republic.

But Plato never combined his economic ideas into a system, and never seems

to have recognized that Trade is one of the great motive powers of the State

and of the world. He would make retail traders only of the inferior sort of

citizens (Rep., Laws), though he remarks, quaintly enough (Laws), that 'if

only the best men and the best women everywhere were compelled to keep

taverns for a time or to carry on retail trade, etc., then we should knew how

pleasant and agreeable all these things are.'


  The  disappointment  of  Glaucon  at  the  'city  of  pigs,'  the  ludicrous

description  of  the  ministers  of  luxury  in  the  more  refined  State,  and  the

afterthought of the necessity of doctors, the illustration of the nature of the

guardian  taken  from  the  dog,  the  desirableness  of  offering  some  almost

unprocurable  victim  when  impure  mysteries  are  to  be  celebrated,  the

behaviour of Zeus to his father and of Hephaestus to his mother, are touches

of humour which have also a serious meaning. In speaking of education Plato

rather startles us by affirming that a child must be trained in falsehood first

and  in  truth  afterwards.  Yet  this  is  not  very  different  from  saying  that

children must be taught through the medium of imagination as well as reason;

that their minds can only develope gradually, and that there is much which

they must learn without understanding. This is also the substance of Plato's

view, though he must be acknowledged to have drawn the line somewhat

differently from modern ethical writers, respecting truth and falsehood. Tous, economies or accommodations would not be allowable unless they were

required  by  the  human  faculties  or  necessary  for  the  communication  of

knowledge to the simple and ignorant. We should insist that the word was

inseparable from the intention, and that we must not be 'falsely true,' i.e.

speak or act falsely in support of what was right or true. But Plato would

limit the use of fictions only by requiring that they should have a good moral

effect, and that such a dangerous weapon as falsehood should be employed

by the rulers alone and for great objects.


  A  Greek  in  the  age  of  Plato  attached  no  importance  to  the  question

whether  his  religion  was  an  historical  fact.  He  was  just  beginning  to  be

conscious that the past had a history; but he could see nothing beyond Homer

and  Hesiod.  Whether  their  narratives  were  true  or  false  did  not  seriously

affect the political or social life of Hellas. Men only began to suspect that

they were fictions when they recognised them to be immoral. And so in all

religions: the consideration of their morality comes first, afterwards the truth

of the documents in which they are recorded, or of the events natural or

supernatural which are told of them. But in modern times, and in Protestant

countries perhaps more than in Catholic, we have been too much inclined to

identify the historical with the moral; and some have refused to believe in

religion at all, unless a superhuman accuracy was discernible in every part of

the record. The facts of an ancient or religious history are amongst the most

important of all facts; but they are frequently uncertain, and we only learn the

true lesson which is to be gathered from them when we place ourselves above

them. These reflections tend to show that the difference between Plato and

ourselves,  though  not  unimportant,  is  not  so  great  as  might  at  first  sight

appear.  For  we  should  agree  with  him  in  placing  the  moral  before  the

historical  truth  of  religion;  and,  generally,  in  disregarding  those  errors  or

misstatements  of  fact  which  necessarily  occur  in  the  early  stages  of  all

religions. We know also that changes in the traditions of a country cannot be

made in a day; and are therefore tolerant of many things which science and

criticism would condemn.


  We note in passing that the allegorical interpretation of mythology, said

to have been first introduced as early as the sixth century before Christ by

Theagenes of Rhegium, was well established in the age of Plato, and here, as

in the Phaedrus, though for a different reason, was rejected by him. Thatanachronisms whether of religion or law, when men have reached another

stage of civilization, should be got rid of by fictions is in accordance with

universal  experience.  Great  is  the  art  of  interpretation;  and  by  a  natural

process, which when once discovered was always going on, what could not

be altered was explained away. And so without any palpable inconsistency

there existed side by side two forms of religion, the tradition inherited or

invented by the poets and the customary worship of the temple; on the other

hand, there was the religion of the philosopher, who was dwelling in the

heaven of ideas, but did not therefore refuse to offer a cock to Aesculapius, or

to  be  seen  saying  his  prayers  at  the  rising  of  the  sun.  At  length  the

antagonism between the popular and philosophical religion, never so great

among the Greeks as in our own age, disappeared, and was only felt like the

difference  between  the  religion  of  the  educated  and  uneducated  among

ourselves. The Zeus of Homer and Hesiod easily passed into the 'royal mind'

of  Plato  (Philebus);  the  giant  Heracles  became  the  knight-errant  and

benefactor of mankind. These and still more wonderful transformations were

readily effected by the ingenuity of Stoics and neo- Platonists in the two or

three centuries before and after Christ. The Greek and Roman religions were

gradually  permeated  by  the  spirit  of  philosophy;  having  lost  their  ancient

meaning, they were resolved into poetry and morality; and probably were

never purer than at the time of their decay, when their influence over the

world was waning.


  A singular conception which occurs towards the end of the book is the lie

in the soul; this is connected with the Platonic and Socratic doctrine that

involuntary ignorance is worse than voluntary. The lie in the soul is a true lie,

the corruption of the highest truth, the deception of the highest part of the

soul, from which he who is deceived has no power of delivering himself. For

example, to represent God as false or immoral, or, according to Plato, as

deluding men with appearances or as the author of evil; or again, to affirm

with Protagoras that 'knowledge is sensation,' or that 'being is becoming,' or

with Thrasymachus 'that might is right,' would have been regarded by Plato

as  a  lie  of  this  hateful  sort.  The  greatest  unconsciousness  of  the  greatest

untruth, e.g. if, in the language of the Gospels (John), 'he who was blind'

were  to  say  'I  see,'  is  another  aspect  of  the  state  of  mind  which  Plato  is

describing. The lie in the soul may be further compared with the sin against

the  Holy  Ghost  (Luke),  allowing  for  the  difference  between  Greek  andChristian modes of speaking. To this is opposed the lie in words, which is

only such a deception as may occur in a play or poem, or allegory or figure of

speech, or in any sort of accommodation,--which though useless to the gods

may  be  useful  to  men  in  certain  cases.  Socrates  is  here  answering  the

question  which  he  had  himself  raised  about  the  propriety  of  deceiving  a

madman; and he is also contrasting the nature of God and man. For God is

Truth, but mankind can only be true by appearing sometimes to be partial, or

false.  Reserving  for  another  place  the  greater  questions  of  religion  or

education,  we  may  note  further,  (1)  the  approval  of  the  old  traditional

education of Greece; (2) the preparation which Plato is making for the attack

on Homer and the poets; (3) the preparation which he is also making for the

use of economies in the State; (4) the contemptuous and at the same time

euphemistic manner in which here as below he alludes to the 'Chronique

Scandaleuse' of the gods.


  BOOK  III.  There  is  another  motive  in  purifying  religion,  which  is  to

banish fear; for no man can be courageous who is afraid of death, or who

believes  the  tales  which  are  repeated  by  the  poets  concerning  the  world

below.  They  must  be  gently  requested  not  to  abuse  hell;  they  may  be

reminded that their stories are both untrue and discouraging. Nor must they

be angry if we expunge obnoxious passages, such as the depressing words of

Achilles--'I would rather be a serving-man than rule over all the dead;' and

the verses which tell of the squalid mansions, the senseless shadows, the

flitting soul mourning over lost strength and youth, the soul with a gibber

going beneath the earth like smoke, or the souls of the suitors which flutter

about  like  bats.  The  terrors  and  horrors  of  Cocytus  and  Styx,  ghosts  and

sapless shades, and the rest of their Tartarean nomenclature, must vanish.

Such tales may have their use; but they are not the proper food for soldiers.

As little can we admit the sorrows and sympathies of the Homeric heroes:--

Achilles, the son of Thetis, in tears, throwing ashes on his head, or pacing up

and  down  the  sea-shore  in  distraction;  or  Priam,  the  cousin  of  the  gods,

crying aloud, rolling in the mire. A good man is not prostrated at the loss of

children  or  fortune.  Neither  is  death  terrible  to  him;  and  therefore

lamentations over the dead should not be practised by men of note; they

should be the concern of inferior persons only, whether women or men. Still

worse is the attribution of such weakness to the gods; as when the goddesses

say, 'Alas! my travail!' and worst of all, when the king of heaven himselflaments his inability to save Hector, or sorrows over the impending doom of

his dear Sarpedon. Such a character of God, if not ridiculed by our young

men, is likely to be imitated by them. Nor should our citizens be given to

excess of laughter--'Such violent delights' are followed by a violent re-action.

The description in the Iliad of the gods shaking their sides at the clumsiness

of Hephaestus will not be admitted by us. 'Certainly not.'


  Truth should have a high place among the virtues, for falsehood, as we

were saying, is useless to the gods, and only useful to men as a medicine. But

this employment of falsehood must remain a privilege of state; the common

man must not in return tell a lie to the ruler; any more than the patient would

tell a lie to his physician, or the sailor to his captain.


  In the next place our youth must be temperate, and temperance consists in

self-control and obedience to authority. That is a lesson which Homer teaches

in some places: 'The Achaeans marched on breathing prowess, in silent awe

of their leaders;'--but a very different one in other places: 'O heavy with wine,

who hast the eyes of a dog, but the heart of a stag.' Language of the latter

kind will not impress self-control on the minds of youth. The same may be

said about his praises of eating and drinking and his dread of starvation; also

about the verses in which he tells of the rapturous loves of Zeus and Here, or

of how Hephaestus once detained Ares and Aphrodite in a net on a similar

occasion. There is a nobler strain heard in the words:--'Endure, my soul, thou

hast endured worse.' Nor must we allow our citizens to receive bribes, or to

say, 'Gifts persuade the gods, gifts reverend kings;' or to applaud the ignoble

advice of Phoenix to Achilles that he should get money out of the Greeks

before he assisted them; or the meanness of Achilles himself in taking gifts

from Agamemnon; or his requiring a ransom for the body of Hector; or his

cursing  of  Apollo;  or  his  insolence  to  the  river-god  Scamander;  or  his

dedication to the dead Patroclus of his own hair which had been already

dedicated to the other river-god Spercheius; or his cruelty in dragging the

body of Hector round the walls, and slaying the captives at the pyre: such a

combination of meanness and cruelty in Cheiron's pupil is inconceivable. The

amatory  exploits  of  Peirithous  and  Theseus  are  equally  unworthy.  Either

these so- called sons of gods were not the sons of gods, or they were not such

as the poets imagine them, any more than the gods themselves are the authors

of evil. The youth who believes that such things are done by those who havethe blood of heaven flowing in their veins will be too ready to imitate their

example.


  Enough of gods and heroes;--what shall we say about men? What the

poets  and  story-tellers  say--that  the  wicked  prosper  and  the  righteous  are

afflicted, or that justice is another's gain? Such misrepresentations cannot be

allowed by us. But in this we are anticipating the definition of justice, and

had therefore better defer the enquiry.


  The subjects of poetry have been sufficiently treated; next follows style.

Now all poetry is a narrative of events past, present, or to come; and narrative

is of three kinds, the simple, the imitative, and a composition of the two. An

instance will make my meaning clear. The first scene in Homer is of the last

or mixed kind, being partly description and partly dialogue. But if you throw

the dialogue into the 'oratio obliqua,' the passage will run thus: The priest

came and prayed Apollo that the Achaeans might take Troy and have a safe

return if Agamemnon would only give him back his daughter; and the other

Greeks assented, but Agamemnon was wroth, and so on--The whole then

becomes descriptive, and the poet is the only speaker left; or, if you omit the

narrative, the whole becomes dialogue. These are the three styles--which of

them  is  to  be  admitted  into  our  State?  'Do  you  ask  whether  tragedy  and

comedy are to be admitted?' Yes, but also something more--Is it not doubtful

whether  our  guardians  are  to  be  imitators  at  all?  Or  rather,  has  not  the

question been already answered, for we have decided that one man cannot in

his life play many parts, any more than he can act both tragedy and comedy,

or be rhapsodist and actor at once? Human nature is coined into very small

pieces, and as our guardians have their own business already, which is the

care  of  freedom,  they  will  have  enough  to  do  without  imitating.  If  they

imitate they should imitate, not any meanness or baseness, but the good only;

for the mask which the actor wears is apt to become his face. We cannot

allow men to play the parts of women, quarrelling, weeping, scolding, or

boasting against the gods,--least of all when making love or in labour. They

must not represent slaves, or bullies, or cowards, drunkards, or madmen, or

blacksmiths, or neighing horses, or bellowing bulls, or sounding rivers, or a

raging sea. A good or wise man will be willing to perform good and wise

actions, but he will be ashamed to play an inferior part which he has never

practised; and he will prefer to employ the descriptive style with as littleimitation as possible. The man who has no self-respect, on the contrary, will

imitate anybody and anything; sounds of nature and cries of animals alike;

his whole performance will be imitation of gesture and voice. Now in the

descriptive style there are few changes, but in the dramatic there are a great

many.  Poets  and  musicians  use  either,  or  a  compound  of  both,  and  this

compound is very attractive to youth and their teachers as well as to the

vulgar. But our State in which one man plays one part only is not adapted for

complexity.  And  when  one  of  these  polyphonous  pantomimic  gentlemen

offers to exhibit himself and his poetry we will show him every observance

of respect, but at the same time tell him that there is no room for his kind in

our State; we prefer the rough, honest poet, and will not depart from our

original models (Laws).


  Next as to the music. A song or ode has three parts,--the subject, the

harmony, and the rhythm; of which the two last are dependent upon the first.

As we banished strains of lamentation, so we may now banish the mixed

Lydian  harmonies,  which  are  the  harmonies  of  lamentation;  and  as  our

citizens are to be temperate, we may also banish convivial harmonies, such as

the Ionian and pure Lydian. Two remain--the Dorian and Phrygian, the first

for war, the second for peace; the one expressive of courage, the other of

obedience or instruction or religious feeling. And as we reject varieties of

harmony,  we  shall  also  reject  the  many-stringed,  variously-  shaped

instruments which give utterance to them, and in particular the flute, which is

more complex than any of them. The lyre and the harp may be permitted in

the town, and the Pan's-pipe in the fields. Thus we have made a purgation of

music, and will now make a purgation of metres. These should be like the

harmonies, simple and suitable to the occasion. There are four notes of the

tetrachord, and there are three ratios of metre, 3/2, 2/2, 2/1, which have all

their characteristics, and the feet have different characteristics as well as the

rhythms. But about this you and I must ask Damon, the great musician, who

speaks, if I remember rightly, of a martial measure as well as of dactylic,

trochaic,  and  iambic  rhythms,  which  he  arranges  so  as  to  equalize  the

syllables with one another, assigning to each the proper quantity. We only

venture to affirm the general principle that the style is to conform to the

subject and the metre to the style; and that the simplicity and harmony of the

soul should be reflected in them all. This principle of simplicity has to be

learnt by every one in the days of his youth, and may be gathered anywhere,