SOCRATES: Then in astronomy also, the same man will be true and false?


HIPPIAS: It would seem so.


SOCRATES: And now, Hippias, consider the question at large about all the

sciences, and see whether the same principle does not always hold. I know

that in most arts you are the wisest of men, as I have heard you boasting in

the agora at the tables of the money-changers, when you were setting forth

the great and enviable stores of your wisdom; and you said that upon one

occasion, when you went to the Olympic games, all that you had on your

person was made by yourself. You began with your ring, which was of your

own workmanship, and you said that you could engrave rings; and you had

another seal which was also of your own workmanship, and a strigil and an

oil flask, which you had made yourself; you said also that you had made the

shoes which you had on your feet, and the cloak and the short tunic; but what

appeared to us all most extraordinary and a proof of singular art, was the

girdle of your tunic, which, you said, was as fine as the most costly Persian

fabric, and of your own weaving; moreover, you told us that you had brought

with you poems, epic, tragic, and dithyrambic, as well as prose writings of

the most various kinds; and you said that your skill was also pre-eminent in

the arts which I was just now mentioning, and in the true principles of rhythm

and harmony and of orthography; and if I remember rightly, there were a

great many other accomplishments in which you excelled. I have forgotten to

mention your art of memory, which you regard as your special glory, and I

dare say that I have forgotten many other things; but, as I was saying, only

look to your own arts--and there are plenty of them--and to those of others;

and tell me, having regard to the admissions which you and I have made,

whether you discover any department of art or any description of wisdom or

cunning, whichever name you use, in which the true and false are different

and not the same: tell me, if you can, of any. But you cannot.


HIPPIAS: Not without consideration, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Nor will consideration help you, Hippias, as I believe; but then

if I am right, remember what the consequence will be.


HIPPIAS: I do not know what you mean, Socrates.SOCRATES: I suppose that you are not using your art of memory, doubtless

because you think that such an accomplishment is not needed on the present

occasion. I will therefore remind you of what you were saying: were you not

saying that Achilles was a true man, and Odysseus false and wily?


HIPPIAS: I was.


SOCRATES: And now do you perceive that the same person has turned out

to be false as well as true? If Odysseus is false he is also true, and if Achilles

is true he is also false, and so the two men are not opposed to one another, but

they are alike.


HIPPIAS: O Socrates, you are always weaving the meshes of an argument,

selecting  the  most  difficult  point,  and  fastening  upon  details  instead  of

grappling  with  the  matter  in  hand  as  a  whole.  Come  now,  and  I  will

demonstrate to you, if you will allow me, by many satisfactory proofs, that

Homer has made Achilles a better man than Odysseus, and a truthful man

too; and that he has made the other crafty, and a teller of many untruths, and

inferior to Achilles. And then, if you please, you shall make a speech on the

other side, in order to prove that Odysseus is the better man; and this may be

compared to mine, and then the company will know which of us is the better

speaker.


SOCRATES: O Hippias, I do not doubt that you are wiser than I am. But I

have a way, when anybody else says anything, of giving close attention to

him, especially if the speaker appears to me to be a wise man. Having a

desire  to  understand,  I  question  him,  and  I  examine  and  analyse  and  put

together what he says, in order that I may understand; but if the speaker

appears to me to be a poor hand, I do not interrogate him, or trouble myself

about him, and you may know by this who they are whom I deem to be wise

men, for you will see that when I am talking with a wise man, I am very

attentive to what he says; and I ask questions of him, in order that I may

learn, and be improved by him. And I could not help remarking while you

were speaking, that when you recited the verses in which Achilles, as you

argued, attacks Odysseus as a deceiver, that you must be strangely mistaken,

because Odysseus, the man of wiles, is never found to tell a lie; but Achilles

is found to be wily on your own showing. At any rate he speaks falsely; forfirst he utters these words, which you just now repeated,--


'He is hateful to me even as the gates of death who thinks one thing and says

another:'--


And  then  he  says,  a  little  while  afterwards,  he  will  not  be  persuaded  by

Odysseus and Agamemnon, neither will he remain at Troy; but, says he,--


'To-morrow, when I have offered sacrifices to Zeus and all the Gods, having

loaded my ships well, I will drag them down into the deep; and then you shall

see, if you have a mind, and if such things are a care to you, early in the

morning my ships sailing over the fishy Hellespont, and my men eagerly

plying the oar; and, if the illustrious shaker of the earth gives me a good

voyage, on the third day I shall reach the fertile Phthia.'


And before that, when he was reviling Agamemnon, he said,--


'And now to Phthia I will go, since to return home in the beaked ships is far

better, nor am I inclined to stay here in dishonour and amass wealth and

riches for you.'


But although on that occasion, in the presence of the whole army, he spoke

after this fashion, and on the other occasion to his companions, he appears

never to have made any preparation or attempt to draw down the ships, as if

he had the least intention of sailing home; so nobly regardless was he of the

truth. Now I, Hippias, originally asked you the question, because I was in

doubt as to which of the two heroes was intended by the poet to be the best,

and because I thought that both of them were the best, and that it would be

difficult to decide which was the better of them, not only in respect of truth

and falsehood, but of virtue generally, for even in this matter of speaking the

truth they are much upon a par.


HIPPIAS: There you are wrong, Socrates; for in so far as Achilles speaks

falsely, the falsehood is obviously unintentional. He is compelled against his

will to remain and rescue the army in their misfortune. But when Odysseus

speaks falsely he is voluntarily and intentionally false.SOCRATES: You, sweet Hippias, like Odysseus, are a deceiver yourself.


HIPPIAS: Certainly not, Socrates; what makes you say so?


SOCRATES:  Because  you  say  that  Achilles  does  not  speak  falsely  from

design,  when  he  is  not  only  a  deceiver,  but  besides  being  a  braggart,  in

Homer's description of him is so cunning, and so far superior to Odysseus in

lying and pretending, that he dares to contradict himself, and Odysseus does

not find him out; at any rate he does not appear to say anything to him which

would imply that he perceived his falsehood.


HIPPIAS: What do you mean, Socrates?


SOCRATES: Did you not observe that afterwards, when he is speaking to

Odysseus, he says that he will sail away with the early dawn; but to Ajax he

tells quite a different story?


HIPPIAS: Where is that?


SOCRATES: Where he says,--


'I will not think about bloody war until the son of warlike Priam, illustrious

Hector,  comes  to  the  tents  and  ships  of  the  Myrmidons,  slaughtering  the

Argives, and burning the ships with fire; and about my tent and dark ship, I

suspect that Hector, although eager for the battle, will nevertheless stay his

hand.'


Now, do you really think, Hippias, that the son of Thetis, who had been the

pupil of the sage Cheiron, had such a bad memory, or would have carried the

art of lying to such an extent (when he had been assailing liars in the most

violent terms only the instant before) as to say to Odysseus that he would sail

away, and to Ajax that he would remain, and that he was not rather practising

upon  the  simplicity  of  Odysseus,  whom  he  regarded  as  an  ancient,  and

thinking  that  he  would  get  the  better  of  him  by  his  own  cunning  and

falsehood?


HIPPIAS: No, I do not agree with you, Socrates; but I believe that Achilles isinduced to say one thing to Ajax, and another to Odysseus in the innocence of

his  heart,  whereas  Odysseus,  whether  he  speaks  falsely  or  truly,  speaks

always with a purpose.


SOCRATES:  Then  Odysseus  would  appear  after  all  to  be  better  than

Achilles?


HIPPIAS: Certainly not, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Why, were not the voluntary liars only just now shown to be

better than the involuntary?


HIPPIAS:  And  how,  Socrates,  can  those  who  intentionally  err,  and

voluntarily and designedly commit iniquities, be better than those who err

and do wrong involuntarily? Surely there is a great excuse to be made for a

man telling a falsehood, or doing an injury or any sort of harm to another in

ignorance. And the laws are obviously far more severe on those who lie or do

evil, voluntarily, than on those who do evil involuntarily.


SOCRATES: You see, Hippias, as I have already told you, how pertinacious

I am in asking questions of wise men. And I think that this is the only good

point about me, for I am full of defects, and always getting wrong in some

way or other. My deficiency is proved to me by the fact that when I meet one

of you who are famous for wisdom, and to whose wisdom all the Hellenes are

witnesses, I am found out to know nothing. For speaking generally, I hardly

ever have the same opinion about anything which you have, and what proof

of ignorance can be greater than to differ from wise men? But I have one

singular good quality, which is my salvation; I am not ashamed to learn, and I

ask and enquire, and am very grateful to those who answer me, and never fail

to give them my grateful thanks; and when I learn a thing I never deny my

teacher, or pretend that the lesson is a discovery of my own; but I praise his

wisdom, and proclaim what I have learned from him. And now I cannot agree

in what you are saying, but I strongly disagree. Well, I know that this is my

own fault, and is a defect in my character, but I will not pretend to be more

than I am; and my opinion, Hippias, is the very contrary of what you are

saying.  For  I  maintain  that  those  who  hurt  or  injure  mankind,  and  speak

falsely and deceive, and err voluntarily, are better far than those who dowrong involuntarily. Sometimes, however, I am of the opposite opinion; for I

am all abroad in my ideas about this matter, a condition obviously occasioned

by ignorance. And just now I happen to be in a crisis of my disorder at which

those  who  err  voluntarily  appear  to  me  better  than  those  who  err

involuntarily.  My  present  state  of  mind  is  due  to  our  previous  argument,

which  inclines  me  to  believe  that  in  general  those  who  do  wrong

involuntarily are worse than those who do wrong voluntarily, and therefore I

hope that you will be good to me, and not refuse to heal me; for you will do

me a much greater benefit if you cure my soul of ignorance, than you would

if you were to cure my body of disease. I must, however, tell you beforehand,

that if you make a long oration to me you will not cure me, for I shall not be

able to follow you; but if you will answer me, as you did just now, you will

do me a great deal of good, and I do not think that you will be any the worse

yourself. And I have some claim upon you also, O son of Apemantus, for you

incited me to converse with Hippias; and now, if Hippias will not answer me,

you must entreat him on my behalf.


EUDICUS:  But  I  do  not  think,  Socrates,  that  Hippias  will  require  any

entreaty of mine; for he has already said that he will refuse to answer no

man.--Did you not say so, Hippias?


HIPPIAS: Yes, I did; but then, Eudicus, Socrates is always troublesome in an

argument, and appears to be dishonest. (Compare Gorgias; Republic.)


SOCRATES: Excellent Hippias, I do not do so intentionally (if I did, it would

show me to be a wise man and a master of wiles, as you would argue), but

unintentionally, and therefore you must pardon me; for, as you say, he who is

unintentionally dishonest should be pardoned.


EUDICUS: Yes, Hippias, do as he says; and for our sake, and also that you

may not belie your profession, answer whatever Socrates asks you.


HIPPIAS: I will answer, as you request me; and do you ask whatever you

like.


SOCRATES: I am very desirous, Hippias, of examining this question, as to

which are the better--those who err voluntarily or involuntarily? And if youwill answer me, I think that I can put you in the way of approaching the

subject: You would admit, would you not, that there are good runners?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And there are bad runners?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And he who runs well is a good runner, and he who runs ill is a

bad runner?


HIPPIAS: Very true.


SOCRATES: And he who runs slowly runs ill, and he who runs quickly runs

well?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  Then  in  a  race,  and  in  running,  swiftness  is  a  good,  and

slowness is an evil quality?


HIPPIAS: To be sure.


SOCRATES: Which of the two then is a better runner? He who runs slowly

voluntarily, or he who runs slowly involuntarily?


HIPPIAS: He who runs slowly voluntarily.


SOCRATES: And is not running a species of doing?


HIPPIAS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And if a species of doing, a species of action?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then he who runs badly does a bad and dishonourable action ina race?


HIPPIAS: Yes; a bad action, certainly.


SOCRATES: And he who runs slowly runs badly?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  Then  the  good  runner  does  this  bad  and  disgraceful  action

voluntarily, and the bad involuntarily?


HIPPIAS: That is to be inferred.


SOCRATES: Then he who involuntarily does evil actions, is worse in a race

than he who does them voluntarily?


HIPPIAS: Yes, in a race.


SOCRATES: Well, but at a wrestling match--which is the better wrestler, he

who falls voluntarily or involuntarily?


HIPPIAS: He who falls voluntarily, doubtless.


SOCRATES: And is it worse or more dishonourable at a wrestling match, to

fall, or to throw another?


HIPPIAS: To fall.


SOCRATES: Then, at a wrestling match, he who voluntarily does base and

dishonourable  actions  is  a  better  wrestler  than  he  who  does  them

involuntarily?


HIPPIAS: That appears to be the truth.


SOCRATES: And what would you say of any other bodily exercise--is not he

who is better made able to do both that which is strong and that which is

weak--that which is fair and that which is foul?--so that when he does bad

actions with the body, he who is better made does them voluntarily, and hewho is worse made does them involuntarily.


HIPPIAS: Yes, that appears to be true about strength.


SOCRATES: And what do you say about grace, Hippias? Is not he who is

better  made  able  to  assume  evil  and  disgraceful  figures  and  postures

voluntarily, as he who is worse made assumes them involuntarily?


HIPPIAS: True.


SOCRATES: Then voluntary ungracefulness comes from excellence of the

bodily frame, and involuntary from the defect of the bodily frame?


HIPPIAS: True.


SOCRATES: And what would you say of an unmusical voice; would you

prefer the voice which is voluntarily or involuntarily out of tune?


HIPPIAS: That which is voluntarily out of tune.


SOCRATES: The involuntary is the worse of the two?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And would you choose to possess goods or evils?


HIPPIAS: Goods.


SOCRATES:  And  would  you  rather  have  feet  which  are  voluntarily  or

involuntarily lame?


HIPPIAS: Feet which are voluntarily lame.


SOCRATES: But is not lameness a defect or deformity?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And is not blinking a defect in the eyes?HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And would you rather always have eyes with which you might

voluntarily blink and not see, or with which you might involuntarily blink?


HIPPIAS: I would rather have eyes which voluntarily blink.


SOCRATES: Then in your own case you deem that which voluntarily acts ill,

better than that which involuntarily acts ill?


HIPPIAS: Yes, certainly, in cases such as you mention.


SOCRATES: And does not the same hold of ears, nostrils, mouth, and of all

the senses--those which involuntarily act ill are not to be desired, as being

defective; and those which voluntarily act ill are to be desired as being good?


HIPPIAS: I agree.


SOCRATES: And what would you say of instruments;--which are the better

sort  of  instruments  to  have  to  do  with?--those  with  which  a  man  acts  ill

voluntarily or involuntarily? For example, had a man better have a rudder

with which he will steer ill, voluntarily or involuntarily?


HIPPIAS: He had better have a rudder with which he will steer ill voluntarily.


SOCRATES: And does not the same hold of the bow and the lyre, the flute

and all other things?


HIPPIAS: Very true.


SOCRATES: And would you rather have a horse of such a temper that you

may ride him ill voluntarily or involuntarily?


HIPPIAS: I would rather have a horse which I could ride ill voluntarily.


SOCRATES: That would be the better horse?


HIPPIAS: Yes.SOCRATES: Then with a horse of better temper, vicious actions would be

produced voluntarily; and with a horse of bad temper involuntarily?


HIPPIAS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And that would be true of a dog, or of any other animal?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  And  is  it  better  to  possess  the  mind  of  an  archer  who

voluntarily or involuntarily misses the mark?


HIPPIAS: Of him who voluntarily misses.


SOCRATES: This would be the better mind for the purposes of archery?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then the mind which involuntarily errs is worse than the mind

which errs voluntarily?


HIPPIAS: Yes, certainly, in the use of the bow.


SOCRATES: And what would you say of the art of medicine;--has not the

mind which voluntarily works harm to the body, more of the healing art?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then in the art of medicine the voluntary is better than the

involuntary?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Well, and in lute-playing and in flute-playing, and in all arts

and sciences, is not that mind the better which voluntarily does what is evil

and dishonourable, and goes wrong, and is not the worse that which does so

involuntarily?HIPPIAS: That is evident.


SOCRATES: And what would you say of the characters of slaves? Should

we not prefer to have those who voluntarily do wrong and make mistakes,

and  are  they  not  better  in  their  mistakes  than  those  who  commit  them

involuntarily?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And should we not desire to have our own minds in the best

state possible?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  And  will  our  minds  be  better  if  they  do  wrong  and  make

mistakes voluntarily or involuntarily?


HIPPIAS: O, Socrates, it would be a monstrous thing to say that those who

do wrong voluntarily are better than those who do wrong involuntarily!


SOCRATES: And yet that appears to be the only inference.


HIPPIAS: I do not think so.


SOCRATES: But I imagined, Hippias, that you did. Please to answer once

more: Is not justice a power, or knowledge, or both? Must not justice, at all

events, be one of these?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: But if justice is a power of the soul, then the soul which has the

greater power is also the more just; for that which has the greater power, my

good friend, has been proved by us to be the better.


HIPPIAS: Yes, that has been proved.


SOCRATES: And if justice is knowledge, then the wiser will be the juster

soul, and the more ignorant the more unjust?HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: But if justice be power as well as knowledge--then will not the

soul which has both knowledge and power be the more just, and that which is

the more ignorant be the more unjust? Must it not be so?


HIPPIAS: Clearly.


SOCRATES: And is not the soul which has the greater power and wisdom

also better, and better able to do both good and evil in every action?


HIPPIAS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: The soul, then, which acts ill, acts voluntarily by power and art-

-and these either one or both of them are elements of justice?


HIPPIAS: That seems to be true.


SOCRATES: And to do injustice is to do ill, and not to do injustice is to do

well?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And will not the better and abler soul when it does wrong, do

wrong voluntarily, and the bad soul involuntarily?


HIPPIAS: Clearly.


SOCRATES: And the good man is he who has the good soul, and the bad

man is he who has the bad?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then the good man will voluntarily do wrong, and the bad man

involuntarily, if the good man is he who has the good soul?


HIPPIAS: Which he certainly has.SOCRATES: Then, Hippias, he who voluntarily does wrong and disgraceful

things, if there be such a man, will be the good man?


HIPPIAS: There I cannot agree with you.


SOCRATES: Nor can I agree with myself, Hippias; and yet that seems to be

the conclusion which, as far as we can see at present, must follow from our

argument. As I was saying before, I am all abroad, and being in perplexity am

always changing my opinion. Now, that I or any ordinary man should wander

in perplexity is not surprising; but if you wise men also wander, and we

cannot come to you and rest from our wandering, the matter begins to be

serious both to us and to you.


THE ENDLysis, or Friendship


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettPERSONS  OF  THE  DIALOGUE: Socrates,  who  is  the  narrator,

Menexenus, Hippothales, Lysis, Ctesippus.


SCENE: A newly-erected Palaestra outside the walls of Athens.


I was going from the Academy straight to the Lyceum, intending to take the

outer road, which is close under the wall. When I came to the postern gate of

the city, which is by the fountain of Panops, I fell in with Hippothales, the

son of Hieronymus, and Ctesippus the Paeanian, and a company of young

men who were standing with them. Hippothales, seeing me approach, asked

whence I came and whither I was going.


I am going, I replied, from the Academy straight to the Lyceum.


Then come straight to us, he said, and put in here; you may as well.


Who are you, I said; and where am I to come?


He showed me an enclosed space and an open door over against the wall.

And  there,  he  said,  is  the  building  at  which  we  all  meet:  and  a  goodly

company we are.


And what is this building, I asked; and what sort of entertainment have you?


The building, he replied, is a newly erected Palaestra; and the entertainment

is generally conversation, to which you are welcome.


Thank you, I said; and is there any teacher there?


Yes, he said, your old friend and admirer, Miccus.


Indeed, I replied; he is a very eminent professor.


Are you disposed, he said, to go with me and see them?


Yes, I said; but I should like to know first, what is expected of me, and who

is the favourite among you?Some persons have one favourite, Socrates, and some another, he said.


And who is yours? I asked: tell me that, Hippothales.


At  this  he  blushed;  and  I  said  to  him,  O  Hippothales,  thou  son  of

Hieronymus!  do  not  say  that  you  are,  or  that  you  are  not,  in  love;  the

confession is too late; for I see that you are not only in love, but are already

far gone in your love. Simple and foolish as I am, the Gods have given me

the power of understanding affections of this kind.


Whereupon he blushed more and more.


Ctesippus said: I like to see you blushing, Hippothales, and hesitating to tell

Socrates the name; when, if he were with you but for a very short time, you

would  have  plagued  him  to  death  by  talking  about  nothing  else.  Indeed,

Socrates, he has literally deafened us, and stopped our ears with the praises of

Lysis; and if he is a little intoxicated, there is every likelihood that we may

have our sleep murdered with a cry of Lysis. His performances in prose are

bad enough, but nothing at all in comparison with his verse; and when he

drenches us with his poems and other compositions, it is really too bad; and

worse still is his manner of singing them to his love; he has a voice which is

truly appalling, and we cannot help hearing him: and now having a question

put to him by you, behold he is blushing.


Who is Lysis? I said: I suppose that he must be young; for the name does not

recall any one to me.


Why,  he  said,  his  father  being  a  very  well-known  man,  he  retains  his

patronymic,  and  is  not  as  yet  commonly  called  by  his  own  name;  but,

although you do not know his name, I am sure that you must know his face,

for that is quite enough to distinguish him.


But tell me whose son he is, I said.


He is the eldest son of Democrates, of the deme of Aexone.


Ah, Hippothales, I said; what a noble and really perfect love you have found!I wish that you would favour me with the exhibition which you have been

making to the rest of the company, and then I shall be able to judge whether

you  know  what  a  lover  ought  to  say  about  his  love,  either  to  the  youth

himself, or to others.


Nay, Socrates, he said; you surely do not attach any importance to what he is

saying.


Do you mean, I said, that you disown the love of the person whom he says

that you love?


No; but I deny that I make verses or address compositions to him.


He is not in his right mind, said Ctesippus; he is talking nonsense, and is stark

mad.


O Hippothales, I said, if you have ever made any verses or songs in honour of

your favourite, I do not want to hear them; but I want to know the purport of

them, that I may be able to judge of your mode of approaching your fair one.


Ctesippus will be able to tell you, he said; for if, as he avers, the sound of my

words is always dinning in his ears, he must have a very accurate knowledge

and recollection of them.


Yes, indeed, said Ctesippus; I know only too well; and very ridiculous the

tale is: for although he is a lover, and very devotedly in love, he has nothing

particular to talk about to his beloved which a child might not say. Now is not

that ridiculous? He can only speak of the wealth of Democrates, which the

whole city celebrates, and grandfather Lysis, and the other ancestors of the

youth, and their stud of horses, and their victory at the Pythian games, and at

the Isthmus, and at Nemea with four horses and single horses--these are the

tales which he composes and repeats. And there is greater twaddle still. Only

the  day  before  yesterday  he  made  a  poem  in  which  he  described  the

entertainment of Heracles, who was a connexion of the family, setting forth

how in virtue of this relationship he was hospitably received by an ancestor

of Lysis; this ancestor was himself begotten of Zeus by the daughter of the

founder of the deme. And these are the sort of old wives' tales which he singsand recites to us, and we are obliged to listen to him.


When I heard this, I said: O ridiculous Hippothales! how can you be making

and singing hymns in honour of yourself before you have won?


But my songs and verses, he said, are not in honour of myself, Socrates.


You think not? I said.


Nay, but what do you think? he replied.


Most assuredly, I said, those songs are all in your own honour; for if you win

your beautiful love, your discourses and songs will be a glory to you, and

may be truly regarded as hymns of praise composed in honour of you who

have conquered and won such a love; but if he slips away from you, the more

you have praised him, the more ridiculous you will look at having lost this

fairest and best of blessings; and therefore the wise lover does not praise his

beloved until he has won him, because he is afraid of accidents. There is also

another danger; the fair, when any one praises or magnifies them, are filled

with the spirit of pride and vain-glory. Do you not agree with me?


Yes, he said.


And  the  more  vain-glorious  they  are,  the  more  difficult  is  the  capture  of

them?


I believe you.


What should you say of a hunter who frightened away his prey, and made the

capture of the animals which he is hunting more difficult?


He would be a bad hunter, undoubtedly.


Yes; and if, instead of soothing them, he were to infuriate them with words

and songs, that would show a great want of wit: do you not agree.


Yes.And now reflect, Hippothales, and see whether you are not guilty of all these

errors in writing poetry. For I can hardly suppose that you will affirm a man

to be a good poet who injures himself by his poetry.


Assuredly not, he said; such a poet would be a fool. And this is the reason

why I take you into my counsels, Socrates, and I shall be glad of any further

advice which you may have to offer. Will you tell me by what words or

actions I may become endeared to my love?


That is not easy to determine, I said; but if you will bring your love to me,

and will let me talk with him, I may perhaps be able to show you how to

converse with him, instead of singing and reciting in the fashion of which

you are accused.


There will be no difficulty in bringing him, he replied; if you will only go

with Ctesippus into the Palaestra, and sit down and talk, I believe that he will

come of his own accord; for he is fond of listening, Socrates. And as this is

the festival of the Hermaea, the young men and boys are all together, and

there is no separation between them. He will be sure to come: but if he does

not, Ctesippus with whom he is familiar, and whose relation Menexenus is

his great friend, shall call him.


That will be the way, I said. Thereupon I led Ctesippus into the Palaestra, and

the rest followed.


Upon entering we found that the boys had just been sacrificing; and this part

of the festival was nearly at an end. They were all in their white array, and

games at dice were going on among them. Most of them were in the outer

court amusing themselves; but some were in a corner of the Apodyterium

playing at odd and even with a number of dice, which they took out of little

wicker baskets. There was also a circle of lookers-on; among them was Lysis.

He was standing with the other boys and youths, having a crown upon his

head, like a fair vision, and not less worthy of praise for his goodness than for

his beauty. We left them, and went over to the opposite side of the room,

where, finding a quiet place, we sat down; and then we began to talk. This

attracted  Lysis,  who  was  constantly  turning  round  to  look  at  us--he  was

evidently wanting to come to us. For a time he hesitated and had not thecourage to come alone; but first of all, his friend Menexenus, leaving his

play, entered the Palaestra from the court, and when he saw Ctesippus and

myself, was going to take a seat by us; and then Lysis, seeing him, followed,

and sat down by his side; and the other boys joined. I should observe that

Hippothales, when he saw the crowd, got behind them, where he thought that

he would be out of sight of Lysis, lest he should anger him; and there he

stood and listened.


I turned to Menexenus, and said: Son of Demophon, which of you two youths

is the elder?


That is a matter of dispute between us, he said.


And which is the nobler? Is that also a matter of dispute?


Yes, certainly.


And another disputed point is, which is the fairer?


The two boys laughed.


I shall not ask which is the richer of the two, I said; for you are friends, are

you not?


Certainly, they replied.


And friends have all things in common, so that one of you can be no richer

than the other, if you say truly that you are friends.


They assented. I was about to ask which was the juster of the two, and which

was the wiser of the two; but at this moment Menexenus was called away by

some  one  who  came  and  said  that  the  gymnastic-master  wanted  him.  I

supposed that he had to offer sacrifice. So he went away, and I asked Lysis

some more questions. I dare say, Lysis, I said, that your father and mother

love you very much.


Certainly, he said.And they would wish you to be perfectly happy.


Yes.


But do you think that any one is happy who is in the condition of a slave, and

who cannot do what he likes?


I should think not indeed, he said.


And if your father and mother love you, and desire that you should be happy,

no one can doubt that they are very ready to promote your happiness.


Certainly, he replied.


And do they then permit you to do what you like, and never rebuke you or

hinder you from doing what you desire?


Yes, indeed, Socrates; there are a great many things which they hinder me

from doing.


What do you mean? I said. Do they want you to be happy, and yet hinder you

from doing what you like? for example, if you want to mount one of your

father's chariots, and take the reins at a race, they will not allow you to do so-

-they will prevent you?


Certainly, he said, they will not allow me to do so.


Whom then will they allow?


There is a charioteer, whom my father pays for driving.


And do they trust a hireling more than you? and may he do what he likes with

the horses? and do they pay him for this?


They do.


But I dare say that you may take the whip and guide the mule-cart if you

like;--they will permit that?Permit me! indeed they will not.


Then, I said, may no one use the whip to the mules?


Yes, he said, the muleteer.


And is he a slave or a free man?


A slave, he said.


And do they esteem a slave of more value than you who are their son? And

do they entrust their property to him rather than to you? and allow him to do

what he likes, when they prohibit you? Answer me now: Are you your own

master, or do they not even allow that?


Nay, he said; of course they do not allow it.


Then you have a master?


Yes, my tutor; there he is.


And is he a slave?


To be sure; he is our slave, he replied.


Surely, I said, this is a strange thing, that a free man should be governed by a

slave. And what does he do with you?


He takes me to my teachers.


You do not mean to say that your teachers also rule over you?


Of course they do.


Then I must say that your father is pleased to inflict many lords and masters

on you. But at any rate when you go home to your mother, she will let you

have your own way, and will not interfere with your happiness; her wool, or

the piece of cloth which she is weaving, are at your disposal: I am sure thatthere is nothing to hinder you from touching her wooden spathe, or her comb,

or any other of her spinning implements.


Nay, Socrates, he replied, laughing; not only does she hinder me, but I should

be beaten if I were to touch one of them.


Well, I said, this is amazing. And did you ever behave ill to your father or

your mother?


No, indeed, he replied.


But why then are they so terribly anxious to prevent you from being happy,

and doing as you like?--keeping you all day long in subjection to another,

and, in a word, doing nothing which you desire; so that you have no good, as

would appear, out of their great possessions, which are under the control of

anybody rather than of you, and have no use of your own fair person, which

is  tended  and  taken  care  of  by  another;  while  you,  Lysis,  are  master  of

nobody, and can do nothing?


Why, he said, Socrates, the reason is that I am not of age.


I doubt whether that is the real reason, I said; for I should imagine that your

father  Democrates,  and  your  mother,  do  permit  you  to  do  many  things

already,  and  do  not  wait  until  you  are  of  age:  for  example,  if  they  want

anything read or written, you, I presume, would be the first person in the

house who is summoned by them.


Very true.


And you would be allowed to write or read the letters in any order which you

please, or to take up the lyre and tune the notes, and play with the fingers, or

strike with the plectrum, exactly as you please, and neither father nor mother

would interfere with you.


That is true, he said.


Then what can be the reason, Lysis, I said, why they allow you to do the one

and not the other?I suppose, he said, because I understand the one, and not the other.


Yes, my dear youth, I said, the reason is not any deficiency of years, but a

deficiency of knowledge; and whenever your father thinks that you are wiser

than he is, he will instantly commit himself and his possessions to you.


I think so.


Aye, I said; and about your neighbour, too, does not the same rule hold as

about your father? If he is satisfied that you know more of housekeeping than

he does, will he continue to administer his affairs himself, or will he commit

them to you?


I think that he will commit them to me.


Will not the Athenian people, too, entrust their affairs to you when they see

that you have wisdom enough to manage them?


Yes.


And oh! let me put another case, I said: There is the great king, and he has an

eldest son, who is the Prince of Asia;--suppose that you and I go to him and

establish to his satisfaction that we are better cooks than his son, will he not

entrust to us the prerogative of making soup, and putting in anything that we

like while the pot is boiling, rather than to the Prince of Asia, who is his son?


To us, clearly.


And we shall be allowed to throw in salt by handfuls, whereas the son will

not be allowed to put in as much as he can take up between his fingers?


Of course.


Or suppose again that the son has bad eyes, will he allow him, or will he not

allow him, to touch his own eyes if he thinks that he has no knowledge of

medicine?He will not allow him.


Whereas, if he supposes us to have a knowledge of medicine, he will allow us

to do what we like with him--even to open the eyes wide and sprinkle ashes

upon them, because he supposes that we know what is best?


That is true.


And everything in which we appear to him to be wiser than himself or his son

he will commit to us?


That is very true, Socrates, he replied.


Then now, my dear Lysis, I said, you perceive that in things which we know

every one will trust us,--Hellenes and barbarians, men and women,--and we

may do as we please about them, and no one will like to interfere with us; we

shall be free, and masters of others; and these things will be really ours, for

we  shall  be  benefited  by  them.  But  in  things  of  which  we  have  no

understanding,  no  one  will  trust  us  to  do  as  seems  good  to  us--they  will

hinder us as far as they can; and not only strangers, but father and mother,

and the friend, if there be one, who is dearer still, will also hinder us; and we

shall be subject to others; and these things will not be ours, for we shall not

be benefited by them. Do you agree?


He assented.


And shall we be friends to others, and will any others love us, in as far as we

are useless to them?


Certainly not.


Neither can your father or mother love you, nor can anybody love anybody

else, in so far as they are useless to them?


No.


And therefore, my boy, if you are wise, all men will be your friends and

kindred, for you will be useful and good; but if you are not wise, neitherfather, nor mother, nor kindred, nor any one else, will be your friends. And in

matters of which you have as yet no knowledge, can you have any conceit of

knowledge?


That is impossible, he replied.


And you, Lysis, if you require a teacher, have not yet attained to wisdom.


True.


And  therefore  you  are  not  conceited,  having  nothing  of  which  to  be

conceited.


Indeed, Socrates, I think not.


When I heard him say this, I turned to Hippothales, and was very nearly

making  a  blunder,  for  I  was  going  to  say  to  him:  That  is  the  way,

Hippothales,  in  which  you  should  talk  to  your  beloved,  humbling  and

lowering him, and not as you do, puffing him up and spoiling him. But I saw

that he was in great excitement and confusion at what had been said, and I

remembered that, although he was in the neighbourhood, he did not want to

be seen by Lysis; so upon second thoughts I refrained.


In the meantime Menexenus came back and sat down in his place by Lysis;

and Lysis, in a childish and affectionate manner, whispered privately in my

ear, so that Menexenus should not hear: Do, Socrates, tell Menexenus what

you have been telling me.


Suppose that you tell him yourself, Lysis, I replied; for I am sure that you

were attending.


Certainly, he replied.


Try, then, to remember the words, and be as exact as you can in repeating

them to him, and if you have forgotten anything, ask me again the next time

that you see me.


I will be sure to do so, Socrates; but go on telling him something new, and letme hear, as long as I am allowed to stay.


I certainly cannot refuse, I said, since you ask me; but then, as you know,

Menexenus is very pugnacious, and therefore you must come to the rescue if

he attempts to upset me.


Yes, indeed, he said; he is very pugnacious, and that is the reason why I want

you to argue with him.


That I may make a fool of myself?


No, indeed, he said; but I want you to put him down.


That  is  no  easy  matter,  I  replied;  for  he  is  a  terrible  fellow--a  pupil  of

Ctesippus. And there is Ctesippus himself: do you see him?


Never mind, Socrates, you shall argue with him.


Well, I suppose that I must, I replied.


Hereupon Ctesippus complained that we were talking in secret, and keeping

the feast to ourselves.


I shall be happy, I said, to let you have a share. Here is Lysis, who does not

understand something that I was saying, and wants me to ask Menexenus,

who, as he thinks, is likely to know.


And why do you not ask him? he said.


Very well, I said, I will; and do you, Menexenus, answer. But first I must tell

you that I am one who from my childhood upward have set my heart upon a

certain thing. All people have their fancies; some desire horses, and others

dogs;  and  some  are  fond  of  gold,  and  others  of  honour.  Now,  I  have  no

violent desire of any of these things; but I have a passion for friends; and I

would rather have a good friend than the best cock or quail in the world: I

would even go further, and say the best horse or dog. Yea, by the dog of

Egypt, I should greatly prefer a real friend to all the gold of Darius, or even to

Darius himself: I am such a lover of friends as that. And when I see you andLysis, at your early age, so easily possessed of this treasure, and so soon, he

of you, and you of him, I am amazed and delighted, seeing that I myself,

although I am now advanced in years, am so far from having made a similar

acquisition, that I do not even know in what way a friend is acquired. But I

want to ask you a question about this, for you have experience: tell me then,

when one loves another, is the lover or the beloved the friend; or may either

be the friend?


Either may, I should think, be the friend of either.


Do you mean, I said, that if only one of them loves the other, they are mutual

friends?


Yes, he said; that is my meaning.


But what if the lover is not loved in return? which is a very possible case.


Yes.


Or is, perhaps, even hated? which is a fancy which sometimes is entertained

by lovers respecting their beloved. Nothing can exceed their love; and yet

they imagine either that they are not loved in return, or that they are hated. Is

not that true?


Yes, he said, quite true.


In that case, the one loves, and the other is loved?


Yes.


Then which is the friend of which? Is the lover the friend of the beloved,

whether he be loved in return, or hated; or is the beloved the friend; or is

there no friendship at all on either side, unless they both love one another?


There would seem to be none at all.


Then this notion is not in accordance with our previous one. We were saying

that both were friends, if one only loved; but now, unless they both love,neither is a friend.


That appears to be true.


Then nothing which does not love in return is beloved by a lover?


I think not.


Then they are not lovers of horses, whom the horses do not love in return; nor

lovers of quails, nor of dogs, nor of wine, nor of gymnastic exercises, who

have no return of love; no, nor of wisdom, unless wisdom loves them in

return. Or shall we say that they do love them, although they are not beloved

by them; and that the poet was wrong who sings--


'Happy  the  man  to  whom  his  children  are  dear,  and  steeds  having  single

hoofs, and dogs of chase, and the stranger of another land'?


I do not think that he was wrong.


You think that he is right?


Yes.


Then, Menexenus, the conclusion is, that what is beloved, whether loving or

hating, may be dear to the lover of it: for example, very young children, too

young to love, or even hating their father or mother when they are punished

by them, are never dearer to them than at the time when they are being hated

by them.


I think that what you say is true.


And, if so, not the lover, but the beloved, is the friend or dear one?


Yes.


And the hated one, and not the hater, is the enemy?


Clearly.Then many men are loved by their enemies, and hated by their friends, and

are the friends of their enemies, and the enemies of their friends. Yet how

absurd, my dear friend, or indeed impossible is this paradox of a man being

an enemy to his friend or a friend to his enemy.


I quite agree, Socrates, in what you say.


But if this cannot be, the lover will be the friend of that which is loved?


True.


And the hater will be the enemy of that which is hated?


Certainly.


Yet we must acknowledge in this, as in the preceding instance, that a man

may be the friend of one who is not his friend, or who may be his enemy,

when he loves that which does not love him or which even hates him. And he

may be the enemy of one who is not his enemy, and is even his friend: for

example, when he hates that which does not hate him, or which even loves

him.


That appears to be true.


But if the lover is not a friend, nor the beloved a friend, nor both together,

what are we to say? Whom are we to call friends to one another? Do any

remain?


Indeed, Socrates, I cannot find any.


But, O Menexenus! I said, may we not have been altogether wrong in our

conclusions?


I am sure that we have been wrong, Socrates, said Lysis. And he blushed as

he spoke, the words seeming to come from his lips involuntarily, because his

whole mind was taken up with the argument; there was no mistaking his

attentive look while he was listening.I was pleased at the interest which was shown by Lysis, and I wanted to give

Menexenus a rest, so I turned to him and said, I think, Lysis, that what you

say is true, and that, if we had been right, we should never have gone so far

wrong; let us proceed no further in this direction (for the road seems to be

getting troublesome), but take the other path into which we turned, and see

what the poets have to say; for they are to us in a manner the fathers and

authors of wisdom, and they speak of friends in no light or trivial manner, but

God himself, as they say, makes them and draws them to one another; and

this they express, if I am not mistaken, in the following words:--


'God is ever drawing like towards like, and making them acquainted.'


I dare say that you have heard those words.


Yes, he said; I have.


And have you not also met with the treatises of philosophers who say that

like must love like? they are the people who argue and write about nature and

the universe.


Very true, he replied.


And are they right in saying this?


They may be.


Perhaps, I said, about half, or possibly, altogether, right, if their meaning

were rightly apprehended by us. For the more a bad man has to do with a bad

man, and the more nearly he is brought into contact with him, the more he

will be likely to hate him, for he injures him; and injurer and injured cannot

be friends. Is not that true?


Yes, he said.


Then one half of the saying is untrue, if the wicked are like one another?


That is true.But the real meaning of the saying, as I imagine, is, that the good are like one

another, and friends to one another; and that the bad, as is often said of them,

are  never  at  unity  with  one  another  or  with  themselves;  for  they  are

passionate and restless, and anything which is at variance and enmity with

itself is not likely to be in union or harmony with any other thing. Do you not

agree?


Yes, I do.


Then, my friend, those who say that the like is friendly to the like mean to

intimate, if I rightly apprehend them, that the good only is the friend of the

good, and of him only; but that the evil never attains to any real friendship,

either with good or evil. Do you agree?


He nodded assent.


Then now we know how to answer the question 'Who are friends?' for the

argument declares 'That the good are friends.'


Yes, he said, that is true.


Yes, I replied; and yet I am not quite satisfied with this answer. By heaven,

and shall I tell you what I suspect? I will. Assuming that like, inasmuch as he

is like, is the friend of like, and useful to him--or rather let me try another

way of putting the matter: Can like do any good or harm to like which he

could not do to himself, or suffer anything from his like which he would not

suffer from himself? And if neither can be of any use to the other, how can

they be loved by one another? Can they now?


They cannot.


And can he who is not loved be a friend?


Certainly not.


But say that the like is not the friend of the like in so far as he is like; still the

good may be the friend of the good in so far as he is good?True.


But then again, will not the good, in so far as he is good, be sufficient for

himself? Certainly he will. And he who is sufficient wants nothing-- that is

implied in the word sufficient.


Of course not.


And he who wants nothing will desire nothing?


He will not.


Neither can he love that which he does not desire?


He cannot.


And he who loves not is not a lover or friend?


Clearly not.


What place then is there for friendship, if, when absent, good men have no

need of one another (for even when alone they are sufficient for themselves),

and when present have no use of one another? How can such persons ever be

induced to value one another?


They cannot.


And friends they cannot be, unless they value one another?


Very true.


But see now, Lysis, whether we are not being deceived in all this--are we not

indeed entirely wrong?


How so? he replied.


Have I not heard some one say, as I just now recollect, that the like is the

greatest enemy of the like, the good of the good?--Yes, and he quoted theauthority of Hesiod, who says:


'Potter quarrels with potter, bard with bard, Beggar with beggar;'


and of all other things he affirmed, in like manner, 'That of necessity the most

like are most full of envy, strife, and hatred of one another, and the most

unlike, of friendship. For the poor man is compelled to be the friend of the

rich, and the weak requires the aid of the strong, and the sick man of the

physician; and every one who is ignorant, has to love and court him who

knows.' And indeed he went on to say in grandiloquent language, that the

idea of friendship existing between similars is not the truth, but the very

reverse of the truth, and that the most opposed are the most friendly; for that

everything desires not like but that which is most unlike: for example, the dry

desires the moist, the cold the hot, the bitter the sweet, the sharp the blunt, the

void the full, the full the void, and so of all other things; for the opposite is

the  food  of  the  opposite,  whereas  like  receives  nothing  from  like.  And  I

thought that he who said this was a charming man, and that he spoke well.

What do the rest of you say?


I should say, at first hearing, that he is right, said Menexenus.


Then we are to say that the greatest friendship is of opposites?


Exactly.


Yes, Menexenus; but will not that be a monstrous answer? and will not the

all-wise eristics be down upon us in triumph, and ask, fairly enough, whether

love is not the very opposite of hate; and what answer shall we make to them-

-must we not admit that they speak the truth?


We must.


They will then proceed to ask whether the enemy is the friend of the friend,

or the friend the friend of the enemy?


Neither, he replied.


Well,  but  is  a  just  man  the  friend  of  the  unjust,  or  the  temperate  of  theintemperate, or the good of the bad?


I do not see how that is possible.


And  yet,  I  said,  if  friendship  goes  by  contraries,  the  contraries  must  be

friends.


They must.


Then neither like and like nor unlike and unlike are friends.


I suppose not.


And  yet  there  is  a  further  consideration:  may  not  all  these  notions  of

friendship be erroneous? but may not that which is neither good nor evil still

in some cases be the friend of the good?


How do you mean? he said.


Why really, I said, the truth is that I do not know; but my head is dizzy with

thinking  of  the  argument,  and  therefore  I  hazard  the  conjecture,  that  'the

beautiful is the friend,' as the old proverb says. Beauty is certainly a soft,

smooth, slippery thing, and therefore of a nature which easily slips in and

permeates our souls. For I affirm that the good is the beautiful. You will

agree to that?


Yes.


This I say from a sort of notion that what is neither good nor evil is the friend

of the beautiful and the good, and I will tell you why I am inclined to think

so: I assume that there are three principles--the good, the bad, and that which

is neither good nor bad. You would agree--would you not?


I agree.


And neither is the good the friend of the good, nor the evil of the evil, nor the

good of the evil;--these alternatives are excluded by the previous argument;

and therefore, if there be such a thing as friendship or love at all, we mustinfer that what is neither good nor evil must be the friend, either of the good,

or of that which is neither good nor evil, for nothing can be the friend of the

bad.


True.


But neither can like be the friend of like, as we were just now saying.


True.


And if so, that which is neither good nor evil can have no friend which is

neither good nor evil.


Clearly not.


Then the good alone is the friend of that only which is neither good nor evil.


That may be assumed to be certain.


And does not this seem to put us in the right way? Just remark, that the body

which is in health requires neither medical nor any other aid, but is well

enough; and the healthy man has no love of the physician, because he is in

health.


He has none.


But the sick loves him, because he is sick?


Certainly.


And sickness is an evil, and the art of medicine a good and useful thing?


Yes.


But the human body, regarded as a body, is neither good nor evil?


True.And the body is compelled by reason of disease to court and make friends of

the art of medicine?


Yes.


Then that which is neither good nor evil becomes the friend of good, by

reason of the presence of evil?


So we may infer.


And clearly this must have happened before that which was neither good nor

evil had become altogether corrupted with the element of evil--if itself had

become  evil  it  would  not  still  desire  and  love  the  good;  for,  as  we  were

saying, the evil cannot be the friend of the good.


Impossible.


Further, I must observe that some substances are assimilated when others are

present with them; and there are some which are not assimilated: take, for

example, the case of an ointment or colour which is put on another substance.


Very good.


In such a case, is the substance which is anointed the same as the colour or

ointment?


What do you mean? he said.


This is what I mean: Suppose that I were to cover your auburn locks with

white  lead,  would  they  be  really  white,  or  would  they  only  appear  to  be

white?


They would only appear to be white, he replied.


And yet whiteness would be present in them?


True.But that would not make them at all the more white, notwithstanding the

presence of white in them--they would not be white any more than black?


No.


But when old age infuses whiteness into them, then they become assimilated,

and are white by the presence of white.


Certainly.


Now I want to know whether in all cases a substance is assimilated by the

presence of another substance; or must the presence be after a peculiar sort?


The latter, he said.


Then that which is neither good nor evil may be in the presence of evil, but

not as yet evil, and that has happened before now?


Yes.


And  when  anything  is  in  the  presence  of  evil,  not  being  as  yet  evil,  the

presence of good arouses the desire of good in that thing; but the presence of

evil, which makes a thing evil, takes away the desire and friendship of the

good; for that which was once both good and evil has now become evil only,

and the good was supposed to have no friendship with the evil?


None.


And therefore we say that those who are already wise, whether Gods or men,

are no longer lovers of wisdom; nor can they be lovers of wisdom who are

ignorant to the extent of being evil, for no evil or ignorant person is a lover of

wisdom. There remain those who have the misfortune to be ignorant, but are

not yet hardened in their ignorance, or void of understanding, and do not as

yet fancy that they know what they do not know: and therefore those who are

the lovers of wisdom are as yet neither good nor bad. But the bad do not love

wisdom any more than the good; for, as we have already seen, neither is

unlike the friend of unlike, nor like of like. You remember that?Yes, they both said.


And so, Lysis and Menexenus, we have discovered the nature of friendship--

there can be no doubt of it: Friendship is the love which by reason of the

presence of evil the neither good nor evil has of the good, either in the soul,

or in the body, or anywhere.


They both agreed and entirely assented, and for a moment I rejoiced and was

satisfied  like  a  huntsman  just  holding  fast  his  prey.  But  then  a  most

unaccountable suspicion came across me, and I felt that the conclusion was

untrue. I was pained, and said, Alas! Lysis and Menexenus, I am afraid that

we have been grasping at a shadow only.


Why do you say so? said Menexenus.


I am afraid, I said, that the argument about friendship is false: arguments, like

men, are often pretenders.


How do you mean? he asked.


Well, I said; look at the matter in this way: a friend is the friend of some one;

is he not?


Certainly he is.


And has he a motive and object in being a friend, or has he no motive and

object?


He has a motive and object.


And is the object which makes him a friend, dear to him, or neither dear nor

hateful to him?


I do not quite follow you, he said.


I do not wonder at that, I said. But perhaps, if I put the matter in another way,

you will be able to follow me, and my own meaning will be clearer to myself.

The sick man, as I was just now saying, is the friend of the physician--is henot?


Yes.


And he is the friend of the physician because of disease, and for the sake of

health?


Yes.


And disease is an evil?


Certainly.


And what of health? I said. Is that good or evil, or neither?


Good, he replied.


And we were saying, I believe, that the body being neither good nor evil,

because of disease, that is to say because of evil, is the friend of medicine,

and medicine is a good: and medicine has entered into this friendship for the

sake of health, and health is a good.


True.


And is health a friend, or not a friend?


A friend.


And disease is an enemy?


Yes.


Then that which is neither good nor evil is the friend of the good because of

the evil and hateful, and for the sake of the good and the friend?


Clearly.


Then the friend is a friend for the sake of the friend, and because of theenemy?


That is to be inferred.


Then at this point, my boys, let us take heed, and be on our guard against

deceptions. I will not again repeat that the friend is the friend of the friend,

and the like of the like, which has been declared by us to be an impossibility;

but, in order that this new statement may not delude us, let us attentively

examine another point, which I will proceed to explain: Medicine, as we were

saying, is a friend, or dear to us for the sake of health?


Yes.


And health is also dear?


Certainly.


And if dear, then dear for the sake of something?


Yes.


And  surely  this  object  must  also  be  dear,  as  is  implied  in  our  previous

admissions?


Yes.


And that something dear involves something else dear?


Yes.


But then, proceeding in this way, shall we not arrive at some first principle of

friendship or dearness which is not capable of being referred to any other, for

the sake of which, as we maintain, all other things are dear, and, having there

arrived, we shall stop?


True.


My fear is that all those other things, which, as we say, are dear for the sakeof another, are illusions and deceptions only, but where that first principle is,

there is the true ideal of friendship. Let me put the matter thus: Suppose the

case of a great treasure (this may be a son, who is more precious to his father

than all his other treasures); would not the father, who values his son above

all things, value other things also for the sake of his son? I mean, for instance,

if he knew that his son had drunk hemlock, and the father thought that wine

would save him, he would value the wine?


He would.


And also the vessel which contains the wine?


Certainly.


But does he therefore value the three measures of wine, or the earthen vessel

which contains them, equally with his son? Is not this rather the true state of

the case? All his anxiety has regard not to the means which are provided for

the  sake  of  an  object,  but  to  the  object  for  the  sake  of  which  they  are

provided. And although we may often say that gold and silver are highly

valued by us, that is not the truth; for there is a further object, whatever it

may be, which we value most of all, and for the sake of which gold and all

our other possessions are acquired by us. Am I not right?


Yes, certainly.


And may not the same be said of the friend? That which is only dear to us for

the sake of something else is improperly said to be dear, but the truly dear is

that in which all these so-called dear friendships terminate.


That, he said, appears to be true.


And the truly dear or ultimate principle of friendship is not for the sake of

any other or further dear.


True.


Then we have done with the notion that friendship has any further object.

May we then infer that the good is the friend?I think so.


And the good is loved for the sake of the evil? Let me put the case in this

way: Suppose that of the three principles, good, evil, and that which is neither

good nor evil, there remained only the good and the neutral, and that evil

went far away, and in no way affected soul or body, nor ever at all that class

of things which, as we say, are neither good nor evil in themselves;--would

the good be of any use, or other than useless to us? For if there were nothing

to hurt us any longer, we should have no need of anything that would do us

good. Then would be clearly seen that we did but love and desire the good

because of the evil, and as the remedy of the evil, which was the disease; but

if there had been no disease, there would have been no need of a remedy. Is

not this the nature of the good--to be loved by us who are placed between the

two, because of the evil? but there is no use in the good for its own sake.


I suppose not.


Then  the  final  principle  of  friendship,  in  which  all  other  friendships

terminated,  those,  I  mean,  which  are  relatively  dear  and  for  the  sake  of

something else, is of another and a different nature from them. For they are

called dear because of another dear or friend. But with the true friend or dear,

the case is quite the reverse; for that is proved to be dear because of the hated,

and if the hated were away it would be no longer dear.


Very true, he replied: at any rate not if our present view holds good.


But, oh! will you tell me, I said, whether if evil were to perish, we should

hunger any more, or thirst any more, or have any similar desire? Or may we

suppose that hunger will remain while men and animals remain, but not so as

to be hurtful? And the same of thirst and the other desires,-- that they will

remain, but will not be evil because evil has perished? Or rather shall I say,

that to ask what either will be then or will not be is ridiculous, for who

knows? This we do know, that in our present condition hunger may injure us,

and may also benefit us:--Is not that true?


Yes.And in like manner thirst or any similar desire may sometimes be a good and

sometimes an evil to us, and sometimes neither one nor the other?


To be sure.


But is there any reason why, because evil perishes, that which is not evil

should perish with it?


None.


Then, even if evil perishes, the desires which are neither good nor evil will

remain?


Clearly they will.


And must not a man love that which he desires and affects?


He must.


Then, even if evil perishes, there may still remain some elements of love or

friendship?


Yes.


But not if evil is the cause of friendship: for in that case nothing will be the

friend of any other thing after the destruction of evil; for the effect cannot

remain when the cause is destroyed.


True.


And  have  we  not  admitted  already  that  the  friend  loves  something  for  a

reason? and at the time of making the admission we were of opinion that the

neither good nor evil loves the good because of the evil?


Very true.


But now our view is changed, and we conceive that there must be some other

cause of friendship?I suppose so.


May not the truth be rather, as we were saying just now, that desire is the

cause of friendship; for that which desires is dear to that which is desired at

the time of desiring it? and may not the other theory have been only a long

story about nothing?


Likely enough.


But surely, I said, he who desires, desires that of which he is in want?


Yes.


And that of which he is in want is dear to him?


True.


And he is in want of that of which he is deprived?


Certainly.


Then love, and desire, and friendship would appear to be of the natural or

congenial. Such, Lysis and Menexenus, is the inference.


They assented.


Then if you are friends, you must have natures which are congenial to one

another?


Certainly, they both said.


And I say, my boys, that no one who loves or desires another would ever

have  loved  or  desired  or  affected  him,  if  he  had  not  been  in  some  way

congenial to him, either in his soul, or in his character, or in his manners, or

in his form.


Yes, yes, said Menexenus. But Lysis was silent.Then, I said, the conclusion is, that what is of a congenial nature must be

loved.


It follows, he said.


Then the lover, who is true and no counterfeit, must of necessity be loved by

his love.


Lysis and Menexenus gave a faint assent to this; and Hippothales changed

into all manner of colours with delight.


Here,  intending  to  revise  the  argument,  I  said:  Can  we  point  out  any

difference between the congenial and the like? For if that is possible, then I

think, Lysis and Menexenus, there may be some sense in our argument about

friendship. But if the congenial is only the like, how will you get rid of the

other argument, of the uselessness of like to like in as far as they are like; for

to say that what is useless is dear, would be absurd? Suppose, then, that we

agree to distinguish between the congenial and the like--in the intoxication of

argument, that may perhaps be allowed.


Very true.


And shall we further say that the good is congenial, and the evil uncongenial

to every one? Or again that the evil is congenial to the evil, and the good to

the good; and that which is neither good nor evil to that which is neither good

nor evil?


They agreed to the latter alternative.


Then, my boys, we have again fallen into the old discarded error; for the

unjust will be the friend of the unjust, and the bad of the bad, as well as the

good of the good.


That appears to be the result.


But again, if we say that the congenial is the same as the good, in that case

the good and he only will be the friend of the good.True.


But that too was a position of ours which, as you will remember, has been

already refuted by ourselves.


We remember.


Then what is to be done? Or rather is there anything to be done? I can only,

like the wise men who argue in courts, sum up the arguments:--If neither the

beloved, nor the lover, nor the like, nor the unlike, nor the good, nor the

congenial, nor any other of whom we spoke--for there were such a number of

them that I cannot remember all--if none of these are friends, I know not what

remains to be said.


Here I was going to invite the opinion of some older person, when suddenly

we were interrupted by the tutors of Lysis and Menexenus, who came upon

us like an evil apparition with their brothers, and bade them go home, as it

was  getting  late.  At  first,  we  and  the  by-standers  drove  them  off;  but

afterwards,  as  they  would  not  mind,  and  only  went  on  shouting  in  their

barbarous dialect, and got angry, and kept calling the boys--they appeared to

us to have been drinking rather too much at the Hermaea, which made them

difficult to manage--we fairly gave way and broke up the company.


I said, however, a few words to the boys at parting: O Menexenus and Lysis,

how ridiculous that you two boys, and I, an old boy, who would fain be one

of you, should imagine ourselves to be friends--this is what the by- standers

will go away and say--and as yet we have not been able to discover what is a

friend!


THE END                        Menexenus Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    Beginning of MenexenusAPPENDIX I. (Menexenus)


  It seems impossible to separate by any exact line the genuine writings of

Plato from the spurious. The only external evidence to them which is of much

value is that of Aristotle; for the Alexandrian catalogues of a century later

include manifest forgeries. Even the value of the Aristotelian authority is a

good deal impaired by the uncertainty concerning the date and authorship of

the  writings  which  are  ascribed  to  him.  And  several  of  the  citations  of

Aristotle omit the name of Plato, and some of them omit the name of the

dialogue from which they are taken. Prior, however, to the enquiry about the

writings of a particular author, general considerations which equally affect all

evidence to the genuineness of ancient writings are the following: Shorter

works are more likely to have been forged, or to have received an erroneous

designation,  than  longer  ones;  and  some  kinds  of  composition,  such  as

epistles  or  panegyrical  orations,  are  more  liable  to  suspicion  than  others;

those, again, which have a taste of sophistry in them, or the ring of a later

age, or the slighter character of a rhetorical exercise, or in which a motive or

some affinity to spurious writings can be detected, or which seem to have

originated in a name or statement really occurring in some classical author,

are also of doubtful credit; while there is no instance of any ancient writing

proved to be a forgery, which combines excellence with length. A really great

and original writer would have no object in fathering his works on Plato; and

to the forger or imitator, the 'literary hack' of Alexandria and Athens, the

Gods did not grant originality or genius. Further, in attempting to balance the

evidence for and against a Platonic dialogue, we must not forget that the form

of  the  Platonic  writing  was  common  to  several  of  his  contemporaries.

Aeschines, Euclid, Phaedo, Antisthenes, and in the next generation Aristotle,

are all said to have composed dialogues; and mistakes of names are very

likely to have occurred. Greek literature in the third century before Christ was

almost  as  voluminous  as  our  own,  and  without  the  safeguards  of  regular

publication, or printing, or binding, or even of distinct titles. An unknown

writing  was  naturally  attributed  to  a  known  writer  whose  works  bore  the

same character; and the name once appended easily obtained authority. A

tendency may also be observed to blend the works and opinions of the master

with those of his scholars. To a later Platonist, the difference between Platoand his imitators was not so perceptible as to ourselves. The Memorabilia of

Xenophon and the Dialogues of Plato are but a part of a considerable Socratic

literature  which  has  passed  away.  And  we  must  consider  how  we  should

regard the question of the genuineness of a particular writing, if this lost

literature had been preserved to us.


  These  considerations  lead  us  to  adopt  the  following  criteria  of

genuineness: (1) That is most certainly Plato's which Aristotle attributes to

him by name, which (2) is of considerable length, of (3) great excellence, and

also (4) in harmony with the general spirit of the Platonic writings. But the

testimony of Aristotle cannot always be distinguished from that of a later age

(see above); and has various degrees of importance. Those writings which he

cites without mentioning Plato, under their own names, e.g. the Hippias, the

Funeral Oration, the Phaedo, etc., have an inferior degree of evidence in their

favour. They may have been supposed by him to be the writings of another,

although  in  the  case  of  really  great  works,  e.g.  the  Phaedo,  this  is  not

credible; those again which are quoted but not named, are still more defective

in their external credentials. There may be also a possibility that Aristotle was

mistaken, or may have confused the master and his scholars in the case of a

short writing; but this is inconceivable about a more important work, e.g. the

Laws, especially when we remember that he was living at Athens, and a

frequenter of the groves of the Academy, during the last twenty years of

Plato's life. Nor must we forget that in all his numerous citations from the

Platonic  writings  he  never  attributes  any  passage  found  in  the  extant

dialogues to any one but Plato. And lastly, we may remark that one or two

great writings, such as the Parmenides and the Politicus, which are wholly

devoid of Aristotelian (1) credentials may be fairly attributed to Plato, on the

ground of (2) length, (3) excellence, and (4) accordance with the general

spirit  of  his  writings.  Indeed  the  greater  part  of  the  evidence  for  the

genuineness of ancient Greek authors may be summed up under two heads

only:  (1)  excellence;  and  (2)  uniformity  of  tradition--a  kind  of  evidence,

which though in many cases sufficient, is of inferior value.


    Proceeding upon these principles we appear to arrive at the conclusion

that nineteen-twentieths of all the writings which have ever been ascribed to

Plato, are undoubtedly genuine. There is another portion of them, including

the Epistles, the Epinomis, the dialogues rejected by the ancients themselves,namely, the Axiochus, De justo, De virtute, Demodocus, Sisyphus, Eryxias,

which on grounds, both of internal and external evidence, we are able with

equal certainty to reject. But there still remains a small portion of which we

are unable to affirm either that they are genuine or spurious. They may have

been written in youth, or possibly like the works of some painters, may be

partly  or  wholly  the  compositions  of  pupils;  or  they  may  have  been  the

writings of some contemporary transferred by accident to the more celebrated

name of Plato, or of some Platonist in the next generation who aspired to

imitate his master. Not that on grounds either of language or philosophy we

should  lightly  reject  them.  Some  difference  of  style,  or  inferiority  of

execution, or inconsistency of thought, can hardly be considered decisive of

their  spurious  character.  For  who  always  does  justice  to  himself,  or  who

writes with equal care at all times? Certainly not Plato, who exhibits the

greatest differences in dramatic power, in the formation of sentences, and in

the use of words, if his earlier writings are compared with his later ones, say

the Protagoras or Phaedrus with the Laws. Or who can be expected to think in

the same manner during a period of authorship extending over above fifty

years,  in  an  age  of  great  intellectual  activity,  as  well  as  of  political  and

literary transition? Certainly not Plato, whose earlier writings are separated

from his later ones by as wide an interval of philosophical speculation as that

which separates his later writings from Aristotle.


  The  dialogues  which  have  been  translated  in  the  first  Appendix,  and

which  appear  to  have  the  next  claim  to  genuineness  among  the  Platonic

writings, are the Lesser Hippias, the Menexenus or Funeral Oration, the First

Alcibiades. Of these, the Lesser Hippias and the Funeral Oration are cited by

Aristotle; the first in the Metaphysics, the latter in the Rhetoric. Neither of

them are expressly attributed to Plato, but in his citation of both of them he

seems to be referring to passages in the extant dialogues. From the mention

of 'Hippias' in the singular by Aristotle, we may perhaps infer that he was

unacquainted with a second dialogue bearing the same name. Moreover, the

mere existence of a Greater and Lesser Hippias, and of a First and Second

Alcibiades, does to a certain extent throw a doubt upon both of them. Though

a very clever and ingenious work, the Lesser Hippias does not appear to

contain anything beyond the power of an imitator, who was also a careful

student  of  the  earlier  Platonic  writings,  to  invent.  The  motive  or  leading

thought  of  the  dialogue  may  be  detected  in  Xen.  Mem.,  and  there  is  nosimilar instance of a 'motive' which is taken from Xenophon in an undoubted

dialogue of Plato. On the other hand, the upholders of the genuineness of the

dialogue will find in the Hippias a true Socratic spirit; they will compare the

Ion as being akin both in subject and treatment; they will urge the authority

of  Aristotle;  and  they  will  detect  in  the  treatment  of  the  Sophist,  in  the

satirical reasoning upon Homer, in the reductio ad absurdum of the doctrine

that vice is ignorance, traces of a Platonic authorship. In reference to the last

point we are doubtful, as in some of the other dialogues, whether the author is

asserting or overthrowing the paradox of Socrates, or merely following the

argument 'whither the wind blows.' That no conclusion is arrived at is also in

accordance with the character of the earlier dialogues. The resemblances or

imitations  of  the  Gorgias,  Protagoras,  and  Euthydemus,  which  have  been

observed in the Hippias, cannot with certainty be adduced on either side of

the argument. On the whole, more may be said in favour of the genuineness

of the Hippias than against it.


  The Menexenus or Funeral Oration is cited by Aristotle, and is interesting

as  supplying  an  example  of  the  manner  in  which  the  orators  praised  'the

Athenians among the Athenians,' falsifying persons and dates, and casting a

veil over the gloomier events of Athenian history. It exhibits an acquaintance

with the funeral oration of Thucydides, and was, perhaps, intended to rival

that great work. If genuine, the proper place of the Menexenus would be at

the end of the Phaedrus. The satirical opening and the concluding words bear

a great resemblance to the earlier dialogues; the oration itself is professedly a

mimetic work, like the speeches in the Phaedrus, and cannot therefore be

tested by a comparison of the other writings of Plato. The funeral oration of

Pericles is expressly mentioned in the Phaedrus, and this may have suggested

the subject, in the same manner that the Cleitophon appears to be suggested

by the slight mention of Cleitophon and his attachment to Thrasymachus in

the Republic; and the Theages by the mention of Theages in the Apology and

Republic; or as the Second Alcibiades seems to be founded upon the text of

Xenophon, Mem. A similar taste for parody appears not only in the Phaedrus,

but  in  the  Protagoras,  in  the  Symposium,  and  to  a  certain  extent  in  the

Parmenides.


  To these two doubtful writings of Plato I have added the First Alcibiades,

which, of all the disputed dialogues of Plato, has the greatest merit, and issomewhat longer than any of them, though not verified by the testimony of

Aristotle,  and  in  many  respects  at  variance  with  the  Symposium  in  the

description  of  the  relations  of  Socrates  and  Alcibiades.  Like  the  Lesser

Hippias and the Menexenus, it is to be compared to the earlier writings of

Plato. The motive of the piece may, perhaps, be found in that passage of the

Symposium in which Alcibiades describes himself as self-convicted by the

words of Socrates. For the disparaging manner in which Schleiermacher has

spoken of this dialogue there seems to be no sufficient foundation. At the

same time, the lesson imparted is simple, and the irony more transparent than

in the undoubted dialogues of Plato. We know, too, that Alcibiades was a

favourite  thesis,  and  that  at  least  five  or  six  dialogues  bearing  this  name

passed current in antiquity, and are attributed to contemporaries of Socrates

and  Plato.  (1)  In  the  entire  absence  of  real  external  evidence  (for  the

catalogues of the Alexandrian librarians cannot be regarded as trustworthy);

and (2) in the absence of the highest marks either of poetical or philosophical

excellence;  and  (3)  considering  that  we  have  express  testimony  to  the

existence of contemporary writings bearing the name of Alcibiades, we are

compelled  to  suspend  our  judgment  on  the  genuineness  of  the  extant

dialogue.


  Neither at this point, nor at any other, do we propose to draw an absolute

line of demarcation between genuine and spurious writings of Plato. They

fade  off  imperceptibly  from  one  class  to  another.  There  may  have  been

degrees of genuineness in the dialogues themselves, as there are certainly

degrees of evidence by which they are supported. The traditions of the oral

discourses both of Socrates and Plato may have formed the basis of semi-

Platonic writings; some of them may be of the same mixed character which is

apparent in Aristotle and Hippocrates, although the form of them is different.

But the writings of Plato, unlike the writings of Aristotle, seem never to have

been confused with the writings of his disciples: this was probably due to

their definite form, and to their inimitable excellence. The three dialogues

which we have offered in the Appendix to the criticism of the reader may be

partly spurious and partly genuine; they may be altogether spurious;--that is

an alternative which must be frankly admitted. Nor can we maintain of some

other dialogues, such as the Parmenides, and the Sophist, and Politicus, that

no  considerable  objection  can  be  urged  against  them,  though  greatly

overbalanced by the weight (chiefly) of internal evidence in their favour. Nor,on the other hand, can we exclude a bare possibility that some dialogues

which are usually rejected, such as the Greater Hippias and the Cleitophon,

may  be  genuine.  The  nature  and  object  of  these  semi-Platonic  writings

require more careful study and more comparison of them with one another,

and with forged writings in general, than they have yet received, before we

can finally decide on their character. We do not consider them all as genuine

until they can be proved to be spurious, as is often maintained and still more

often implied in this and similar discussions; but should say of some of them,

that their genuineness is neither proven nor disproven until further evidence

about them can be adduced. And we are as confident that the Epistles are

spurious, as that the Republic, the Timaeus, and the Laws are genuine.


  On the whole, not a twentieth part of the writings which pass under the

name of Plato, if we exclude the works rejected by the ancients themselves

and two or three other plausible inventions, can be fairly doubted by those

who are willing to allow that a considerable change and growth may have

taken place in his philosophy (see above). That twentieth debatable portion

scarcely in any degree affects our judgment of Plato, either as a thinker or a

writer, and though suggesting some interesting questions to the scholar and

critic, is of little importance to the general reader.



INTRODUCTION


  The Menexenus has more the character of a rhetorical exercise than any

other of the Platonic works. The writer seems to have wished to emulate

Thucydides, and the far slighter work of Lysias. In his rivalry with the latter,

to  whom  in  the  Phaedrus  Plato  shows  a  strong  antipathy,  he  is  entirely

successful, but he is not equal to Thucydides. The Menexenus, though not

without real Hellenic interest, falls very far short of the rugged grandeur and

political insight of the great historian. The fiction of the speech having been

invented  by  Aspasia  is  well  sustained,  and  is  in  the  manner  of  Plato,

notwithstanding the anachronism which puts into her mouth an allusion to the

peace  of  Antalcidas,  an  event  occurring  forty  years  after  the  date  of  the

supposed  oration.  But  Plato,  like  Shakespeare,  is  careless  of  such

anachronisms, which are not supposed to strike the mind of the reader. The

effect produced by these grandiloquent orations on Socrates, who does notrecover after having heard one of them for three days and more, is truly

Platonic.


  Such discourses, if we may form a judgment from the three which are

extant  (for  the  so-called  Funeral  Oration  of  Demosthenes  is  a  bad  and

spurious imitation of Thucydides and Lysias), conformed to a regular type.

They began with Gods and ancestors, and the legendary history of Athens, to

which  succeeded  an  almost  equally  fictitious  account  of  later  times.  The

Persian war usually formed the centre of the narrative; in the age of Isocrates

and Demosthenes the Athenians were still living on the glories of Marathon

and Salamis. The Menexenus veils in panegyric the weak places of Athenian

history. The war of Athens and Boeotia is a war of liberation; the Athenians

gave back the Spartans taken at Sphacteria out of kindness--indeed, the only

fault of the city was too great kindness to their enemies, who were more

honoured  than  the  friends  of  others  (compare  Thucyd.,  which  seems  to

contain the germ of the idea); we democrats are the aristocracy of virtue, and

the like. These are the platitudes and falsehoods in which history is disguised.

The taking of Athens is hardly mentioned.


  The author of the Menexenus, whether Plato or not, is evidently intending

to ridicule the practice, and at the same time to show that he can beat the

rhetoricians in their own line, as in the Phaedrus he may be supposed to offer

an example of what Lysias might have said, and of how much better he might

have written in his own style. The orators had recourse to their favourite loci

communes, one of which, as we find in Lysias, was the shortness of the time

allowed them for preparation. But Socrates points out that they had them

always ready for delivery, and that there was no difficulty in improvising any

number of such orations. To praise the Athenians among the Athenians was

easy,--to praise them among the Lacedaemonians would have been a much

more difficult task. Socrates himself has turned rhetorician, having learned of

a woman, Aspasia, the mistress of Pericles; and any one whose teachers had

been far inferior to his own--say, one who had learned from Antiphon the

Rhamnusian--would be quite equal to the task of praising men to themselves.

When we remember that Antiphon is described by Thucydides as the best

pleader of his day, the satire on him and on the whole tribe of rhetoricians is

transparent.  The  ironical  assumption  of  Socrates,  that  he  must  be  a  good  orator

because he had learnt of Aspasia, is not coarse, as Schleiermacher supposes,

but is rather to be regarded as fanciful. Nor can we say that the offer of

Socrates to dance naked out of love for Menexenus, is any more un-Platonic

than the threat of physical force which Phaedrus uses towards Socrates. Nor

is there any real vulgarity in the fear which Socrates expresses that he will get

a beating from his mistress, Aspasia: this is the natural exaggeration of what

might be expected from an imperious woman. Socrates is not to be taken

seriously in all that he says, and Plato, both in the Symposium and elsewhere,

is not slow to admit a sort of Aristophanic humour. How a great original

genius like Plato might or might not have written, what was his conception of

humour,  or  what  limits  he  would  have  prescribed  to  himself,  if  any,  in

drawing the picture of the Silenus Socrates, are problems which no critical

instinct can determine.


  On  the  other  hand,  the  dialogue  has  several  Platonic  traits,  whether

original or imitated may be uncertain. Socrates, when he departs from his

character of a 'know nothing' and delivers a speech, generally pretends that

what he is speaking is not his own composition. Thus in the Cratylus he is

run away with; in the Phaedrus he has heard somebody say something--is

inspired by the genius loci; in the Symposium he derives his wisdom from

Diotima of Mantinea, and the like. But he does not impose on Menexenus by

his  dissimulation.  Without  violating  the  character  of  Socrates,  Plato,  who

knows so well how to give a hint, or some one writing in his name, intimates

clearly enough that the speech in the Menexenus like that in the Phaedrus is

to be attributed to Socrates. The address of the dead to the living at the end of

the oration may also be compared to the numerous addresses of the same kind

which occur in Plato, in whom the dramatic element is always tending to

prevail  over  the  rhetorical.  The  remark  has  been  often  made,  that  in  the

Funeral Oration of Thucydides there is no allusion to the existence of the

dead. But in the Menexenus a future state is clearly, although not strongly,

asserted.


  Whether the Menexenus is a genuine writing of Plato, or an imitation

only, remains uncertain. In either case, the thoughts are partly borrowed from

the Funeral Oration of Thucydides; and the fact that they are so, is not in

favour of the genuineness of the work. Internal evidence seems to leave thequestion of authorship in doubt. There are merits and there are defects which

might lead to either conclusion. The form of the greater part of the work

makes the enquiry difficult; the introduction and the finale certainly wear the

look either of Plato or of an extremely skilful imitator. The excellence of the

forgery may be fairly adduced as an argument that it is not a forgery at all. In

this  uncertainty  the  express  testimony  of  Aristotle,  who  quotes,  in  the

Rhetoric, the well-known words, 'It is easy to praise the Athenians among the

Athenians,' from the Funeral Oration, may perhaps turn the balance in its

favour. It must be remembered also that the work was famous in antiquity,

and is included in the Alexandrian catalogues of Platonic writings.Menexenus


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettPERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: Socrates and Menexenus.


SOCRATES: Whence come you, Menexenus? Are you from the Agora?


MENEXENUS: Yes, Socrates; I have been at the Council.


SOCRATES: And what might you be doing at the Council? And yet I need

hardly ask, for I see that you, believing yourself to have arrived at the end of

education and of philosophy, and to have had enough of them, are mounting

upwards  to  things  higher  still,  and,  though  rather  young  for  the  post,  are

intending to govern us elder men, like the rest of your family, which has

always provided some one who kindly took care of us.


MENEXENUS: Yes, Socrates, I shall be ready to hold office, if you allow

and advise that I should, but not if you think otherwise. I went to the council

chamber because I heard that the Council was about to choose some one who

was to speak over the dead. For you know that there is to be a public funeral?


SOCRATES: Yes, I know. And whom did they choose?


MENEXENUS:  No  one;  they  delayed  the  election  until  tomorrow,  but  I

believe that either Archinus or Dion will be chosen.


SOCRATES: O Menexenus! Death in battle is certainly in many respects a

noble thing. The dead man gets a fine and costly funeral, although he may

have been poor, and an elaborate speech is made over him by a wise man

who has long ago prepared what he has to say, although he who is praised

may not have been good for much. The speakers praise him for what he has

done and for what he has not done--that is the beauty of them--and they steal

away our souls with their embellished words; in every conceivable form they

praise the city; and they praise those who died in war, and all our ancestors

who went before us; and they praise ourselves also who are still alive, until I

feel quite elevated by their laudations, and I stand listening to their words,

Menexenus, and become enchanted by them, and all in a moment I imagine

myself to have become a greater and nobler and finer man than I was before.

And if, as often happens, there are any foreigners who accompany me to thespeech, I become suddenly conscious of having a sort of triumph over them,

and they seem to experience a corresponding feeling of admiration at me, and

at the greatness of the city, which appears to them, when they are under the

influence of the speaker, more wonderful than ever. This consciousness of

dignity lasts me more than three days, and not until the fourth or fifth day do

I come to my senses and know where I am; in the meantime I have been

living in the Islands of the Blest. Such is the art of our rhetoricians, and in

such manner does the sound of their words keep ringing in my ears.


MENEXENUS: You are always making fun of the rhetoricians, Socrates; this

time, however, I am inclined to think that the speaker who is chosen will not

have much to say, for he has been called upon to speak at a moment's notice,

and he will be compelled almost to improvise.


SOCRATES: But why, my friend, should he not have plenty to say? Every

rhetorician  has  speeches  ready  made;  nor  is  there  any  difficulty  in

improvising  that  sort  of  stuff.  Had  the  orator  to  praise  Athenians  among

Peloponnesians,  or  Peloponnesians  among  Athenians,  he  must  be  a  good

rhetorician who could succeed and gain credit. But there is no difficulty in a

man's winning applause when he is contending for fame among the persons

whom he is praising.


MENEXENUS: Do you think not, Socrates?


SOCRATES: Certainly 'not.'


MENEXENUS: Do you think that you could speak yourself if there should

be a necessity, and if the Council were to choose you?


SOCRATES: That I should be able to speak is no great wonder, Menexenus,

considering that I have an excellent mistress in the art of rhetoric,--she who

has made so many good speakers, and one who was the best among all the

Hellenes--Pericles, the son of Xanthippus.


MENEXENUS: And who is she? I suppose that you mean Aspasia.


SOCRATES: Yes, I do; and besides her I had Connus, the son of Metrobius,as a master, and he was my master in music, as she was in rhetoric. No

wonder that a man who has received such an education should be a finished

speaker; even the pupil of very inferior masters, say, for example, one who

had learned music of Lamprus, and rhetoric of Antiphon the Rhamnusian,

might make a figure if he were to praise the Athenians among the Athenians.


MENEXENUS: And what would you be able to say if you had to speak?


SOCRATES:  Of  my  own  wit,  most  likely  nothing;  but  yesterday  I  heard

Aspasia composing a funeral oration about these very dead. For she had been

told, as you were saying, that the Athenians were going to choose a speaker,

and she repeated to me the sort of speech which he should deliver, partly

improvising and partly from previous thought, putting together fragments of

the  funeral  oration  which  Pericles  spoke,  but  which,  as  I  believe,  she

composed.


MENEXENUS: And can you remember what Aspasia said?


SOCRATES: I ought to be able, for she taught me, and she was ready to

strike me because I was always forgetting.


MENEXENUS: Then why will you not rehearse what she said?


SOCRATES: Because I am afraid that my mistress may be angry with me if I

publish her speech.


MENEXENUS: Nay, Socrates, let us have the speech, whether Aspasia's or

any one else's, no matter. I hope that you will oblige me.


SOCRATES: But I am afraid that you will laugh at me if I continue the

games of youth in old age.


MENEXENUS: Far otherwise, Socrates; let us by all means have the speech.


SOCRATES: Truly I have such a disposition to oblige you, that if you bid me

dance naked I should not like to refuse, since we are alone. Listen then: If I

remember  rightly,  she  began  as  follows,  with  the  mention  of  the  dead:--

(Thucyd.)There is a tribute of deeds and of words. The departed have already had the

first, when going forth on their destined journey they were attended on their

way by the state and by their friends; the tribute of words remains to be given

to them, as is meet and by law ordained. For noble words are a memorial and

a crown of noble actions, which are given to the doers of them by the hearers.

A word is needed which will duly praise the dead and gently admonish the

living, exhorting the brethren and descendants of the departed to imitate their

virtue, and consoling their fathers and mothers and the survivors, if any, who

may chance to be alive of the previous generation. What sort of a word will

this be, and how shall we rightly begin the praises of these brave men? In

their life they rejoiced their own friends with their valour, and their death

they gave in exchange for the salvation of the living. And I think that we

should praise them in the order in which nature made them good, for they

were good because they were sprung from good fathers. Wherefore let us first

of all praise the goodness of their birth; secondly, their nurture and education;

and then let us set forth how noble their actions were, and how worthy of the

education which they had received.


And first as to their birth. Their ancestors were not strangers, nor are these

their descendants sojourners only, whose fathers have come from another

country; but they are the children of the soil, dwelling and living in their own

land. And the country which brought them up is not like other countries, a

stepmother to her children, but their own true mother; she bore them and

nourished them and received them, and in her bosom they now repose. It is

meet and right, therefore, that we should begin by praising the land which is

their mother, and that will be a way of praising their noble birth.


The country is worthy to be praised, not only by us, but by all mankind; first,

and above all, as being dear to the Gods. This is proved by the strife and

contention of the Gods respecting her. And ought not the country which the

Gods praise to be praised by all mankind? The second praise which may be

fairly claimed by her, is that at the time when the whole earth was sending

forth and creating diverse animals, tame and wild, she our mother was free

and pure from savage monsters, and out of all animals selected and brought

forth man, who is superior to the rest in understanding, and alone has justice

and religion. And a great proof that she brought forth the common ancestorsof us and of the departed, is that she provided the means of support for her

offspring.  For  as  a  woman  proves  her  motherhood  by  giving  milk  to  her

young ones (and she who has no fountain of milk is not a mother), so did this

our land prove that she was the mother of men, for in those days she alone

and first of all brought forth wheat and barley for human food, which is the

best  and  noblest  sustenance  for  man,  whom  she  regarded  as  her  true

offspring. And these are truer proofs of motherhood in a country than in a

woman, for the woman in her conception and generation is but the imitation

of the earth, and not the earth of the woman. And of the fruit of the earth she

gave  a  plenteous  supply,  not  only  to  her  own,  but  to  others  also;  and

afterwards she made the olive to spring up to be a boon to her children, and to

help them in their toils. And when she had herself nursed them and brought

them up to manhood, she gave them Gods to be their rulers and teachers,

whose names are well known, and need not now be repeated. They are the

Gods who first ordered our lives, and instructed us in the arts for the supply

of our daily needs, and taught us the acquisition and use of arms for the

defence of the country.


Thus born into the world and thus educated, the ancestors of the departed

lived  and  made  themselves  a  government,  which  I  ought  briefly  to

commemorate. For government is the nurture of man, and the government of

good men is good, and of bad men bad. And I must show that our ancestors

were trained under a good government, and for this reason they were good,

and our contemporaries are also good, among whom our departed friends are

to be reckoned. Then as now, and indeed always, from that time to this,

speaking  generally,  our  government  was  an  aristocracy--a  form  of

government which receives various names, according to the fancies of men,

and  is  sometimes  called  democracy,  but  is  really  an  aristocracy  or

government of the best which has the approval of the many. For kings we

have always had, first hereditary and then elected, and authority is mostly in

the hands of the people, who dispense offices and power to those who appear

to be most deserving of them. Neither is a man rejected from weakness or

poverty or obscurity of origin, nor honoured by reason of the opposite, as in

other states, but there is one principle--he who appears to be wise and good is

a governor and ruler. The basis of this our government is equality of birth; for

other states are made up of all sorts and unequal conditions of men, and

therefore their governments are unequal; there are tyrannies and there areoligarchies, in which the one party are slaves and the others masters. But we

and our citizens are brethren, the children all of one mother, and we do not

think it right to be one another's masters or servants; but the natural equality

of birth compels us to seek for legal equality, and to recognize no superiority

except in the reputation of virtue and wisdom.


And so their and our fathers, and these, too, our brethren, being nobly born

and  having  been  brought  up  in  all  freedom,  did  both  in  their  public  and

private capacity many noble deeds famous over the whole world. They were

the deeds of men who thought that they ought to fight both against Hellenes

for the sake of Hellenes on behalf of freedom, and against barbarians in the

common interest of Hellas. Time would fail me to tell of their defence of

their country against the invasion of Eumolpus and the Amazons, or of their

defence of the Argives against the Cadmeians, or of the Heracleids against

the Argives; besides, the poets have already declared in song to all mankind

their glory, and therefore any commemoration of their deeds in prose which

we might attempt would hold a second place. They already have their reward,

and I say no more of them; but there are other worthy deeds of which no poet

has worthily sung, and which are still wooing the poet's muse. Of these I am

bound to make honourable mention, and shall invoke others to sing of them

also in lyric and other strains, in a manner becoming the actors. And first I

will tell how the Persians, lords of Asia, were enslaving Europe, and how the

children of this land, who were our fathers, held them back. Of these I will

speak first, and praise their valour, as is meet and fitting. He who would

rightly estimate them should place himself in thought at that time, when the

whole of Asia was subject to the third king of Persia. The first king, Cyrus,

by his valour freed the Persians, who were his countrymen, and subjected the

Medes, who were their lords, and he ruled over the rest of Asia, as far as

Egypt; and after him came his son, who ruled all the accessible part of Egypt

and Libya; the third king was Darius, who extended the land boundaries of

the empire to Scythia, and with his fleet held the sea and the islands. None

presumed to be his equal; the minds of all men were enthralled by him--so

many and mighty and warlike nations had the power of Persia subdued. Now

Darius had a quarrel against us and the Eretrians, because, as he said, we had

conspired against Sardis, and he sent 500,000 men in transports and vessels

of war, and 300 ships, and Datis as commander, telling him to bring the

Eretrians and Athenians to the king, if he wished to keep his head on hisshoulders. He sailed against the Eretrians, who were reputed to be amongst

the  noblest  and  most  warlike  of  the  Hellenes  of  that  day,  and  they  were

numerous,  but  he  conquered  them  all  in  three  days;  and  when  he  had

conquered them, in order that no one might escape, he searched the whole

country after this manner: his soldiers, coming to the borders of Eretria and

spreading  from  sea  to  sea,  joined  hands  and  passed  through  the  whole

country, in order that they might be able to tell the king that no one had

escaped them. And from Eretria they went to Marathon with a like intention,

expecting to bind the Athenians in the same yoke of necessity in which they

had bound the Eretrians. Having effected one-half of their purpose, they were

in the act of attempting the other, and none of the Hellenes dared to assist

either the Eretrians or the Athenians, except the Lacedaemonians, and they

arrived a day too late for the battle; but the rest were panic-stricken and kept

quiet, too happy in having escaped for a time. He who has present to his mind

that conflict will know what manner of men they were who received the onset

of the barbarians at Marathon, and chastened the pride of the whole of Asia,

and by the victory which they gained over the barbarians first taught other

men that the power of the Persians was not invincible, but that hosts of men

and the multitude of riches alike yield to valour. And I assert that those men

are the fathers not only of ourselves, but of our liberties and of the liberties of

all who are on the continent, for that was the action to which the Hellenes

looked back when they ventured to fight for their own safety in the battles

which  ensued:  they  became  disciples  of  the  men  of  Marathon.  To  them,

therefore, I assign in my speech the first place, and the second to those who

fought and conquered in the sea fights at Salamis and Artemisium; for of

them, too, one might have many things to say--of the assaults which they

endured by sea and land, and how they repelled them. I will mention only

that act of theirs which appears to me to be the noblest, and which followed

that  of  Marathon  and  came  nearest  to  it;  for  the  men  of  Marathon  only

showed the Hellenes that it was possible to ward off the barbarians by land,

the many by the few; but there was no proof that they could be defeated by

ships, and at sea the Persians retained the reputation of being invincible in

numbers and wealth and skill and strength. This is the glory of the men who

fought  at  sea,  that  they  dispelled  the  second  terror  which  had  hitherto

possessed the Hellenes, and so made the fear of numbers, whether of ships or

men, to cease among them. And so the soldiers of Marathon and the sailors of

Salamis  became  the  schoolmasters  of  Hellas;  the  one  teaching  andhabituating the Hellenes not to fear the barbarians at sea, and the others not to

fear  them  by  land.  Third  in  order,  for  the  number  and  valour  of  the

combatants, and third in the salvation of Hellas, I place the battle of Plataea.

And  now  the  Lacedaemonians  as  well  as  the  Athenians  took  part  in  the

struggle; they were all united in this greatest and most terrible conflict of all;

wherefore their virtues will be celebrated in times to come, as they are now

celebrated by us. But at a later period many Hellenic tribes were still on the

side of the barbarians, and there was a report that the great king was going to

make a new attempt upon the Hellenes, and therefore justice requires that we

should also make mention of those who crowned the previous work of our

salvation, and drove and purged away all barbarians from the sea. These were

the men who fought by sea at the river Eurymedon, and who went on the

expedition to Cyprus, and who sailed to Egypt and divers other places; and

they should be gratefully remembered by us, because they compelled the king

in fear for himself to look to his own safety instead of plotting the destruction

of Hellas.


And so the war against the barbarians was fought out to the end by the whole

city on their own behalf, and on behalf of their countrymen. There was peace,

and our city was held in honour; and then, as prosperity makes men jealous,

there  succeeded  a  jealousy  of  her,  and  jealousy  begat  envy,  and  so  she

became engaged against her will in a war with the Hellenes. On the breaking

out of war, our citizens met the Lacedaemonians at Tanagra, and fought for

the freedom of the Boeotians; the issue was doubtful, and was decided by the

engagement  which  followed.  For  when  the  Lacedaemonians  had  gone  on

their way, leaving the Boeotians, whom they were aiding, on the third day

after the battle of Tanagra, our countrymen conquered at Oenophyta, and

righteously restored those who had been unrighteously exiled. And they were

the  first  after  the  Persian  war  who  fought  on  behalf  of  liberty  in  aid  of

Hellenes against Hellenes; they were brave men, and freed those whom they

aided, and were the first too who were honourably interred in this sepulchre

by the state. Afterwards there was a mighty war, in which all the Hellenes

joined, and devastated our country, which was very ungrateful of them; and

our countrymen, after defeating them in a naval engagement and taking their

leaders,  the  Spartans,  at  Sphagia,  when  they  might  have  destroyed  them,

spared their lives, and gave them back, and made peace, considering that they

should war with the fellow-countrymen only until they gained a victory overthem, and not because of the private anger of the state destroy the common

interest  of  Hellas;  but  that  with  barbarians  they  should  war  to  the  death.

Worthy of praise are they also who waged this war, and are here interred; for

they proved, if any one doubted the superior prowess of the Athenians in the

former war with the barbarians, that their doubts had no foundation--showing

by their victory in the civil war with Hellas, in which they subdued the other

chief state of the Hellenes, that they could conquer single-handed those with

whom they had been allied in the war against the barbarians. After the peace

there followed a third war, which was of a terrible and desperate nature, and

in this many brave men who are here interred lost their lives--many of them

had won victories in Sicily, whither they had gone over the seas to fight for

the liberties of the Leontines, to whom they were bound by oaths; but, owing

to the distance, the city was unable to help them, and they lost heart and came

to misfortune, their very enemies and opponents winning more renown for

valour and temperance than the friends of others. Many also fell in naval

engagements at the Hellespont, after having in one day taken all the ships of

the enemy, and defeated them in other naval engagements. And what I call

the terrible and desperate nature of the war, is that the other Hellenes, in their

extreme animosity towards the city, should have entered into negotiations

with their bitterest enemy, the king of Persia, whom they, together with us,

had expelled;--him, without us, they again brought back, barbarian against

Hellenes,  and  all  the  hosts,  both  of  Hellenes  and  barbarians,  were  united

against Athens. And then shone forth the power and valour of our city. Her

enemies had supposed that she was exhausted by the war, and our ships were

blockaded at Mitylene. But the citizens themselves embarked, and came to

the rescue with sixty other ships, and their valour was confessed of all men,

for  they  conquered  their  enemies  and  delivered  their  friends.  And  yet  by

some evil fortune they were left to perish at sea, and therefore are not interred

here. Ever to be remembered and honoured are they, for by their valour not

only that sea-fight was won for us, but the entire war was decided by them,

and through them the city gained the reputation of being invincible, even

though attacked by all mankind. And that reputation was a true one, for the

defeat which came upon us was our own doing. We were never conquered by

others, and to this day we are still unconquered by them; but we were our

own conquerors, and received defeat at our own hands. Afterwards there was

quiet and peace abroad, but there sprang up war at home; and, if men are

destined to have civil war, no one could have desired that his city should takethe disorder in a milder form. How joyful and natural was the reconciliation

of those who came from the Piraeus and those who came from the city; with

what moderation did they order the war against the tyrants in Eleusis, and in a

manner how unlike what the other Hellenes expected! And the reason of this

gentleness  was  the  veritable  tie  of  blood,  which  created  among  them  a

friendship as of kinsmen, faithful not in word only, but in deed. And we

ought also to remember those who then fell by one another's hands, and on

such occasions as these to reconcile them with sacrifices and prayers, praying

to those who have power over them, that they may be reconciled even as we

are reconciled. For they did not attack one another out of malice or enmity,

but  they  were  unfortunate.  And  that  such  was  the  fact  we  ourselves  are

witnesses, who are of the same race with them, and have mutually received

and granted forgiveness of what we have done and suffered. After this there

was perfect peace, and the city had rest; and her feeling was that she forgave

the  barbarians,  who  had  severely  suffered  at  her  hands  and  severely

retaliated, but that she was indignant at the ingratitude of the Hellenes, when

she remembered how they had received good from her and returned evil,

having made common cause with the barbarians, depriving her of the ships

which had once been their salvation, and dismantling our walls, which had

preserved  their  own  from  falling.  She  thought  that  she  would  no  longer

defend  the  Hellenes,  when  enslaved  either  by  one  another  or  by  the

barbarians,  and  did  accordingly.  This  was  our  feeling,  while  the

Lacedaemonians were thinking that we who were the champions of liberty

had fallen, and that their business was to subject the remaining Hellenes. And

why should I say more? for the events of which I am speaking happened not

long ago and we can all of us remember how the chief peoples of Hellas,

Argives and Boeotians and Corinthians, came to feel the need of us, and,

what is the greatest miracle of all, the Persian king himself was driven to such

extremity as to come round to the opinion, that from this city, of which he

was the destroyer, and from no other, his salvation would proceed.


And if a person desired to bring a deserved accusation against our city, he

would find only one charge which he could justly urge--that she was too

compassionate and too favourable to the weaker side. And in this instance she

was not able to hold out or keep her resolution of refusing aid to her injurers

when they were being enslaved, but she was softened, and did in fact send

out aid, and delivered the Hellenes from slavery, and they were free until theyafterwards enslaved themselves. Whereas, to the great king she refused to

give  the  assistance  of  the  state,  for  she  could  not  forget  the  trophies  of

Marathon and Salamis and Plataea; but she allowed exiles and volunteers to

assist  him,  and  they  were  his  salvation.  And  she  herself,  when  she  was

compelled, entered into the war, and built walls and ships, and fought with

the Lacedaemonians on behalf of the Parians. Now the king fearing this city

and wanting to stand aloof, when he saw the Lacedaemonians growing weary

of the war at sea, asked of us, as the price of his alliance with us and the other

allies,  to  give  up  the  Hellenes  in  Asia,  whom  the  Lacedaemonians  had

previously handed over to him, he thinking that we should refuse, and that

then he might have a pretence for withdrawing from us. About the other allies

he was mistaken, for the Corinthians and Argives and Boeotians, and the

other states, were quite willing to let them go, and swore and covenanted,

that, if he would pay them money, they would make over to him the Hellenes

of the continent, and we alone refused to give them up and swear. Such was

the  natural  nobility  of  this  city,  so  sound  and  healthy  was  the  spirit  of

freedom among us, and the instinctive dislike of the barbarian, because we

are pure Hellenes, having no admixture of barbarism in us. For we are not

like many others, descendants of Pelops or Cadmus or Egyptus or Danaus,

who are by nature barbarians, and yet pass for Hellenes, and dwell in the

midst  of  us;  but  we  are  pure  Hellenes,  uncontaminated  by  any  foreign

element, and therefore the hatred of the foreigner has passed unadulterated

into the life-blood of the city. And so, notwithstanding our noble sentiments,

we were again isolated, because we were unwilling to be guilty of the base

and unholy act of giving up Hellenes to barbarians. And we were in the same

case as when we were subdued before; but, by the favour of Heaven, we

managed better, for we ended the war without the loss of our ships or walls or

colonies; the enemy was only too glad to be quit of us. Yet in this war we lost

many brave men, such as were those who fell owing to the ruggedness of the

ground at the battle of Corinth, or by treason at Lechaeum. Brave men, too,

were those who delivered the Persian king, and drove the Lacedaemonians

from the sea. I remind you of them, and you must celebrate them together

with me, and do honour to their memories.


Such were the actions of the men who are here interred, and of others who

have died on behalf of their country; many and glorious things I have spoken

of them, and there are yet many more and more glorious things remaining tobe told--many days and nights would not suffice to tell of them. Let them not

be forgotten, and let every man remind their descendants that they also are

soldiers who must not desert the ranks of their ancestors, or from cowardice

fall behind. Even as I exhort you this day, and in all future time, whenever I

meet with any of you, shall continue to remind and exhort you, O ye sons of

heroes, that you strive to be the bravest of men. And I think that I ought now

to  repeat  what  your  fathers  desired  to  have  said  to  you  who  are  their

survivors, when they went out to battle, in case anything happened to them. I

will tell you what I heard them say, and what, if they had only speech, they

would  fain  be  saying,  judging  from  what  they  then  said.  And  you  must

imagine that you hear them saying what I now repeat to you:--


'Sons, the event proves that your fathers were brave men; for we might have

lived dishonourably, but have preferred to die honourably rather than bring

you  and  your  children  into  disgrace,  and  rather  than  dishonour  our  own

fathers  and  forefathers;  considering  that  life  is  not  life  to  one  who  is  a

dishonour  to  his  race,  and  that  to  such  a  one  neither  men  nor  Gods  are

friendly, either while he is on the earth or after death in the world below.

Remember  our  words,  then,  and  whatever  is  your  aim  let  virtue  be  the

condition  of  the  attainment  of  your  aim,  and  know  that  without  this  all

possessions and pursuits are dishonourable and evil. For neither does wealth

bring  honour  to  the  owner,  if  he  be  a  coward;  of  such  a  one  the  wealth

belongs to another, and not to himself. Nor does beauty and strength of body,

when dwelling in a base and cowardly man, appear comely, but the reverse of

comely, making the possessor more conspicuous, and manifesting forth his

cowardice. And all knowledge, when separated from justice and virtue, is

seen to be cunning and not wisdom; wherefore make this your first and last

and constant and all-absorbing aim, to exceed, if possible, not only us but all

your ancestors in virtue; and know that to excel you in virtue only brings us

shame, but that to be excelled by you is a source of happiness to us. And we

shall  most  likely  be  defeated,  and  you  will  most  likely  be  victors  in  the

contest,  if  you  learn  so  to  order  your  lives  as  not  to  abuse  or  waste  the

reputation of your ancestors, knowing that to a man who has any self-respect,

nothing is more dishonourable than to be honoured, not for his own sake, but

on account of the reputation of his ancestors. The honour of parents is a fair

and noble treasure to their posterity, but to have the use of a treasure of

wealth and honour, and to leave none to your successors, because you haveneither money nor reputation of your own, is alike base and dishonourable.

And if you follow our precepts you will be received by us as friends, when

the hour of destiny brings you hither; but if you neglect our words and are

disgraced in your lives, no one will welcome or receive you. This is the

message which is to be delivered to our children.


'Some of us have fathers and mothers still living, and we would urge them, if,

as is likely, we shall die, to bear the calamity as lightly as possible, and not to

condole with one another; for they have sorrows enough, and will not need

any one to stir them up. While we gently heal their wounds, let us remind

them that the Gods have heard the chief part of their prayers; for they prayed,

not that their children might live for ever, but that they might be brave and

renowned. And this, which is the greatest good, they have attained. A mortal

man cannot expect to have everything in his own life turning out according to

his will; and they, if they bear their misfortunes bravely, will be truly deemed

brave fathers of the brave. But if they give way to their sorrows, either they

will be suspected of not being our parents, or we of not being such as our

panegyrists declare. Let not either of the two alternatives happen, but rather

let them be our chief and true panegyrists, who show in their lives that they

are true men, and had men for their sons. Of old the saying, "Nothing too

much," appeared to be, and really was, well said. For he whose happiness

rests with himself, if possible, wholly, and if not, as far as is possible,--who is

not hanging in suspense on other men, or changing with the vicissitude of

their fortune,--has his life ordered for the best. He is the temperate and valiant

and wise; and when his riches come and go, when his children are given and

taken away, he will remember the proverb--"Neither rejoicing overmuch nor

grieving overmuch," for he relies upon himself. And such we would have our

parents to be--that is our word and wish, and as such we now offer ourselves,

neither lamenting overmuch, nor fearing overmuch, if we are to die at this

time.  And  we  entreat  our  fathers  and  mothers  to  retain  these  feelings

throughout their future life, and to be assured that they will not please us by

sorrowing and lamenting over us. But, if the dead have any knowledge of the

living, they will displease us most by making themselves miserable and by

taking their misfortunes too much to heart, and they will please us best if they

bear their loss lightly and temperately. For our life will have the noblest end

which is vouchsafed to man, and should be glorified rather than lamented.

And if they will direct their minds to the care and nurture of our wives andchildren, they will soonest forget their misfortunes, and live in a better and

nobler way, and be dearer to us.


'This is all that we have to say to our families: and to the state we would say--

Take care of our parents and of our sons: let her worthily cherish the old age

of our parents, and bring up our sons in the right way. But we know that she

will of her own accord take care of them, and does not need any exhortation

of ours.'


This, O ye children and parents of the dead, is the message which they bid us

deliver to you, and which I do deliver with the utmost seriousness. And in

their  name  I  beseech  you,  the  children,  to  imitate  your  fathers,  and  you,

parents, to be of good cheer about yourselves; for we will nourish your age,

and take care of you both publicly and privately in any place in which one of

us may meet one of you who are the parents of the dead. And the care of you

which the city shows, you know yourselves; for she has made provision by

law concerning the parents and children of those who die in war; the highest

authority is specially entrusted with the duty of watching over them above all

other citizens, and they will see that your fathers and mothers have no wrong

done to them. The city herself shares in the education of the children, desiring

as far as it is possible that their orphanhood may not be felt by them; while

they are children she is a parent to them, and when they have arrived at man's

estate she sends them to their several duties, in full armour clad; and bringing

freshly to their minds the ways of their fathers, she places in their hands the

instruments of their fathers' virtues; for the sake of the omen, she would have

them from the first begin to rule over their own houses arrayed in the strength

and arms of their fathers. And as for the dead, she never ceases honouring

them, celebrating in common for all rites which become the property of each;

and  in  addition  to  this,  holding  gymnastic  and  equestrian  contests,  and

musical festivals of every sort. She is to the dead in the place of a son and

heir, and to their sons in the place of a father, and to their parents and elder

kindred  in  the  place  of  a  guardian--ever  and  always  caring  for  them.

Considering this, you ought to bear your calamity the more gently; for thus

you will be most endeared to the dead and to the living, and your sorrows

will heal and be healed. And now do you and all, having lamented the dead in

common according to the law, go your ways.You have heard, Menexenus, the oration of Aspasia the Milesian.


MENEXENUS: Truly, Socrates, I marvel that Aspasia, who is only a woman,

should be able to compose such a speech; she must be a rare one.


SOCRATES: Well, if you are incredulous, you may come with me and hear

her.


MENEXENUS: I have often met Aspasia, Socrates, and know what she is

like.


SOCRATES: Well, and do you not admire her, and are you not grateful for

her speech?


MENEXENUS: Yes, Socrates, I am very grateful to her or to him who told

you, and still more to you who have told me.


SOCRATES: Very good. But you must take care not to tell of me, and then at

some future time I will repeat to you many other excellent political speeches

of hers.


MENEXENUS: Fear not, only let me hear them, and I will keep the secret.


SOCRATES: Then I will keep my promise.


THE END                            Meno Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    Beginning of MenoIntroduction to Plato's Meno


  This  Dialogue  begins  abruptly  with  a  question  of  Meno,  who  asks,

'whether virtue can be taught.' Socrates replies that he does not as yet know

what virtue is, and has never known anyone who did. 'Then he cannot have

met Gorgias when he was at Athens.' Yes, Socrates had met him, but he has a

bad memory, and has forgotten what Gorgias said. Will Meno tell him his

own notion, which is probably not very different from that of Gorgias? 'O

yes--nothing easier: there is the virtue of a man, of a woman, of an old man,

and of a child; there is a virtue of every age and state of life, all of which may

be easily described.'


  Socrates reminds Meno that this is only an enumeration of the virtues and

not a definition of the notion which is common to them all. In a second

attempt Meno defines virtue to be 'the power of command.' But to this, again,

exceptions are taken. For there must be a virtue of those who obey, as well as

of those who command; and the power of command must be justly or not

unjustly exercised. Meno is very ready to admit that justice is virtue: 'Would

you  say  virtue  or  a  virtue,  for  there  are  other  virtues,  such  as  courage,

temperance, and the like; just as round is a figure, and black and white are

colours, and yet there are other figures and other colours. Let Meno take the

examples of figure and colour, and try to define them.' Meno confesses his

inability, and after a process of interrogation, in which Socrates explains to

him the nature of a 'simile in multis,' Socrates himself defines figure as 'the

accompaniment of colour.' But some one may object that he does not know

the meaning of the word 'colour;' and if he is a candid friend, and not a mere

disputant,  Socrates  is  willing  to  furnish  him  with  a  simpler  and  more

philosophical definition, into which no disputed word is allowed to intrude:

'Figure is the limit of form.' Meno imperiously insists that he must still have a

definition of colour. Some raillery follows; and at length Socrates is induced

to reply, 'that colour is the effluence of form, sensible, and in due proportion

to  the  sight.'  This  definition  is  exactly  suited  to  the  taste  of  Meno,  who

welcomes the familiar language of Gorgias and Empedocles. Socrates is of

opinion that the more abstract or dialectical definition of figure is far better.  Now that Meno has been made to understand the nature of a general

definition, he answers in the spirit of a Greek gentleman, and in the words of

a poet, 'that virtue is to delight in things honourable, and to have the power of

getting  them.'  This  is  a  nearer  approximation  than  he  has  yet  made  to  a

complete  definition,  and,  regarded  as  a  piece  of  proverbial  or  popular

morality,  is  not  far  from  the  truth.  But  the  objection  is  urged,  'that  the

honourable is the good,' and as every one equally desires the good, the point

of the definition is contained in the words, 'the power of getting them.' 'And

they must be got justly or with justice.' The definition will then stand thus:

'Virtue is the power of getting good with justice.' But justice is a part of

virtue, and therefore virtue is the getting of good with a part of virtue. The

definition repeats the word defined.


  Meno  complains  that  the  conversation  of  Socrates  has  the  effect  of  a

torpedo's shock upon him. When he talks with other persons he has plenty to

say  about  virtue;  in  the  presence  of  Socrates,  his  thoughts  desert  him.

Socrates replies that he is only the cause of perplexity in others, because he is

himself perplexed. He proposes to continue the enquiry. But how, asks Meno,

can he enquire either into what he knows or into what he does not know?

This is a sophistical puzzle, which, as Socrates remarks, saves a great deal of

trouble to him who accepts it. But the puzzle has a real difficulty latent under

it, to which Socrates will endeavour to find a reply. The difficulty is the

origin of knowledge:--


  He has heard from priests and priestesses, and from the poet Pindar, of an

immortal  soul  which  is  born  again  and  again  in  successive  periods  of

existence, returning into this world when she has paid the penalty of ancient

crime, and, having wandered over all places of the upper and under world,

and seen and known all things at one time or other, is by association out of

one thing capable of recovering all. For nature is of one kindred; and every

soul has a seed or germ which may be developed into all knowledge. The

existence of this latent knowledge is further proved by the interrogation of

one  of  Meno's  slaves,  who,  in  the  skilful  hands  of  Socrates,  is  made  to

acknowledge some elementary relations of geometrical figures. The theorem

that the square of the diagonal is double the square of the side--that famous

discovery  of  primitive  mathematics,  in  honour  of  which  the  legendary

Pythagoras is said to have sacrificed a hecatomb--is elicited from him. Thefirst  step  in  the  process  of  teaching  has  made  him  conscious  of  his  own

ignorance. He has had the 'torpedo's shock' given him, and is the better for the

operation.  But  whence  had  the  uneducated  man  this  knowledge?  He  had

never  learnt  geometry  in  this  world;  nor  was  it  born  with  him;  he  must

therefore have had it when he was not a man. And as he always either was or

was not a man, he must have always had it. (Compare Phaedo.)


  After Socrates has given this specimen of the true nature of teaching, the

original  question  of  the  teachableness  of  virtue  is  renewed.  Again  he

professes a desire to know 'what virtue is' first. But he is willing to argue the

question, as mathematicians say, under an hypothesis. He will assume that if

virtue is knowledge, then virtue can be taught. (This was the stage of the

argument at which the Protagoras concluded.)


  Socrates has no difficulty in showing that virtue is a good, and that goods,

whether of body or mind, must be under the direction of knowledge. Upon

the  assumption  just  made,  then,  virtue  is  teachable.  But  where  are  the

teachers? There are none to be found. This is extremely discouraging. Virtue

is no sooner discovered to be teachable, than the discovery follows that it is

not taught. Virtue, therefore, is and is not teachable.


  In this dilemma an appeal is made to Anytus, a respectable and well-to-do

citizen of the old school, and a family friend of Meno, who happens to be

present. He is asked 'whether Meno shall go to the Sophists and be taught.'

The suggestion throws him into a rage. 'To whom, then, shall Meno go?' asks

Socrates. To any Athenian gentleman--to the great Athenian statesmen of

past  times.  Socrates  replies  here,  as  elsewhere  (Laches,  Prot.),  that

Themistocles, Pericles, and other great men, had sons to whom they would

surely, if they could have done so, have imparted their own political wisdom;

but no one ever heard that these sons of theirs were remarkable for anything

except riding and wrestling and similar accomplishments. Anytus is angry at

the imputation which is cast on his favourite statesmen, and on a class to

which he supposes himself to belong; he breaks off with a significant hint.

The mention of another opportunity of talking with him, and the suggestion

that  Meno  may  do  the  Athenian  people  a  service  by  pacifying  him,  are

evident allusions to the trial of Socrates.  Socrates returns to the consideration of the question 'whether virtue is

teachable,' which was denied on the ground that there are no teachers of it:

(for the Sophists are bad teachers, and the rest of the world do not profess to

teach). But there is another point which we failed to observe, and in which

Gorgias has never instructed Meno, nor Prodicus Socrates. This is the nature

of right opinion. For virtue may be under the guidance of right opinion as

well as of knowledge; and right opinion is for practical purposes as good as

knowledge,  but  is  incapable  of  being  taught,  and  is  also  liable,  like  the

images of Daedalus, to 'walk off,' because not bound by the tie of the cause.

This is the sort of instinct which is possessed by statesmen, who are not wise

or knowing persons, but only inspired or divine. The higher virtue, which is

identical  with  knowledge,  is  an  ideal  only.  If  the  statesman  had  this

knowledge, and could teach what he knew, he would be like Tiresias in the

world below,--'he alone has wisdom, but the rest flit like shadows.'


  This Dialogue is an attempt to answer the question, Can virtue be taught?

No one would either ask or answer such a question in modern times. But in

the age of Socrates it was only by an effort that the mind could rise to a

general notion of virtue as distinct from the particular virtues of courage,

liberality,  and  the  like.  And  when  a  hazy  conception  of  this  ideal  was

attained, it was only by a further effort that the question of the teachableness

of virtue could be resolved.


  The answer which is given by Plato is paradoxical enough, and seems

rather intended to stimulate than to satisfy enquiry. Virtue is knowledge, and

therefore virtue can be taught. But virtue is not taught, and therefore in this

higher and ideal sense there is no virtue and no knowledge. The teaching of

the  Sophists  is  confessedly  inadequate,  and  Meno,  who  is  their  pupil,  is

ignorant of the very nature of general terms. He can only produce out of their

armoury the sophism, 'that you can neither enquire into what you know nor

into  what  you  do  not  know;'  to  which  Socrates  replies  by  his  theory  of

reminiscence.


  To  the  doctrine  that  virtue  is  knowledge,  Plato  has  been  constantly

tending in the previous Dialogues. But the new truth is no sooner found than

it vanishes away. 'If there is knowledge, there must be teachers; and where

are the teachers?' There is no knowledge in the higher sense of systematic,connected, reasoned knowledge, such as may one day be attained, and such

as Plato himself seems to see in some far off vision of a single science. And

there are no teachers in the higher sense of the word; that is to say, no real

teachers who will arouse the spirit of enquiry in their pupils, and not merely

instruct them in rhetoric or impart to them ready- made information for a fee

of 'one' or of 'fifty drachms.' Plato is desirous of deepening the notion of

education, and therefore he asserts the paradox that there are no educators.

This paradox, though different in form, is not really different from the remark

which is often made in modern times by those who would depreciate either

the methods of education commonly employed, or the standard attained--that

'there is no true education among us.'


  There remains still a possibility which must not be overlooked. Even if

there be no true knowledge, as is proved by 'the wretched state of education,'

there may be right opinion, which is a sort of guessing or divination resting

on no knowledge of causes, and incommunicable to others. This is the gift

which our statesmen have, as is proved by the circumstance that they are

unable to impart their knowledge to their sons. Those who are possessed of it

cannot be said to be men of science or philosophers, but they are inspired and

divine.


  There may be some trace of irony in this curious passage, which forms

the concluding portion of the Dialogue. But Plato certainly does not mean to

intimate that the supernatural or divine is the true basis of human life. To him

knowledge, if only attainable in this world, is of all things the most divine.

Yet, like other philosophers, he is willing to admit that 'probability is the

guide  of  life  (Butler's  Analogy.);'  and  he  is  at  the  same  time  desirous  of

contrasting  the  wisdom  which  governs  the  world  with  a  higher  wisdom.

There are many instincts, judgments, and anticipations of the human mind

which cannot be reduced to rule, and of which the grounds cannot always be

given in words. A person may have some skill or latent experience which he

is able to use himself and is yet unable to teach others, because he has no

principles,  and  is  incapable  of  collecting  or  arranging  his  ideas.  He  has

practice, but not theory; art, but not science. This is a true fact of psychology,

which is recognized by Plato in this passage. But he is far from saying, as

some have imagined, that inspiration or divine grace is to be regarded as

higher  than  knowledge.  He  would  not  have  preferred  the  poet  or  man  ofaction to the philosopher, or the virtue of custom to the virtue based upon

ideas.


  Also here, as in the Ion and Phaedrus, Plato appears to acknowledge an

unreasoning element in the higher nature of man. The philosopher only has

knowledge, and yet the statesman and the poet are inspired. There may be a

sort of irony in regarding in this way the gifts of genius. But there is no

reason to suppose that he is deriding them, any more than he is deriding the

phenomena of love or of enthusiasm in the Symposium, or of oracles in the

Apology, or of divine intimations when he is speaking of the daemonium of

Socrates. He recognizes the lower form of right opinion, as well as the higher

one of science, in the spirit of one who desires to include in his philosophy

every aspect of human life; just as he recognizes the existence of popular

opinion as a fact, and the Sophists as the expression of it.


  This Dialogue contains the first intimation of the doctrine of reminiscence

and of the immortality of the soul. The proof is very slight, even slighter than

in the Phaedo and Republic. Because men had abstract ideas in a previous

state, they must have always had them, and their souls therefore must have

always existed. For they must always have been either men or not men. The

fallacy of the latter words is transparent. And Socrates himself appears to be

conscious of their weakness; for he adds immediately afterwards, 'I have said

some things of which I am not altogether confident.' (Compare Phaedo.) It

may  be  observed,  however,  that  the  fanciful  notion  of  pre-existence  is

combined with a true but partial view of the origin and unity of knowledge,

and  of  the  association  of  ideas.  Knowledge  is  prior  to  any  particular

knowledge, and exists not in the previous state of the individual, but of the

race. It is potential, not actual, and can only be appropriated by strenuous

exertion.


  The idealism of Plato is here presented in a less developed form than in

the Phaedo and Phaedrus. Nothing is said of the pre-existence of ideas of

justice, temperance, and the like. Nor is Socrates positive of anything but the

duty  of  enquiry.  The  doctrine  of  reminiscence  too  is  explained  more  in

accordance with fact and experience as arising out of the affinities of nature

(ate  tes  thuseos  oles  suggenous  ouses).  Modern  philosophy  says  that  all

things in nature are dependent on one another; the ancient philosopher hadthe same truth latent in his mind when he affirmed that out of one thing all

the  rest  may  be  recovered.  The  subjective  was  converted  by  him  into  an

objective;  the  mental  phenomenon  of  the  association  of  ideas  (compare

Phaedo)  became  a  real  chain  of  existences.  The  germs  of  two  valuable

principles of education may also be gathered from the 'words of priests and

priestesses:'  (1)  that  true  knowledge  is  a  knowledge  of  causes  (compare

Aristotle's theory of episteme); and (2) that the process of learning consists

not in what is brought to the learner, but in what is drawn out of him.


  Some lesser points of the dialogue may be noted, such as (1) the acute

observation that Meno prefers the familiar definition, which is embellished

with  poetical  language,  to  the  better  and  truer  one;  or  (2)  the  shrewd

reflection, which may admit of an application to modern as well as to ancient

teachers, that the Sophists having made large fortunes; this must surely be a

criterion of their powers of teaching, for that no man could get a living by

shoemaking who was not a good shoemaker; or (3) the remark conveyed,

almost in a word, that the verbal sceptic is saved the labour of thought and

enquiry (ouden dei to toiouto zeteseos). Characteristic also of the temper of

the Socratic enquiry is, (4) the proposal to discuss the teachableness of virtue

under an hypothesis, after the manner of the mathematicians; and (5) the

repetition of the favourite doctrine which occurs so frequently in the earlier

and more Socratic Dialogues, and gives a colour to all of them--that mankind

only desire evil through ignorance; (6) the experiment of eliciting from the

slave-boy the mathematical truth which is latent in him, and (7) the remark

that he is all the better for knowing his ignorance.


  The character of Meno, like that of Critias, has no relation to the actual

circumstances  of  his  life.  Plato  is  silent  about  his  treachery  to  the  ten

thousand Greeks, which Xenophon has recorded, as he is also silent about the

crimes of Critias. He is a Thessalian Alcibiades, rich and luxurious-- a spoilt

child of fortune, and is described as the hereditary friend of the great king.

Like Alcibiades he is inspired with an ardent desire of knowledge, and is

equally willing to learn of Socrates and of the Sophists. He may be regarded

as standing in the same relation to Gorgias as Hippocrates in the Protagoras

to the other great Sophist. He is the sophisticated youth on whom Socrates

tries his cross-examining powers, just as in the Charmides, the Lysis, and the

Euthydemus, ingenuous boyhood is made the subject of a similar experiment.He is treated by Socrates in a half-playful manner suited to his character; at

the same time he appears not quite to understand the process to which he is

being  subjected.  For  he  is  exhibited  as  ignorant  of  the  very  elements  of

dialectics, in which the Sophists have failed to instruct their disciple. His

definition of virtue as 'the power and desire of attaining things honourable,'

like the first definition of justice in the Republic, is taken from a poet. His

answers have a sophistical ring, and at the same time show the sophistical

incapacity to grasp a general notion.


  Anytus  is  the  type  of  the  narrow-minded  man  of  the  world,  who  is

indignant at innovation, and equally detests the popular teacher and the true

philosopher.  He  seems,  like  Aristophanes,  to  regard  the  new  opinions,

whether of Socrates or the Sophists, as fatal to Athenian greatness. He is of

the  same  class  as  Callicles  in  the  Gorgias,  but  of  a  different  variety;  the

immoral and sophistical doctrines of Callicles are not attributed to him. The

moderation with which he is described is remarkable, if he be the accuser of

Socrates, as is apparently indicated by his parting words. Perhaps Plato may

have been desirous of showing that the accusation of Socrates was not to be

attributed to badness or malevolence, but rather to a tendency in men's minds.

Or he may have been regardless of the historical truth of the characters of his

dialogue, as in the case of Meno and Critias. Like Chaerephon (Apol.) the

real Anytus was a democrat, and had joined Thrasybulus in the conflict with

the thirty.


  The Protagoras arrived at a sort of hypothetical conclusion, that if 'virtue

is knowledge, it can be taught.' In the Euthydemus, Socrates himself offered

an example of the manner in which the true teacher may draw out the mind of

youth; this was in contrast to the quibbling follies of the Sophists. In the

Meno the subject is more developed; the foundations of the enquiry are laid

deeper, and the nature of knowledge is more distinctly explained. There is a

progression by antagonism of two opposite aspects of philosophy. But at the

moment when we approach nearest, the truth doubles upon us and passes out

of our reach. We seem to find that the ideal of knowledge is irreconcilable

with experience. In human life there is indeed the profession of knowledge,

but right opinion is our actual guide. There is another sort of progress from

the general notions of Socrates, who asked simply, 'what is friendship?' 'what

is temperance?' 'what is courage?' as in the Lysis, Charmides, Laches, to thetranscendentalism  of  Plato,  who,  in  the  second  stage  of  his  philosophy,

sought to find the nature of knowledge in a prior and future state of existence.


  The difficulty in framing general notions which has appeared in this and

in all the previous Dialogues recurs in the Gorgias and Theaetetus as well as

in the Republic. In the Gorgias too the statesmen reappear, but in stronger

opposition to the philosopher. They are no longer allowed to have a divine

insight,  but,  though  acknowledged  to  have  been  clever  men  and  good

speakers, are denounced as 'blind leaders of the blind.' The doctrine of the

immortality of the soul is also carried further, being made the foundation not

only of a theory of knowledge, but of a doctrine of rewards and punishments.

In the Republic the relation of knowledge to virtue is described in a manner

more  consistent  with  modern  distinctions.  The  existence  of  the  virtues

without the possession of knowledge in the higher or philosophical sense is

admitted to be possible. Right opinion is again introduced in the Theaetetus

as an account of knowledge, but is rejected on the ground that it is irrational

(as here, because it is not bound by the tie of the cause), and also because the

conception of false opinion is given up as hopeless. The doctrines of Plato are

necessarily  different  at  different  times  of  his  life,  as  new  distinctions  are

realized,  or  new  stages  of  thought  attained  by  him.  We  are  not  therefore

justified, in order to take away the appearance of inconsistency, in attributing

to him hidden meanings or remote allusions.


  There are no external criteria by which we can determine the date of the

Meno. There is no reason to suppose that any of the Dialogues of Plato were

written before the death of Socrates; the Meno, which appears to be one of

the earliest of them, is proved to have been of a later date by the allusion of

Anytus.


  We cannot argue that Plato was more likely to have written, as he has

done, of Meno before than after his miserable death; for we have already

seen, in the examples of Charmides and Critias, that the characters in Plato

are very far from resembling the same characters in history. The repulsive

picture which is given of him in the Anabasis of Xenophon, where he also

appears as the friend of Aristippus 'and a fair youth having lovers,' has no

other trait of likeness to the Meno of Plato.  The place of the Meno in the series is doubtfully indicated by internal

evidence. The main character of the Dialogue is Socrates; but to the 'general

definitions' of Socrates is added the Platonic doctrine of reminiscence. The

problems of virtue and knowledge have been discussed in the Lysis, Laches,

Charmides,  and  Protagoras;  the  puzzle  about  knowing  and  learning  has

already appeared in the Euthydemus. The doctrines of immortality and pre-

existence  are  carried  further  in  the  Phaedrus  and  Phaedo;  the  distinction

between opinion and knowledge is more fully developed in the Theaetetus.

The  lessons  of  Prodicus,  whom  he  facetiously  calls  his  master,  are  still

running  in  the  mind  of  Socrates.  Unlike  the  later  Platonic  Dialogues,  the

Meno arrives at no conclusion. Hence we are led to place the Dialogue at

some point of time later than the Protagoras, and earlier than the Phaedrus

and Gorgias. The place which is assigned to it in this work is due mainly to

the  desire  to  bring  together  in  a  single  volume  all  the  Dialogues  which

contain allusions to the trial and death of Socrates.


  ...


  ON THE IDEAS OF PLATO.


  Plato's  doctrine  of  ideas  has  attained  an  imaginary  clearness  and

definiteness  which  is  not  to  be  found  in  his  own  writings.  The  popular

account of them is partly derived from one or two passages in his Dialogues

interpreted without regard to their poetical environment. It is due also to the

misunderstanding of him by the Aristotelian school; and the erroneous notion

has  been  further  narrowed  and  has  become  fixed  by  the  realism  of  the

schoolmen. This popular view of the Platonic ideas may be summed up in

some such formula as the following: 'Truth consists not in particulars, but in

universals, which have a place in the mind of God, or in some far-off heaven.

These were revealed to men in a former state of existence, and are recovered

by  reminiscence  (anamnesis)  or  association  from  sensible  things.  The

sensible things are not realities, but shadows only, in relation to the truth.'

These unmeaning propositions are hardly suspected to be a caricature of a

great theory of knowledge, which Plato in various ways and under many

figures of speech is seeking to unfold. Poetry has been converted into dogma;

and it is not remarked that the Platonic ideas are to be found only in about a

third of Plato's writings and are not confined to him. The forms which theyassume are numerous, and if taken literally, inconsistent with one another. At

one  time  we  are  in  the  clouds  of  mythology,  at  another  among  the

abstractions of mathematics or metaphysics; we pass imperceptibly from one

to the other. Reason and fancy are mingled in the same passage. The ideas are

sometimes described as many, coextensive with the universals of sense and

also with the first principles of ethics; or again they are absorbed into the

single idea of good, and subordinated to it. They are not more certain than

facts,  but  they  are  equally  certain  (Phaedo).  They  are  both  personal  and

impersonal. They are abstract terms: they are also the causes of things; and

they are even transformed into the demons or spirits by whose help God

made the world. And the idea of good (Republic) may without violence be

converted into the Supreme Being, who 'because He was good' created all

things (Tim.).


  It  would  be  a  mistake  to  try  and  reconcile  these  differing  modes  of

thought. They are not to be regarded seriously as having a distinct meaning.

They are parables, prophecies, myths, symbols, revelations, aspirations after

an  unknown  world.  They  derive  their  origin  from  a  deep  religious  and

contemplative  feeling,  and  also  from  an  observation  of  curious  mental

phenomena. They gather up the elements of the previous philosophies, which

they put together in a new form. Their great diversity shows the tentative

character of early endeavours to think. They have not yet settled down into a

single  system.  Plato  uses  them,  though  he  also  criticises  them;  he

acknowledges  that  both  he  and  others  are  always  talking  about  them,

especially about the Idea of Good; and that they are not peculiar to himself

(Phaedo; Republic; Soph.). But in his later writings he seems to have laid

aside the old forms of them. As he proceeds he makes for himself new modes

of expression more akin to the Aristotelian logic.


  Yet amid all these varieties and incongruities, there is a common meaning

or spirit which pervades his writings, both those in which he treats of the

ideas and those in which he is silent about them. This is the spirit of idealism,

which in the history of philosophy has had many names and taken many

forms, and has in a measure influenced those who seemed to be most averse

to it. It has often been charged with inconsistency and fancifulness, and yet

has had an elevating effect on human nature, and has exercised a wonderful

charm and interest over a few spirits who have been lost in the thought of it.It  has  been  banished  again  and  again,  but  has  always  returned.  It  has

attempted to leave the earth and soar heavenwards, but soon has found that

only in experience could any solid foundation of knowledge be laid. It has

degenerated into pantheism, but has again emerged. No other knowledge has

given an equal stimulus to the mind. It is the science of sciences, which are

also ideas, and under either aspect require to be defined. They can only be

thought of in due proportion when conceived in relation to one another. They

are the glasses through which the kingdoms of science are seen, but at a

distance. All the greatest minds, except when living in an age of reaction

against them, have unconsciously fallen under their power.


  The account of the Platonic ideas in the Meno is the simplest and clearest,

and  we  shall  best  illustrate  their  nature  by  giving  this  first  and  then

comparing  the  manner  in  which  they  are  described  elsewhere,  e.g.  in  the

Phaedrus, Phaedo, Republic; to which may be added the criticism of them in

the Parmenides, the personal form which is attributed to them in the Timaeus,

the logical character which they assume in the Sophist and Philebus, and the

allusion to them in the Laws. In the Cratylus they dawn upon him with the

freshness of a newly-discovered thought.


  The Meno goes back to a former state of existence, in which men did and

suffered good and evil, and received the reward or punishment of them until

their sin was purged away and they were allowed to return to earth. This is a

tradition of the olden time, to which priests and poets bear witness. The souls

of men returning to earth bring back a latent memory of ideas, which were

known to them in a former state. The recollection is awakened into life and

consciousness by the sight of the things which resemble them on earth. The

soul evidently possesses such innate ideas before she has had time to acquire

them. This is proved by an experiment tried on one of Meno's slaves, from

whom Socrates elicits truths of arithmetic and geometry, which he had never

learned in this world. He must therefore have brought them with him from

another.


  The  notion  of  a  previous  state  of  existence  is  found  in  the  verses  of

Empedocles and in the fragments of Heracleitus. It was the natural answer to

two  questions,  'Whence  came  the  soul?  What  is  the  origin  of  evil?'  and

prevailed  far  and  wide  in  the  east.  It  found  its  way  into  Hellas  probablythrough the medium of Orphic and Pythagorean rites and mysteries. It was

easier to think of a former than of a future life, because such a life has really

existed for the race though not for the individual, and all men come into the

world,  if  not  'trailing  clouds  of  glory,'  at  any  rate  able  to  enter  into  the

inheritance of the past. In the Phaedrus, as well as in the Meno, it is this

former rather than a future life on which Plato is disposed to dwell. There the

Gods, and men following in their train, go forth to contemplate the heavens,

and are borne round in the revolutions of them. There they see the divine

forms of justice, temperance, and the like, in their unchangeable beauty, but

not  without  an  effort  more  than  human.  The  soul  of  man  is  likened  to  a

charioteer and two steeds, one mortal, the other immortal. The charioteer and

the mortal steed are in fierce conflict; at length the animal principle is finally

overpowered,  though  not  extinguished,  by  the  combined  energies  of  the

passionate  and  rational  elements.  This  is  one  of  those  passages  in  Plato

which, partaking both of a philosophical and poetical character, is necessarily

indistinct and inconsistent. The magnificent figure under which the nature of

the soul is described has not much to do with the popular doctrine of the

ideas. Yet there is one little trait in the description which shows that they are

present to Plato's mind, namely, the remark that the soul, which had seen

truths in the form of the universal, cannot again return to the nature of an

animal.


  In  the  Phaedo,  as  in  the  Meno,  the  origin  of  ideas  is  sought  for  in  a

previous state of existence. There was no time when they could have been

acquired  in  this  life,  and  therefore  they  must  have  been  recovered  from

another.  The  process  of  recovery  is  no  other  than  the  ordinary  law  of

association, by which in daily life the sight of one thing or person recalls

another to our minds, and by which in scientific enquiry from any part of

knowledge we may be led on to infer the whole. It is also argued that ideas,

or rather ideals, must be derived from a previous state of existence because

they are more perfect than the sensible forms of them which are given by

experience. But in the Phaedo the doctrine of ideas is subordinate to the proof

of the immortality of the soul. 'If the soul existed in a previous state, then it

will exist in a future state, for a law of alternation pervades all things.' And,

'If the ideas exist, then the soul exists; if not, not.' It is to be observed, both in

the Meno and the Phaedo, that Socrates expresses himself with diffidence. He

speaks in the Phaedo of the words with which he has comforted himself andhis friends, and will not be too confident that the description which he has

given of the soul and her mansions is exactly true, but he 'ventures to think

that something of the kind is true.' And in the Meno, after dwelling upon the

immortality of the soul, he adds, 'Of some things which I have said I am not

altogether  confident'  (compare  Apology;  Gorgias).  From  this  class  of

uncertainties  he  exempts  the  difference  between  truth  and  appearance,  of

which he is absolutely convinced.


  In the Republic the ideas are spoken of in two ways, which though not

contradictory  are  different.  In  the  tenth  book  they  are  represented  as  the

genera or general ideas under which individuals having a common name are

contained.  For  example,  there  is  the  bed  which  the  carpenter  makes,  the

picture of the bed which is drawn by the painter, the bed existing in nature of

which God is the author. Of the latter all visible beds are only the shadows or

reflections. This and similar illustrations or explanations are put forth, not for

their own sake, or as an exposition of Plato's theory of ideas, but with a view

of showing that poetry and the mimetic arts are concerned with an inferior

part of the soul and a lower kind of knowledge. On the other hand, in the 6th

and  7th  books  of  the  Republic  we  reach  the  highest  and  most  perfect

conception, which Plato is able to attain, of the nature of knowledge. The

ideas are now finally seen to be one as well as many, causes as well as ideas,

and to have a unity which is the idea of good and the cause of all the rest.

They seem, however, to have lost their first aspect of universals under which

individuals are contained, and to have been converted into forms of another

kind, which are inconsistently regarded from the one side as images or ideals

of justice, temperance, holiness and the like; from the other as hypotheses, or

mathematical truths or principles.


  In the Timaeus, which in the series of Plato's works immediately follows

the  Republic,  though  probably  written  some  time  afterwards,  no  mention

occurs of the doctrine of ideas. Geometrical forms and arithmetical ratios

furnish the laws according to which the world is created. But though the

conception of the ideas as genera or species is forgotten or laid aside, the

distinction of the visible and intellectual is as firmly maintained as ever. The

IDEA of good likewise disappears and is superseded by the conception of a

personal God, who works according to a final cause or principle of goodness

which he himself is. No doubt is expressed by Plato, either in the Timaeus orin any other dialogue, of the truths which he conceives to be the first and

highest.  It  is  not  the  existence  of  God  or  the  idea  of  good  which  he

approaches  in  a  tentative  or  hesitating  manner,  but  the  investigations  of

physiology. These he regards, not seriously, as a part of philosophy, but as an

innocent recreation (Tim.).


  Passing on to the Parmenides, we find in that dialogue not an exposition

or defence of the doctrine of ideas, but an assault upon them, which is put

into the mouth of the veteran Parmenides, and might be ascribed to Aristotle

himself, or to one of his disciples. The doctrine which is assailed takes two or

three  forms,  but  fails  in  any  of  them  to  escape  the  dialectical  difficulties

which are urged against it. It is admitted that there are ideas of all things, but

the manner in which individuals partake of them, whether of the whole or of

the part, and in which they become like them, or how ideas can be either

within or without the sphere of human knowledge, or how the human and

divine  can  have  any  relation  to  each  other,  is  held  to  be  incapable  of

explanation.  And  yet,  if  there  are  no  universal  ideas,  what  becomes  of

philosophy? (Parmenides.) In the Sophist the theory of ideas is spoken of as a

doctrine held not by Plato, but by another sect of philosophers, called 'the

Friends of Ideas,' probably the Megarians, who were very distinct from him,

if  not  opposed  to  him  (Sophist).  Nor  in  what  may  be  termed  Plato's

abridgement of the history of philosophy (Soph.), is any mention made such

as we find in the first book of Aristotle's Metaphysics, of the derivation of

such a theory or of any part of it from the Pythagoreans, the Eleatics, the

Heracleiteans, or even from Socrates. In the Philebus, probably one of the

latest  of  the  Platonic  Dialogues,  the  conception  of  a  personal  or  semi-

personal deity expressed under the figure of mind, the king of all, who is also

the cause, is retained. The one and many of the Phaedrus and Theaetetus is

still working in the mind of Plato, and the correlation of ideas, not of 'all with

all,' but of 'some with some,' is asserted and explained. But they are spoken of

in a different manner, and are not supposed to be recovered from a former

state  of  existence.  The  metaphysical  conception  of  truth  passes  into  a

psychological one, which is continued in the Laws, and is the final form of

the Platonic philosophy, so far as can be gathered from his own writings (see

especially Laws). In the Laws he harps once more on the old string, and

returns to general notions:--these he acknowledges to be many, and yet he

insists that they are also one. The guardian must be made to recognize thetruth, for which he has contended long ago in the Protagoras, that the virtues

are four, but they are also in some sense one (Laws; compare Protagoras).


  So  various,  and  if  regarded  on  the  surface  only,  inconsistent,  are  the

statements  of  Plato  respecting  the  doctrine  of  ideas.  If  we  attempted  to

harmonize or to combine them, we should make out of them, not a system,

but the caricature of a system. They are the ever-varying expression of Plato's

Idealism. The terms used in them are in their substance and general meaning

the same, although they seem to be different. They pass from the subject to

the object, from earth (diesseits) to heaven (jenseits) without regard to the

gulf which later theology and philosophy have made between them. They are

also intended to supplement or explain each other. They relate to a subject of

which Plato himself would have said that 'he was not confident of the precise

form of his own statements, but was strong in the belief that something of the

kind was true.' It is the spirit, not the letter, in which they agree--the spirit

which places the divine above the human, the spiritual above the material, the

one above the many, the mind before the body.


  The stream of ancient philosophy in the Alexandrian and Roman times

widens into a lake or sea, and then disappears underground to reappear after

many ages in a distant land. It begins to flow again under new conditions, at

first confined between high and narrow banks, but finally spreading over the

continent of Europe. It is and is not the same with ancient philosophy. There

is a great deal in modern philosophy which is inspired by ancient. There is

much in ancient philosophy which was 'born out of due time; and before men

were capable of understanding it. To the fathers of modern philosophy, their

own thoughts appeared to be new and original, but they carried with them an

echo or shadow of the past, coming back by recollection from an elder world.

Of this the enquirers of the seventeenth century, who to themselves appeared

to be working out independently the enquiry into all truth, were unconscious.

They stood in a new relation to theology and natural philosophy, and for a

time maintained towards both an attitude of reserve and separation. Yet the

similarities  between  modern  and  ancient  thought  are  greater  far  than  the

differences. All philosophy, even that part of it which is said to be based

upon experience, is really ideal; and ideas are not only derived from facts, but

they are also prior to them and extend far beyond them, just as the mind is

prior to the senses.  Early Greek speculation culminates in the ideas of Plato, or rather in the

single idea of good. His followers, and perhaps he himself, having arrived at

this elevation, instead of going forwards went backwards from philosophy to

psychology,  from  ideas  to  numbers.  But  what  we  perceive  to  be  the  real

meaning of them, an explanation of the nature and origin of knowledge, will

always continue to be one of the first problems of philosophy.


  Plato also left behind him a most potent instrument, the forms of logic--

arms ready for use, but not yet taken out of their armoury. They were the late

birth of the early Greek philosophy, and were the only part of it which has

had an uninterrupted hold on the mind of Europe. Philosophies come and go;

but  the  detection  of  fallacies,  the  framing  of  definitions,  the  invention  of

methods still continue to be the main elements of the reasoning process.


  Modern philosophy, like ancient, begins with very simple conceptions. It

is almost wholly a reflection on self. It might be described as a quickening

into life of old words and notions latent in the semi-barbarous Latin, and

putting a new meaning into them. Unlike ancient philosophy, it has been

unaffected by impressions derived from outward nature: it arose within the

limits of the mind itself. From the time of Descartes to Hume and Kant it has

had little or nothing to do with facts of science. On the other hand, the ancient

and mediaeval logic retained a continuous influence over it, and a form like

that of mathematics was easily impressed upon it; the principle of ancient

philosophy which is most apparent in it is scepticism; we must doubt nearly

every traditional or received notion, that we may hold fast one or two. The

being of God in a personal or impersonal form was a mental necessity to the

first  thinkers  of  modern  times:  from  this  alone  all  other  ideas  could  be

deduced. There had been an obscure presentiment of 'cognito, ergo sum' more

than 2000 years previously. The Eleatic notion that being and thought were

the same was revived in a new form by Descartes. But now it gave birth to

consciousness and self- reflection: it awakened the 'ego' in human nature. The

mind naked and abstract has no other certainty but the conviction of its own

existence. 'I think, therefore I am;' and this thought is God thinking in me,

who  has  also  communicated  to  the  reason  of  man  his  own  attributes  of

thought and extension--these are truly imparted to him because God is true

(compare Republic). It has been often remarked that Descartes, having begun

by  dismissing  all  presuppositions,  introduces  several:  he  passes  almost  atonce from scepticism to dogmatism. It is more important for the illustration

of Plato to observe that he, like Plato, insists that God is true and incapable of

deception  (Republic)--that  he  proceeds  from  general  ideas,  that  many

elements  of  mathematics  may  be  found  in  him.  A  certain  influence  of

mathematics  both  on  the  form  and  substance  of  their  philosophy  is

discernible in both of them. After making the greatest opposition between

thought and extension, Descartes, like Plato, supposes them to be reunited for

a  time,  not  in  their  own  nature  but  by  a  special  divine  act  (compare

Phaedrus), and he also supposes all the parts of the human body to meet in

the  pineal  gland,  that  alone  affording  a  principle  of  unity  in  the  material

frame of man. It is characteristic of the first period of modern philosophy,

that  having  begun  (like  the  Presocratics)  with  a  few  general  notions,

Descartes  first  falls  absolutely  under  their  influence,  and  then  quickly

discards them. At the same time he is less able to observe facts, because they

are too much magnified by the glasses through which they are seen. The

common logic says 'the greater the extension, the less the comprehension,'

and we may put the same thought in another way and say of abstract or

general  ideas,  that  the  greater  the  abstraction  of  them,  the  less  are  they

capable of being applied to particular and concrete natures.


  Not very different from Descartes in his relation to ancient philosophy is

his successor Spinoza, who lived in the following generation. The system of

Spinoza is less personal and also less dualistic than that of Descartes. In this

respect the difference between them is like that between Xenophanes and

Parmenides. The teaching of Spinoza might be described generally as the

Jewish religion reduced to an abstraction and taking the form of the Eleatic

philosophy. Like Parmenides, he is overpowered and intoxicated with the

idea of Being or God. The greatness of both philosophies consists in the

immensity of a thought which excludes all other thoughts; their weakness is

the  necessary  separation  of  this  thought  from  actual  existence  and  from

practical life. In neither of them is there any clear opposition between the

inward  and  outward  world.  The  substance  of  Spinoza  has  two  attributes,

which  alone  are  cognizable  by  man,  thought  and  extension;  these  are  in

extreme opposition to one another, and also in inseparable identity. They may

be regarded as the two aspects or expressions under which God or substance

is unfolded to man. Here a step is made beyond the limits of the Eleatic

philosophy.  The  famous  theorem  of  Spinoza,  'Omnis  determinatio  estnegatio,' is already contained in the 'negation is relation' of Plato's Sophist.

The grand description of the philosopher in Republic VI, as the spectator of

all time and all existence, may be paralleled with another famous expression

of Spinoza, 'Contemplatio rerum sub specie eternitatis.' According to Spinoza

finite objects are unreal, for they are conditioned by what is alien to them,

and  by  one  another.  Human  beings  are  included  in  the  number  of  them.

Hence there is no reality in human action and no place for right and wrong.

Individuality  is  accident.  The  boasted  freedom  of  the  will  is  only  a

consciousness  of  necessity.  Truth,  he  says,  is  the  direction  of  the  reason

towards the infinite, in which all things repose; and herein lies the secret of

man's well-being. In the exaltation of the reason or intellect, in the denial of

the voluntariness of evil (Timaeus; Laws) Spinoza approaches nearer to Plato

than in his conception of an infinite substance. As Socrates said that virtue is

knowledge, so Spinoza would have maintained that knowledge alone is good,

and what contributes to knowledge useful. Both are equally far from any real

experience or observation of nature. And the same difficulty is found in both

when we seek to apply their ideas to life and practice. There is a gulf fixed

between the infinite substance and finite objects or individuals of Spinoza,

just as there is between the ideas of Plato and the world of sense.


  Removed  from  Spinoza  by  less  than  a  generation  is  the  philosopher

Leibnitz, who after deepening and intensifying the opposition between mind

and  matter,  reunites  them  by  his  preconcerted  harmony  (compare  again

Phaedrus). To him all the particles of matter are living beings which reflect

on one another, and in the least of them the whole is contained. Here we

catch  a  reminiscence  both  of  the  omoiomere,  or  similar  particles  of

Anaxagoras, and of the world-animal of the Timaeus.


  In Bacon and Locke we have another development in which the mind of

man is supposed to receive knowledge by a new method and to work by

observation  and  experience.  But  we  may  remark  that  it  is  the  idea  of

experience, rather than experience itself, with which the mind is filled. It is a

symbol of knowledge rather than the reality which is vouchsafed to us. The

Organon of Bacon is not much nearer to actual facts than the Organon of

Aristotle or the Platonic idea of good. Many of the old rags and ribbons

which defaced the garment of philosophy have been stripped off, but some of

them still adhere. A crude conception of the ideas of Plato survives in the'forms' of Bacon. And on the other hand, there are many passages of Plato in

which the importance of the investigation of facts is as much insisted upon as

by Bacon. Both are almost equally superior to the illusions of language, and

are constantly crying out against them, as against other idols.


  Locke cannot be truly regarded as the author of sensationalism any more

than  of  idealism.  His  system  is  based  upon  experience,  but  with  him

experience includes reflection as well as sense. His analysis and construction

of ideas has no foundation in fact; it is only the dialectic of the mind 'talking

to herself.' The philosophy of Berkeley is but the transposition of two words.

For objects of sense he would substitute sensations. He imagines himself to

have changed the relation of the human mind towards God and nature; they

remain the same as before, though he has drawn the imaginary line by which

they are divided at a different point. He has annihilated the outward world,

but it instantly reappears governed by the same laws and described under the

same names.


  A like remark applies to David Hume, of whose philosophy the central

principle is the denial of the relation of cause and effect. He would deprive

men of a familiar term which they can ill afford to lose; but he seems not to

have observed that this alteration is merely verbal and does not in any degree

affect the nature of things. Still less did he remark that he was arguing from

the necessary imperfection of language against the most certain facts. And

here, again, we may find a parallel with the ancients. He goes beyond facts in

his scepticism, as they did in their idealism. Like the ancient Sophists, he

relegates the more important principles of ethics to custom and probability.

But crude and unmeaning as this philosophy is, it exercised a great influence

on his successors, not unlike that which Locke exercised upon Berkeley and

Berkeley  upon  Hume  himself.  All  three  were  both  sceptical  and  ideal  in

almost  equal  degrees.  Neither  they  nor  their  predecessors  had  any  true

conception of language or of the history of philosophy. Hume's paradox has

been forgotten by the world, and did not any more than the scepticism of the

ancients  require  to  be  seriously  refuted.  Like  some  other  philosophical

paradoxes, it would have been better left to die out. It certainly could not be

refuted  by  a  philosophy  such  as  Kant's,  in  which,  no  less  than  in  the

previously mentioned systems, the history of the human mind and the nature

of  language  are  almost  wholly  ignored,  and  the  certainty  of  objectiveknowledge is transferred to the subject; while absolute truth is reduced to a

figment, more abstract and narrow than Plato's ideas, of 'thing in itself,' to

which, if we reason strictly, no predicate can be applied.


  The question which Plato has raised respecting the origin and nature of

ideas belongs to the infancy of philosophy; in modern times it would no

longer be asked. Their origin is only their history, so far as we know it; there

can  be  no  other.  We  may  trace  them  in  language,  in  philosophy,  in

mythology,  in  poetry,  but  we  cannot  argue  a  priori  about  them.  We  may

attempt to shake them off, but they are always returning, and in every sphere

of science and human action are tending to go beyond facts. They are thought

to be innate, because they have been familiar to us all our lives, and we can

no longer dismiss them from our mind. Many of them express relations of

terms to which nothing exactly or nothing at all in rerum natura corresponds.

We are not such free agents in the use of them as we sometimes imagine.

Fixed ideas have taken the most complete possession of some thinkers who

have been most determined to renounce them, and have been vehemently

affirmed when they could be least explained and were incapable of proof.

The world has often been led away by a word to which no distinct meaning

could be attached. Abstractions such as 'authority,' 'equality,' 'utility,' 'liberty,'

'pleasure,' 'experience,' 'consciousness,' 'chance,' 'substance,' 'matter,' 'atom,'

and a heap of other metaphysical and theological terms, are the source of

quite as much error and illusion and have as little relation to actual facts as

the ideas of Plato. Few students of theology or philosophy have sufficiently

reflected how quickly the bloom of a philosophy passes away; or how hard it

is for one age to understand the writings of another; or how nice a judgment

is required of those who are seeking to express the philosophy of one age in

the terms of another. The 'eternal truths' of which metaphysicians speak have

hardly ever lasted more than a generation. In our own day schools or systems

of philosophy which have once been famous have died before the founders of

them. We are still, as in Plato's age, groping about for a new method more

comprehensive  than  any  of  those  which  now  prevail;  and  also  more

permanent. And we seem to see at a distance the promise of such a method,

which  can  hardly  be  any  other  than  the  method  of  idealized  experience,

having roots which strike far down into the history of philosophy. It is a

method which does not divorce the present from the past, or the part from the

whole, or the abstract from the concrete, or theory from fact, or the divinefrom the human, or one science from another, but labours to connect them.

Along such a road we have proceeded a few steps, sufficient, perhaps, to

make us reflect on the want of method which prevails in our own day. In

another age, all the branches of knowledge, whether relating to God or man

or nature, will become the knowledge of 'the revelation of a single science'

(Symp.), and all things, like the stars in heaven, will shed their light upon one

another.Meno


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettPERSONS  OF  THE  DIALOGUE: Meno,  Socrates,  A  Slave  of  Meno

(Boy), Anytus.


MENO: Can you tell me, Socrates, whether virtue is acquired by teaching or

by practice; or if neither by teaching nor by practice, then whether it comes to

man by nature, or in what other way?


SOCRATES: O Meno, there was a time when the Thessalians were famous

among the other Hellenes only for their riches and their riding; but now, if I

am not mistaken, they are equally famous for their wisdom, especially at

Larisa, which is the native city of your friend Aristippus. And this is Gorgias'

doing; for when he came there, the flower of the Aleuadae, among them your

admirer Aristippus, and the other chiefs of the Thessalians, fell in love with

his wisdom. And he has taught you the habit of answering questions in a

grand and bold style, which becomes those who know, and is the style in

which he himself answers all comers; and any Hellene who likes may ask

him anything. How different is our lot! my dear Meno. Here at Athens there

is a dearth of the commodity, and all wisdom seems to have emigrated from

us to you. I am certain that if you were to ask any Athenian whether virtue

was natural or acquired, he would laugh in your face, and say: 'Stranger, you

have far too good an opinion of me, if you think that I can answer your

question. For I literally do not know what virtue is, and much less whether it

is acquired by teaching or not.' And I myself, Meno, living as I do in this

region of poverty, am as poor as the rest of the world; and I confess with

shame that I know literally nothing about virtue; and when I do not know the

'quid' of anything how can I know the 'quale'? How, if I knew nothing at all

of Meno, could I tell if he was fair, or the opposite of fair; rich and noble, or

the reverse of rich and noble? Do you think that I could?


MENO: No, indeed. But are you in earnest, Socrates, in saying that you do

not  know  what  virtue  is?  And  am  I  to  carry  back  this  report  of  you  to

Thessaly?


SOCRATES: Not only that, my dear boy, but you may say further that I have

never known of any one else who did, in my judgment.MENO: Then you have never met Gorgias when he was at Athens?


SOCRATES: Yes, I have.


MENO: And did you not think that he knew?


SOCRATES: I have not a good memory, Meno, and therefore I cannot now

tell what I thought of him at the time. And I dare say that he did know, and

that you know what he said: please, therefore, to remind me of what he said;

or, if you would rather, tell me your own view; for I suspect that you and he

think much alike.


MENO: Very true.


SOCRATES: Then as he is not here, never mind him, and do you tell me: By

the gods, Meno, be generous, and tell me what you say that virtue is; for I

shall be truly delighted to find that I have been mistaken, and that you and

Gorgias do really have this knowledge; although I have been just saying that I

have never found anybody who had.


MENO: There will be no difficulty, Socrates, in answering your question. Let

us take first the virtue of a man--he should know how to administer the state,

and in the administration of it to benefit his friends and harm his enemies;

and he must also be careful not to suffer harm himself. A woman's virtue, if

you wish to know about that, may also be easily described: her duty is to

order her house, and keep what is indoors, and obey her husband. Every age,

every condition of life, young or old, male or female, bond or free, has a

different virtue: there are virtues numberless, and no lack of definitions of

them; for virtue is relative to the actions and ages of each of us in all that we

do. And the same may be said of vice, Socrates (Compare Arist. Pol.).


SOCRATES: How fortunate I am, Meno! When I ask you for one virtue, you

present  me  with  a  swarm  of  them  (Compare  Theaet.),  which  are  in  your

keeping. Suppose that I carry on the figure of the swarm, and ask of you,

What is the nature of the bee? and you answer that there are many kinds of

bees, and I reply: But do bees differ as bees, because there are many and

different kinds of them; or are they not rather to be distinguished by someother quality, as for example beauty, size, or shape? How would you answer

me?


MENO: I should answer that bees do not differ from one another, as bees.


SOCRATES: And if I went on to say: That is what I desire to know, Meno;

tell me what is the quality in which they do not differ, but are all alike;--

would you be able to answer?


MENO: I should.


SOCRATES: And so of the virtues, however many and different they may

be, they have all a common nature which makes them virtues; and on this he

who would answer the question, 'What is virtue?' would do well to have his

eye fixed: Do you understand?


MENO: I am beginning to understand; but I do not as yet take hold of the

question as I could wish.


SOCRATES: When you say, Meno, that there is one virtue of a man, another

of a woman, another of a child, and so on, does this apply only to virtue, or

would you say the same of health, and size, and strength? Or is the nature of

health always the same, whether in man or woman?


MENO: I should say that health is the same, both in man and woman.


SOCRATES: And is not this true of size and strength? If a woman is strong,

she  will  be  strong  by  reason  of  the  same  form  and  of  the  same  strength

subsisting in her which there is in the man. I mean to say that strength, as

strength, whether of man or woman, is the same. Is there any difference?


MENO: I think not.


SOCRATES: And will not virtue, as virtue, be the same, whether in a child or

in a grown-up person, in a woman or in a man?


MENO: I cannot help feeling, Socrates, that this case is different from the

others.SOCRATES: But why? Were you not saying that the virtue of a man was to

order a state, and the virtue of a woman was to order a house?


MENO: I did say so.


SOCRATES:  And  can  either  house  or  state  or  anything  be  well  ordered

without temperance and without justice?


MENO: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: Then they who order a state or a house temperately or justly

order them with temperance and justice?


MENO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Then both men and women, if they are to be good men and

women, must have the same virtues of temperance and justice?


MENO: True.


SOCRATES: And can either a young man or an elder one be good, if they are

intemperate and unjust?


MENO: They cannot.


SOCRATES: They must be temperate and just?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then all men are good in the same way, and by participation in

the same virtues?


MENO: Such is the inference.


SOCRATES: And they surely would not have been good in the same way,

unless their virtue had been the same?


MENO: They would not.SOCRATES: Then now that the sameness of all virtue has been proven, try

and remember what you and Gorgias say that virtue is.


MENO: Will you have one definition of them all?


SOCRATES: That is what I am seeking.


MENO: If you want to have one definition of them all, I know not what to

say, but that virtue is the power of governing mankind.


SOCRATES: And does this definition of virtue include all virtue? Is virtue

the same in a child and in a slave, Meno? Can the child govern his father, or

the slave his master; and would he who governed be any longer a slave?


MENO: I think not, Socrates.


SOCRATES: No, indeed; there would be small reason in that. Yet once more,

fair friend; according to you, virtue is 'the power of governing;' but do you

not add 'justly and not unjustly'?


MENO: Yes, Socrates; I agree there; for justice is virtue.


SOCRATES: Would you say 'virtue,' Meno, or 'a virtue'?


MENO: What do you mean?


SOCRATES:  I  mean  as  I  might  say  about  anything;  that  a  round,  for

example, is 'a figure' and not simply 'figure,' and I should adopt this mode of

speaking, because there are other figures.


MENO: Quite right; and that is just what I am saying about virtue--that there

are other virtues as well as justice.


SOCRATES: What are they? tell me the names of them, as I would tell you

the names of the other figures if you asked me.


MENO: Courage and temperance and wisdom and magnanimity are virtues;

and there are many others.SOCRATES: Yes, Meno; and again we are in the same case: in searching

after one virtue we have found many, though not in the same way as before;

but we have been unable to find the common virtue which runs through them

all.


MENO: Why, Socrates, even now I am not able to follow you in the attempt

to get at one common notion of virtue as of other things.


SOCRATES: No wonder; but I will try to get nearer if I can, for you know

that all things have a common notion. Suppose now that some one asked you

the question which I asked before: Meno, he would say, what is figure? And

if you answered 'roundness,' he would reply to you, in my way of speaking,

by asking whether you would say that roundness is 'figure' or 'a figure;' and

you would answer 'a figure.'


MENO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And for this reason--that there are other figures?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And if he proceeded to ask, What other figures are there? you

would have told him.


MENO: I should.


SOCRATES: And if he similarly asked what colour is, and you answered

whiteness,  and  the  questioner  rejoined,  Would  you  say  that  whiteness  is

colour  or  a  colour?  you  would  reply,  A  colour,  because  there  are  other

colours as well.


MENO: I should.


SOCRATES: And if he had said, Tell me what they are?--you would have

told him of other colours which are colours just as much as whiteness.


MENO: Yes.SOCRATES: And suppose that he were to pursue the matter in my way, he

would say: Ever and anon we are landed in particulars, but this is not what I

want; tell me then, since you call them by a common name, and say that they

are  all  figures,  even  when  opposed  to  one  another,  what  is  that  common

nature  which  you  designate  as  figure--which  contains  straight  as  well  as

round,  and  is  no  more  one  than  the  other--that  would  be  your  mode  of

speaking?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And in speaking thus, you do not mean to say that the round is

round any more than straight, or the straight any more straight than round?


MENO: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: You only assert that the round figure is not more a figure than

the straight, or the straight than the round?


MENO: Very true.


SOCRATES: To what then do we give the name of figure? Try and answer.

Suppose that when a person asked you this question either about figure or

colour, you were to reply, Man, I do not understand what you want, or know

what you are saying; he would look rather astonished and say: Do you not

understand that I am looking for the 'simile in multis'? And then he might put

the question in another form: Meno, he might say, what is that 'simile in

multis' which you call figure, and which includes not only round and straight

figures, but all? Could you not answer that question, Meno? I wish that you

would try; the attempt will be good practice with a view to the answer about

virtue.


MENO: I would rather that you should answer, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Shall I indulge you?


MENO: By all means.


SOCRATES: And then you will tell me about virtue?MENO: I will.


SOCRATES: Then I must do my best, for there is a prize to be won.


MENO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Well, I will try and explain to you what figure is. What do you

say to this answer?--Figure is the only thing which always follows colour.

Will you be satisfied with it, as I am sure that I should be, if you would let

me have a similar definition of virtue?


MENO: But, Socrates, it is such a simple answer.


SOCRATES: Why simple?


MENO:  Because,  according  to  you,  figure  is  that  which  always  follows

colour.


(SOCRATES: Granted.)


MENO: But if a person were to say that he does not know what colour is, any

more than what figure is--what sort of answer would you have given him?


SOCRATES: I should have told him the truth. And if he were a philosopher

of the eristic and antagonistic sort, I should say to him: You have my answer,

and if I am wrong, your business is to take up the argument and refute me.

But if we were friends, and were talking as you and I are now, I should reply

in a milder strain and more in the dialectician's vein; that is to say, I should

not only speak the truth, but I should make use of premisses which the person

interrogated would be willing to admit. And this is the way in which I shall

endeavour to approach you. You will acknowledge, will you not, that there is

such a thing as an end, or termination, or extremity?--all which words I use in

the same sense, although I am aware that Prodicus might draw distinctions

about them: but still you, I am sure, would speak of a thing as ended or

terminated--that is all which I am saying--not anything very difficult.


MENO: Yes, I should; and I believe that I understand your meaning.SOCRATES: And you would speak of a surface and also of a solid, as for

example in geometry.


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES:  Well  then,  you  are  now  in  a  condition  to  understand  my

definition of figure. I define figure to be that in which the solid ends; or, more

concisely, the limit of solid.


MENO: And now, Socrates, what is colour?


SOCRATES: You are outrageous, Meno, in thus plaguing a poor old man to

give you an answer, when you will not take the trouble of remembering what

is Gorgias' definition of virtue.


MENO: When you have told me what I ask, I will tell you, Socrates.


SOCRATES: A man who was blindfolded has only to hear you talking, and

he would know that you are a fair creature and have still many lovers.


MENO: Why do you think so?


SOCRATES:  Why,  because  you  always  speak  in  imperatives:  like  all

beauties  when  they  are  in  their  prime,  you  are  tyrannical;  and  also,  as  I

suspect, you have found out that I have weakness for the fair, and therefore to

humour you I must answer.


MENO: Please do.


SOCRATES: Would you like me to answer you after the manner of Gorgias,

which is familiar to you?


MENO: I should like nothing better.


SOCRATES: Do not he and you and Empedocles say that there are certain

effluences of existence?


MENO: Certainly.SOCRATES:  And  passages  into  which  and  through  which  the  effluences

pass?


MENO: Exactly.


SOCRATES: And some of the effluences fit into the passages, and some of

them are too small or too large?


MENO: True.


SOCRATES: And there is such a thing as sight?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES:  And  now,  as  Pindar  says,  'read  my  meaning:'--colour  is  an

effluence of form, commensurate with sight, and palpable to sense.


MENO: That, Socrates, appears to me to be an admirable answer.


SOCRATES: Why, yes, because it happens to be one which you have been in

the habit of hearing: and your wit will have discovered, I suspect, that you

may explain in the same way the nature of sound and smell, and of many

other similar phenomena.


MENO: Quite true.


SOCRATES:  The  answer,  Meno,  was  in  the  orthodox  solemn  vein,  and

therefore was more acceptable to you than the other answer about figure.


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And yet, O son of Alexidemus, I cannot help thinking that the

other was the better; and I am sure that you would be of the same opinion, if

you would only stay and be initiated, and were not compelled, as you said

yesterday, to go away before the mysteries.


MENO: But I will stay, Socrates, if you will give me many such answers.SOCRATES: Well then, for my own sake as well as for yours, I will do my

very best; but I am afraid that I shall not be able to give you very many as

good: and now, in your turn, you are to fulfil your promise, and tell me what

virtue is in the universal; and do not make a singular into a plural, as the

facetious say of those who break a thing, but deliver virtue to me whole and

sound, and not broken into a number of pieces: I have given you the pattern.


MENO: Well then, Socrates, virtue, as I take it, is when he, who desires the

honourable, is able to provide it for himself; so the poet says, and I say too--


'Virtue is the desire of things honourable and the power of attaining them.'


SOCRATES: And does he who desires the honourable also desire the good?


MENO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Then are there some who desire the evil and others who desire

the good? Do not all men, my dear sir, desire good?


MENO: I think not.


SOCRATES: There are some who desire evil?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: Do you mean that they think the evils which they desire, to be

good; or do they know that they are evil and yet desire them?


MENO: Both, I think.


SOCRATES: And do you really imagine, Meno, that a man knows evils to be

evils and desires them notwithstanding?


MENO: Certainly I do.


SOCRATES: And desire is of possession?


MENO: Yes, of possession.SOCRATES:  And  does  he  think  that  the  evils  will  do  good  to  him  who

possesses them, or does he know that they will do him harm?


MENO: There are some who think that the evils will do them good, and

others who know that they will do them harm.


SOCRATES: And, in your opinion, do those who think that they will do them

good know that they are evils?


MENO: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: Is it not obvious that those who are ignorant of their nature do

not desire them; but they desire what they suppose to be goods although they

are really evils; and if they are mistaken and suppose the evils to be goods

they really desire goods?


MENO: Yes, in that case.


SOCRATES: Well, and do those who, as you say, desire evils, and think that

evils are hurtful to the possessor of them, know that they will be hurt by

them?


MENO: They must know it.


SOCRATES:  And  must  they  not  suppose  that  those  who  are  hurt  are

miserable in proportion to the hurt which is inflicted upon them?


MENO: How can it be otherwise?


SOCRATES: But are not the miserable ill-fated?


MENO: Yes, indeed.


SOCRATES: And does any one desire to be miserable and ill-fated?


MENO: I should say not, Socrates.


SOCRATES: But if there is no one who desires to be miserable, there is noone, Meno, who desires evil; for what is misery but the desire and possession

of evil?


MENO:  That  appears  to  be  the  truth,  Socrates,  and  I  admit  that  nobody

desires evil.


SOCRATES: And yet, were you not saying just now that virtue is the desire

and power of attaining good?


MENO: Yes, I did say so.


SOCRATES: But if this be affirmed, then the desire of good is common to

all, and one man is no better than another in that respect?


MENO: True.


SOCRATES: And if one man is not better than another in desiring good, he

must be better in the power of attaining it?


MENO: Exactly.


SOCRATES: Then, according to your definition, virtue would appear to be

the power of attaining good?


MENO: I entirely approve, Socrates, of the manner in which you now view

this matter.


SOCRATES: Then let us see whether what you say is true from another point

of view; for very likely you may be right:--You affirm virtue to be the power

of attaining goods?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And the goods which you mean are such as health and wealth

and the possession of gold and silver, and having office and honour in the

state--those are what you would call goods?


MENO: Yes, I should include all those.SOCRATES: Then, according to Meno, who is the hereditary friend of the

great king, virtue is the power of getting silver and gold; and would you add

that they must be gained piously, justly, or do you deem this to be of no

consequence? And is any mode of acquisition, even if unjust and dishonest,

equally to be deemed virtue?


MENO: Not virtue, Socrates, but vice.


SOCRATES: Then justice or temperance or holiness, or some other part of

virtue, as would appear, must accompany the acquisition, and without them

the mere acquisition of good will not be virtue.


MENO: Why, how can there be virtue without these?


SOCRATES:  And  the  non-acquisition  of  gold  and  silver  in  a  dishonest

manner for oneself or another, or in other words the want of them, may be

equally virtue?


MENO: True.


SOCRATES: Then the acquisition of such goods is no more virtue than the

non-acquisition and want of them, but whatever is accompanied by justice or

honesty is virtue, and whatever is devoid of justice is vice.


MENO: It cannot be otherwise, in my judgment.


SOCRATES: And were we not saying just now that justice, temperance, and

the like, were each of them a part of virtue?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And so, Meno, this is the way in which you mock me.


MENO: Why do you say that, Socrates?


SOCRATES:  Why,  because  I  asked  you  to  deliver  virtue  into  my  hands

whole and unbroken, and I gave you a pattern according to which you were to

frame your answer; and you have forgotten already, and tell me that virtue isthe  power  of  attaining  good  justly,  or  with  justice;  and  justice  you

acknowledge to be a part of virtue.


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then it follows from your own admissions, that virtue is doing

what you do with a part of virtue; for justice and the like are said by you to be

parts of virtue.


MENO: What of that?


SOCRATES: What of that! Why, did not I ask you to tell me the nature of

virtue as a whole? And you are very far from telling me this; but declare

every action to be virtue which is done with a part of virtue; as though you

had told me and I must already know the whole of virtue, and this too when

frittered away into little pieces. And, therefore, my dear Meno, I fear that I

must begin again and repeat the same question: What is virtue? for otherwise,

I can only say, that every action done with a part of virtue is virtue; what else

is the meaning of saying that every action done with justice is virtue? Ought I

not to ask the question over again; for can any one who does not know virtue

know a part of virtue?


MENO: No; I do not say that he can.


SOCRATES: Do you remember how, in the example of figure, we rejected

any answer given in terms which were as yet unexplained or unadmitted?


MENO: Yes, Socrates; and we were quite right in doing so.


SOCRATES: But then, my friend, do not suppose that we can explain to any

one the nature of virtue as a whole through some unexplained portion of

virtue, or anything at all in that fashion; we should only have to ask over

again the old question, What is virtue? Am I not right?


MENO: I believe that you are.


SOCRATES: Then begin again, and answer me, What, according to you and

your friend Gorgias, is the definition of virtue?MENO: O Socrates, I used to be told, before I knew you, that you were

always doubting yourself and making others doubt; and now you are casting

your spells over me, and I am simply getting bewitched and enchanted, and

am at my wits' end. And if I may venture to make a jest upon you, you seem

to me both in your appearance and in your power over others to be very like

the flat torpedo fish, who torpifies those who come near him and touch him,

as you have now torpified me, I think. For my soul and my tongue are really

torpid,  and  I  do  not  know  how  to  answer  you;  and  though  I  have  been

delivered of an infinite variety of speeches about virtue before now, and to

many persons--and very good ones they were, as I thought--at this moment I

cannot even say what virtue is. And I think that you are very wise in not

voyaging and going away from home, for if you did in other places as you do

in Athens, you would be cast into prison as a magician.


SOCRATES: You are a rogue, Meno, and had all but caught me.


MENO: What do you mean, Socrates?


SOCRATES: I can tell why you made a simile about me.


MENO: Why?


SOCRATES: In order that I might make another simile about you. For I

know that all pretty young gentlemen like to have pretty similes made about

them--as well they may--but I shall not return the compliment. As to my

being a torpedo, if the torpedo is torpid as well as the cause of torpidity in

others, then indeed I am a torpedo, but not otherwise; for I perplex others, not

because I am clear, but because I am utterly perplexed myself. And now I

know not what virtue is, and you seem to be in the same case, although you

did once perhaps know before you touched me. However, I have no objection

to join with you in the enquiry.


MENO: And how will you enquire, Socrates, into that which you do not

know? What will you put forth as the subject of enquiry? And if you find

what you want, how will you ever know that this is the thing which you did

not know?SOCRATES: I know, Meno, what you mean; but just see what a tiresome

dispute  you  are  introducing.  You  argue  that  a  man  cannot  enquire  either

about that which he knows, or about that which he does not know; for if he

knows, he has no need to enquire; and if not, he cannot; for he does not know

the very subject about which he is to enquire (Compare Aristot. Post. Anal.).


MENO: Well, Socrates, and is not the argument sound?


SOCRATES: I think not.


MENO: Why not?


SOCRATES: I will tell you why: I have heard from certain wise men and

women who spoke of things divine that--


MENO: What did they say?


SOCRATES: They spoke of a glorious truth, as I conceive.


MENO: What was it? and who were they?


SOCRATES: Some of them were priests and priestesses, who had studied

how they might be able to give a reason of their profession: there have been

poets also, who spoke of these things by inspiration, like Pindar, and many

others who were inspired. And they say--mark, now, and see whether their

words are true--they say that the soul of man is immortal, and at one time has

an end, which is termed dying, and at another time is born again, but is never

destroyed.  And  the  moral  is,  that  a  man  ought  to  live  always  in  perfect

holiness. 'For in the ninth year Persephone sends the souls of those from

whom she has received the penalty of ancient crime back again from beneath

into the light of the sun above, and these are they who become noble kings

and mighty men and great in wisdom and are called saintly heroes in after

ages.' The soul, then, as being immortal, and having been born again many

times, and having seen all things that exist, whether in this world or in the

world below, has knowledge of them all; and it is no wonder that she should

be able to call to remembrance all that she ever knew about virtue, and about

everything; for as all nature is akin, and the soul has learned all things; thereis  no  difficulty  in  her  eliciting  or  as  men  say  learning,  out  of  a  single

recollection  all  the  rest,  if  a  man  is  strenuous  and  does  not  faint;  for  all

enquiry and all learning is but recollection. And therefore we ought not to

listen to this sophistical argument about the impossibility of enquiry: for it

will make us idle; and is sweet only to the sluggard; but the other saying will

make us active and inquisitive. In that confiding, I will gladly enquire with

you into the nature of virtue.


MENO: Yes, Socrates; but what do you mean by saying that we do not learn,

and that what we call learning is only a process of recollection? Can you

teach me how this is?


SOCRATES: I told you, Meno, just now that you were a rogue, and now you

ask whether I can teach you, when I am saying that there is no teaching, but

only  recollection;  and  thus  you  imagine  that  you  will  involve  me  in  a

contradiction.


MENO: Indeed, Socrates, I protest that I had no such intention. I only asked

the question from habit; but if you can prove to me that what you say is true,

I wish that you would.


SOCRATES: It will be no easy matter, but I will try to please you to the

utmost of my power. Suppose that you call one of your numerous attendants,

that I may demonstrate on him.


MENO: Certainly. Come hither, boy.


SOCRATES: He is Greek, and speaks Greek, does he not?


MENO: Yes, indeed; he was born in the house.


SOCRATES:  Attend  now  to  the  questions  which  I  ask  him,  and  observe

whether he learns of me or only remembers.


MENO: I will.


SOCRATES: Tell me, boy, do you know that a figure like this is a square?BOY: I do.


SOCRATES: And you know that a square figure has these four lines equal?


BOY: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And these lines which I have drawn through the middle of the

square are also equal?


BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES: A square may be of any size?


BOY: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And if one side of the figure be of two feet, and the other side

be  of  two  feet,  how  much  will  the  whole  be?  Let  me  explain:  if  in  one

direction the space was of two feet, and in the other direction of one foot, the

whole would be of two feet taken once?


BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES: But since this side is also of two feet, there are twice two feet?


BOY: There are.


SOCRATES: Then the square is of twice two feet?


BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES: And how many are twice two feet? count and tell me.


BOY: Four, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And might there not be another square twice as large as this,

and having like this the lines equal?


BOY: Yes.SOCRATES: And of how many feet will that be?


BOY: Of eight feet.


SOCRATES: And now try and tell me the length of the line which forms the

side of that double square: this is two feet--what will that be?


BOY: Clearly, Socrates, it will be double.


SOCRATES:  Do  you  observe,  Meno,  that  I  am  not  teaching  the  boy

anything, but only asking him questions; and now he fancies that he knows

how long a line is necessary in order to produce a figure of eight square feet;

does he not?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And does he really know?


MENO: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: He only guesses that because the square is double, the line is

double.


MENO: True.


SOCRATES: Observe him while he recalls the steps in regular order. (To the

Boy:) Tell me, boy, do you assert that a double space comes from a double

line? Remember that I am not speaking of an oblong, but of a figure equal

every way, and twice the size of this--that is to say of eight feet; and I want to

know whether you still say that a double square comes from double line?


BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES: But does not this line become doubled if we add another such

line here?


BOY: Certainly.SOCRATES: And four such lines will make a space containing eight feet?


BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES: Let us describe such a figure: Would you not say that this is the

figure of eight feet?


BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES: And are there not these four divisions in the figure, each of

which is equal to the figure of four feet?


BOY: True.


SOCRATES: And is not that four times four?


BOY: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And four times is not double?


BOY: No, indeed.


SOCRATES: But how much?


BOY: Four times as much.


SOCRATES: Therefore the double line, boy, has given a space, not twice,

but four times as much.


BOY: True.


SOCRATES: Four times four are sixteen--are they not?


BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES: What line would give you a space of eight feet, as this gives

one of sixteen feet;--do you see?BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES: And the space of four feet is made from this half line?


BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES: Good; and is not a space of eight feet twice the size of this, and

half the size of the other?


BOY: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Such a space, then, will be made out of a line greater than this

one, and less than that one?


BOY: Yes; I think so.


SOCRATES: Very good; I like to hear you say what you think. And now tell

me, is not this a line of two feet and that of four?


BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then the line which forms the side of eight feet ought to be

more than this line of two feet, and less than the other of four feet?


BOY: It ought.


SOCRATES: Try and see if you can tell me how much it will be.


BOY: Three feet.


SOCRATES: Then if we add a half to this line of two, that will be the line of

three. Here are two and there is one; and on the other side, here are two also

and there is one: and that makes the figure of which you speak?


BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES: But if there are three feet this way and three feet that way, the

whole space will be three times three feet?BOY: That is evident.


SOCRATES: And how much are three times three feet?


BOY: Nine.


SOCRATES: And how much is the double of four?


BOY: Eight.


SOCRATES: Then the figure of eight is not made out of a line of three?


BOY: No.


SOCRATES: But from what line?--tell me exactly; and if you would rather

not reckon, try and show me the line.


BOY: Indeed, Socrates, I do not know.


SOCRATES: Do you see, Meno, what advances he has made in his power of

recollection? He did not know at first, and he does not know now, what is the

side of a figure of eight feet: but then he thought that he knew, and answered

confidently as if he knew, and had no difficulty; now he has a difficulty, and

neither knows nor fancies that he knows.


MENO: True.


SOCRATES: Is he not better off in knowing his ignorance?


MENO: I think that he is.


SOCRATES:  If  we  have  made  him  doubt,  and  given  him  the  'torpedo's

shock,' have we done him any harm?


MENO: I think not.


SOCRATES: We have certainly, as would seem, assisted him in some degree

to the discovery of the truth; and now he will wish to remedy his ignorance,but then he would have been ready to tell all the world again and again that

the double space should have a double side.


MENO: True.


SOCRATES: But do you suppose that he would ever have enquired into or

learned what he fancied that he knew, though he was really ignorant of it,

until he had fallen into perplexity under the idea that he did not know, and

had desired to know?


MENO: I think not, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Then he was the better for the torpedo's touch?


MENO: I think so.


SOCRATES: Mark now the farther development. I shall only ask him, and

not teach him, and he shall share the enquiry with me: and do you watch and

see if you find me telling or explaining anything to him, instead of eliciting

his opinion. Tell me, boy, is not this a square of four feet which I have

drawn?


BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES: And now I add another square equal to the former one?


BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES: And a third, which is equal to either of them?


BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES: Suppose that we fill up the vacant corner?


BOY: Very good.


SOCRATES: Here, then, there are four equal spaces?BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES: And how many times larger is this space than this other?


BOY: Four times.


SOCRATES: But it ought to have been twice only, as you will remember.


BOY: True.


SOCRATES: And does not this line, reaching from corner to corner, bisect

each of these spaces?


BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES:  And  are  there  not  here  four  equal  lines  which  contain  this

space?


BOY: There are.


SOCRATES: Look and see how much this space is.


BOY: I do not understand.


SOCRATES: Has not each interior line cut off half of the four spaces?


BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES: And how many spaces are there in this section?


BOY: Four.


SOCRATES: And how many in this?


BOY: Two.


SOCRATES: And four is how many times two?BOY: Twice.


SOCRATES: And this space is of how many feet?


BOY: Of eight feet.


SOCRATES: And from what line do you get this figure?


BOY: From this.


SOCRATES: That is, from the line which extends from corner to corner of

the figure of four feet?


BOY: Yes.


SOCRATES: And that is the line which the learned call the diagonal. And if

this is the proper name, then you, Meno's slave, are prepared to affirm that

the double space is the square of the diagonal?


BOY: Certainly, Socrates.


SOCRATES: What do you say of him, Meno? Were not all these answers

given out of his own head?


MENO: Yes, they were all his own.


SOCRATES: And yet, as we were just now saying, he did not know?


MENO: True.


SOCRATES: But still he had in him those notions of his--had he not?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then he who does not know may still have true notions of that

which he does not know?


MENO: He has.SOCRATES: And at present these notions have just been stirred up in him, as

in a dream; but if he were frequently asked the same questions, in different

forms, he would know as well as any one at last?


MENO: I dare say.


SOCRATES: Without any one teaching him he will recover his knowledge

for himself, if he is only asked questions?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES:  And  this  spontaneous  recovery  of  knowledge  in  him  is

recollection?


MENO: True.


SOCRATES: And this knowledge which he now has must he not either have

acquired or always possessed?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: But if he always possessed this knowledge he would always

have known; or if he has acquired the knowledge he could not have acquired

it in this life, unless he has been taught geometry; for he may be made to do

the same with all geometry and every other branch of knowledge. Now, has

any one ever taught him all this? You must know about him, if, as you say, he

was born and bred in your house.


MENO: And I am certain that no one ever did teach him.


SOCRATES: And yet he has the knowledge?


MENO: The fact, Socrates, is undeniable.


SOCRATES: But if he did not acquire the knowledge in this life, then he

must have had and learned it at some other time?


MENO: Clearly he must.SOCRATES: Which must have been the time when he was not a man?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And if there have been always true thoughts in him, both at the

time when he was and was not a man, which only need to be awakened into

knowledge by putting questions to him, his soul must have always possessed

this knowledge, for he always either was or was not a man?


MENO: Obviously.


SOCRATES: And if the truth of all things always existed in the soul, then the

soul is immortal. Wherefore be of good cheer, and try to recollect what you

do not know, or rather what you do not remember.


MENO: I feel, somehow, that I like what you are saying.


SOCRATES: And I, Meno, like what I am saying. Some things I have said of

which I am not altogether confident. But that we shall be better and braver

and less helpless if we think that we ought to enquire, than we should have

been if we indulged in the idle fancy that there was no knowing and no use in

seeking to know what we do not know;--that is a theme upon which I am

ready to fight, in word and deed, to the utmost of my power.


MENO: There again, Socrates, your words seem to me excellent.


SOCRATES: Then, as we are agreed that a man should enquire about that

which he does not know, shall you and I make an effort to enquire together

into the nature of virtue?


MENO: By all means, Socrates. And yet I would much rather return to my

original question, Whether in seeking to acquire virtue we should regard it as

a thing to be taught, or as a gift of nature, or as coming to men in some other

way?


SOCRATES: Had I the command of you as well as of myself, Meno, I would

not have enquired whether virtue is given by instruction or not, until we had

first ascertained 'what it is.' But as you think only of controlling me who amyour  slave,  and  never  of  controlling  yourself,--such  being  your  notion  of

freedom, I must yield to you, for you are irresistible. And therefore I have

now to enquire into the qualities of a thing of which I do not as yet know the

nature.  At  any  rate,  will  you  condescend  a  little,  and  allow  the  question

'Whether virtue is given by instruction, or in any other way,' to be argued

upon hypothesis? As the geometrician, when he is asked whether a certain

triangle is capable being inscribed in a certain circle (Or, whether a certain

area is capable of being inscribed as a triangle in a certain circle.), will reply:

'I cannot tell you as yet; but I will offer a hypothesis which may assist us in

forming a conclusion: If the figure be such that when you have produced a

given side of it (Or, when you apply it to the given line, i.e. the diameter of

the  circle  (autou).),  the  given  area  of  the  triangle  falls  short  by  an  area

corresponding to the part produced (Or, similar to the area so applied.), then

one  consequence  follows,  and  if  this  is  impossible  then  some  other;  and

therefore I wish to assume a hypothesis before I tell you whether this triangle

is capable of being inscribed in the circle':--that is a geometrical hypothesis.

And we too, as we know not the nature and qualities of virtue, must ask,

whether virtue is or is not taught, under a hypothesis: as thus, if virtue is of

such a class of mental goods, will it be taught or not? Let the first hypothesis

be that virtue is or is not knowledge,--in that case will it be taught or not? or,

as we were just now saying, 'remembered'? For there is no use in disputing

about the name. But is virtue taught or not? or rather, does not every one see

that knowledge alone is taught?


MENO: I agree.


SOCRATES: Then if virtue is knowledge, virtue will be taught?


MENO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Then now we have made a quick end of this question: if virtue

is of such a nature, it will be taught; and if not, not?


MENO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: The next question is, whether virtue is knowledge or of another

species?MENO: Yes, that appears to be the question which comes next in order.


SOCRATES:  Do  we  not  say  that  virtue  is  a  good?--This  is  a  hypothesis

which is not set aside.


MENO: Certainly.


SOCRATES:  Now,  if  there  be  any  sort  of  good  which  is  distinct  from

knowledge, virtue may be that good; but if knowledge embraces all good,

then we shall be right in thinking that virtue is knowledge?


MENO: True.


SOCRATES: And virtue makes us good?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And if we are good, then we are profitable; for all good things

are profitable?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then virtue is profitable?


MENO: That is the only inference.


SOCRATES: Then now let us see what are the things which severally profit

us. Health and strength, and beauty and wealth--these, and the like of these,

we call profitable?


MENO: True.


SOCRATES: And yet these things may also sometimes do us harm: would

you not think so?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And what is the guiding principle which makes them profitableor the reverse? Are they not profitable when they are rightly used, and hurtful

when they are not rightly used?


MENO: Certainly.


SOCRATES:  Next,  let  us  consider  the  goods  of  the  soul:  they  are

temperance,  justice,  courage,  quickness  of  apprehension,  memory,

magnanimity, and the like?


MENO: Surely.


SOCRATES: And such of these as are not knowledge, but of another sort, are

sometimes  profitable  and  sometimes  hurtful;  as,  for  example,  courage

wanting prudence, which is only a sort of confidence? When a man has no

sense he is harmed by courage, but when he has sense he is profited?


MENO: True.


SOCRATES: And the same may be said of temperance and quickness of

apprehension; whatever things are learned or done with sense are profitable,

but when done without sense they are hurtful?


MENO: Very true.


SOCRATES: And in general, all that the soul attempts or endures, when

under the guidance of wisdom, ends in happiness; but when she is under the

guidance of folly, in the opposite?


MENO: That appears to be true.


SOCRATES: If then virtue is a quality of the soul, and is admitted to be

profitable, it must be wisdom or prudence, since none of the things of the

soul  are  either  profitable  or  hurtful  in  themselves,  but  they  are  all  made

profitable or hurtful by the addition of wisdom or of folly; and therefore if

virtue is profitable, virtue must be a sort of wisdom or prudence?


MENO: I quite agree.SOCRATES: And the other goods, such as wealth and the like, of which we

were just now saying that they are sometimes good and sometimes evil, do

not they also become profitable or hurtful, accordingly as the soul guides and

uses  them  rightly  or  wrongly;  just  as  the  things  of  the  soul  herself  are

benefited when under the guidance of wisdom and harmed by folly?


MENO: True.


SOCRATES: And the wise soul guides them rightly, and the foolish soul

wrongly.


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And is not this universally true of human nature? All other

things  hang  upon  the  soul,  and  the  things  of  the  soul  herself  hang  upon

wisdom, if they are to be good; and so wisdom is inferred to be that which

profits--and virtue, as we say, is profitable?


MENO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And thus we arrive at the conclusion that virtue is either wholly

or partly wisdom?


MENO: I think that what you are saying, Socrates, is very true.


SOCRATES: But if this is true, then the good are not by nature good?


MENO: I think not.


SOCRATES: If they had been, there would assuredly have been discerners of

characters among us who would have known our future great men; and on

their showing we should have adopted them, and when we had got them, we

should have kept them in the citadel out of the way of harm, and set a stamp

upon them far rather than upon a piece of gold, in order that no one might

tamper with them; and when they grew up they would have been useful to the

state?


MENO: Yes, Socrates, that would have been the right way.SOCRATES: But if the good are not by nature good, are they made good by

instruction?


MENO:  There  appears  to  be  no  other  alternative,  Socrates.  On  the

supposition that virtue is knowledge, there can be no doubt that virtue is

taught.


SOCRATES: Yes, indeed; but what if the supposition is erroneous?


MENO: I certainly thought just now that we were right.


SOCRATES: Yes, Meno; but a principle which has any soundness should

stand firm not only just now, but always.


MENO: Well; and why are you so slow of heart to believe that knowledge is

virtue?


SOCRATES: I will try and tell you why, Meno. I do not retract the assertion

that if virtue is knowledge it may be taught; but I fear that I have some reason

in doubting whether virtue is knowledge: for consider now and say whether

virtue, and not only virtue but anything that is taught, must not have teachers

and disciples?


MENO: Surely.


SOCRATES: And conversely, may not the art of which neither teachers nor

disciples exist be assumed to be incapable of being taught?


MENO: True; but do you think that there are no teachers of virtue?


SOCRATES: I have certainly often enquired whether there were any, and

taken great pains to find them, and have never succeeded; and many have

assisted me in the search, and they were the persons whom I thought the most

likely to know. Here at the moment when he is wanted we fortunately have

sitting by us Anytus, the very person of whom we should make enquiry; to

him then let us repair. In the first place, he is the son of a wealthy and wise

father,  Anthemion,  who  acquired  his  wealth,  not  by  accident  or  gift,  like

Ismenias the Theban (who has recently made himself as rich as Polycrates),but by his own skill and industry, and who is a well- conditioned, modest

man, not insolent, or overbearing, or annoying; moreover, this son of his has

received a good education, as the Athenian people certainly appear to think,

for they choose him to fill the highest offices. And these are the sort of men

from whom you are likely to learn whether there are any teachers of virtue,

and  who  they  are.  Please,  Anytus,  to  help  me  and  your  friend  Meno  in

answering our question, Who are the teachers? Consider the matter thus: If

we wanted Meno to be a good physician, to whom should we send him?

Should we not send him to the physicians?


ANYTUS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Or if we wanted him to be a good cobbler, should we not send

him to the cobblers?


ANYTUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And so forth?


ANYTUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Let me trouble you with one more question. When we say that

we should be right in sending him to the physicians if we wanted him to be a

physician, do we mean that we should be right in sending him to those who

profess the art, rather than to those who do not, and to those who demand

payment for teaching the art, and profess to teach it to any one who will come

and learn? And if these were our reasons, should we not be right in sending

him?


ANYTUS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And might not the same be said of flute-playing, and of the

other arts? Would a man who wanted to make another a flute-player refuse to

send him to those who profess to teach the art for money, and be plaguing

other persons to give him instruction, who are not professed teachers and who

never had a single disciple in that branch of knowledge which he wishes him

to acquire--would not such conduct be the height of folly?ANYTUS: Yes, by Zeus, and of ignorance too.


SOCRATES: Very good. And now you are in a position to advise with me

about my friend Meno. He has been telling me, Anytus, that he desires to

attain that kind of wisdom and virtue by which men order the state or the

house, and honour their parents, and know when to receive and when to send

away citizens and strangers, as a good man should. Now, to whom should he

go in order that he may learn this virtue? Does not the previous argument

imply clearly that we should send him to those who profess and avouch that

they  are  the  common  teachers  of  all  Hellas,  and  are  ready  to  impart

instruction to any one who likes, at a fixed price?


ANYTUS: Whom do you mean, Socrates?


SOCRATES: You surely know, do you not, Anytus, that these are the people

whom mankind call Sophists?


ANYTUS:  By  Heracles,  Socrates,  forbear!  I  only  hope  that  no  friend  or

kinsman or acquaintance of mine, whether citizen or stranger, will ever be so

mad as to allow himself to be corrupted by them; for they are a manifest pest

and corrupting influence to those who have to do with them.


SOCRATES: What, Anytus? Of all the people who profess that they know

how to do men good, do you mean to say that these are the only ones who not

only do them no good, but positively corrupt those who are entrusted to them,

and in return for this disservice have the face to demand money? Indeed, I

cannot believe you; for I know of a single man, Protagoras, who made more

out of his craft than the illustrious Pheidias, who created such noble works, or

any  ten  other  statuaries.  How  could  that  be?  A  mender  of  old  shoes,  or

patcher up of clothes, who made the shoes or clothes worse than he received

them, could not have remained thirty days undetected, and would very soon

have  starved;  whereas  during  more  than  forty  years,  Protagoras  was

corrupting  all  Hellas,  and  sending  his  disciples  from  him  worse  than  he

received them, and he was never found out. For, if I am not mistaken, he was

about seventy years old at his death, forty of which were spent in the practice

of his profession; and during all that time he had a good reputation, which to

this day he retains: and not only Protagoras, but many others are well spokenof; some who lived before him, and others who are still living. Now, when

you say that they deceived and corrupted the youth, are they to be supposed

to have corrupted them consciously or unconsciously? Can those who were

deemed  by  many  to  be  the  wisest  men  of  Hellas  have  been  out  of  their

minds?


ANYTUS: Out of their minds! No, Socrates; the young men who gave their

money to them were out of their minds, and their relations and guardians who

entrusted their youth to the care of these men were still more out of their

minds, and most of all, the cities who allowed them to come in, and did not

drive them out, citizen and stranger alike.


SOCRATES: Has any of the Sophists wronged you, Anytus? What makes

you so angry with them?


ANYTUS: No, indeed, neither I nor any of my belongings has ever had, nor

would I suffer them to have, anything to do with them.


SOCRATES: Then you are entirely unacquainted with them?


ANYTUS: And I have no wish to be acquainted.


SOCRATES: Then, my dear friend, how can you know whether a thing is

good or bad of which you are wholly ignorant?


ANYTUS: Quite well; I am sure that I know what manner of men these are,

whether I am acquainted with them or not.


SOCRATES: You must be a diviner, Anytus, for I really cannot make out,

judging from your own words, how, if you are not acquainted with them, you

know about them. But I am not enquiring of you who are the teachers who

will corrupt Meno (let them be, if you please, the Sophists); I only ask you to

tell him who there is in this great city who will teach him how to become

eminent in the virtues which I was just now describing. He is the friend of

your family, and you will oblige him.


ANYTUS: Why do you not tell him yourself?SOCRATES: I have told him whom I supposed to be the teachers of these

things; but I learn from you that I am utterly at fault, and I dare say that you

are right. And now I wish that you, on your part, would tell me to whom

among the Athenians he should go. Whom would you name?


ANYTUS: Why single out individuals? Any Athenian gentleman, taken at

random, if he will mind him, will do far more good to him than the Sophists.


SOCRATES:  And  did  those  gentlemen  grow  of  themselves;  and  without

having been taught by any one, were they nevertheless able to teach others

that which they had never learned themselves?


ANYTUS:  I  imagine  that  they  learned  of  the  previous  generation  of

gentlemen. Have there not been many good men in this city?


SOCRATES: Yes, certainly, Anytus; and many good statesmen also there

always have been and there are still, in the city of Athens. But the question is

whether they were also good teachers of their own virtue;--not whether there

are, or have been, good men in this part of the world, but whether virtue can

be taught, is the question which we have been discussing. Now, do we mean

to say that the good men of our own and of other times knew how to impart

to others that virtue which they had themselves; or is virtue a thing incapable

of  being  communicated  or  imparted  by  one  man  to  another?  That  is  the

question which I and Meno have been arguing. Look at the matter in your

own way: Would you not admit that Themistocles was a good man?


ANYTUS: Certainly; no man better.


SOCRATES: And must not he then have been a good teacher, if any man

ever was a good teacher, of his own virtue?


ANYTUS: Yes certainly,--if he wanted to be so.


SOCRATES: But would he not have wanted? He would, at any rate, have

desired to make his own son a good man and a gentleman; he could not have

been jealous of him, or have intentionally abstained from imparting to him

his  own  virtue.  Did  you  never  hear  that  he  made  his  son  Cleophantus  afamous horseman; and had him taught to stand upright on horseback and hurl

a javelin, and to do many other marvellous things; and in anything which

could be learned from a master he was well trained? Have you not heard from

our elders of him?


ANYTUS: I have.


SOCRATES:  Then  no  one  could  say  that  his  son  showed  any  want  of

capacity?


ANYTUS: Very likely not.


SOCRATES: But did any one, old or young, ever say in your hearing that

Cleophantus, son of Themistocles, was a wise or good man, as his father

was?


ANYTUS: I have certainly never heard any one say so.


SOCRATES:  And  if  virtue  could  have  been  taught,  would  his  father

Themistocles have sought to train him in these minor accomplishments, and

allowed him who, as you must remember, was his own son, to be no better

than his neighbours in those qualities in which he himself excelled?


ANYTUS: Indeed, indeed, I think not.


SOCRATES: Here was a teacher of virtue whom you admit to be among the

best men of the past. Let us take another,--Aristides, the son of Lysimachus:

would you not acknowledge that he was a good man?


ANYTUS: To be sure I should.


SOCRATES: And did not he train his son Lysimachus better than any other

Athenian in all that could be done for him by the help of masters? But what

has  been  the  result?  Is  he  a  bit  better  than  any  other  mortal?  He  is  an

acquaintance of yours, and you see what he is like. There is Pericles, again,

magnificent in his wisdom; and he, as you are aware, had two sons, Paralus

and Xanthippus.ANYTUS: I know.


SOCRATES:  And  you  know,  also,  that  he  taught  them  to  be  unrivalled

horsemen, and had them trained in music and gymnastics and all sorts of arts-

-in these respects they were on a level with the best--and had he no wish to

make  good  men  of  them?  Nay,  he  must  have  wished  it.  But  virtue,  as  I

suspect, could not be taught. And that you may not suppose the incompetent

teachers  to  be  only  the  meaner  sort  of  Athenians  and  few  in  number,

remember  again  that  Thucydides  had  two  sons,  Melesias  and  Stephanus,

whom, besides giving them a good education in other things, he trained in

wrestling,  and  they  were  the  best  wrestlers  in  Athens:  one  of  them  he

committed to the care of Xanthias, and the other of Eudorus, who had the

reputation  of  being  the  most  celebrated  wrestlers  of  that  day.  Do  you

remember them?


ANYTUS: I have heard of them.


SOCRATES: Now, can there be a doubt that Thucydides, whose children

were taught things for which he had to spend money, would have taught them

to be good men, which would have cost him nothing, if virtue could have

been taught? Will you reply that he was a mean man, and had not many

friends among the Athenians and allies? Nay, but he was of a great family,

and a man of influence at Athens and in all Hellas, and, if virtue could have

been taught, he would have found out some Athenian or foreigner who would

have made good men of his sons, if he could not himself spare the time from

cares of state. Once more, I suspect, friend Anytus, that virtue is not a thing

which can be taught?


ANYTUS: Socrates, I think that you are too ready to speak evil of men: and,

if you will take my advice, I would recommend you to be careful. Perhaps

there is no city in which it is not easier to do men harm than to do them good,

and this is certainly the case at Athens, as I believe that you know.


SOCRATES: O Meno, think that Anytus is in a rage. And he may well be in

a rage, for he thinks, in the first place, that I am defaming these gentlemen;

and in the second place, he is of opinion that he is one of them himself. But

some day he will know what is the meaning of defamation, and if he everdoes, he will forgive me. Meanwhile I will return to you, Meno; for I suppose

that there are gentlemen in your region too?


MENO: Certainly there are.


SOCRATES: And are they willing to teach the young? and do they profess to

be teachers? and do they agree that virtue is taught?


MENO: No indeed, Socrates, they are anything but agreed; you may hear

them saying at one time that virtue can be taught, and then again the reverse.


SOCRATES:  Can  we  call  those  teachers  who  do  not  acknowledge  the

possibility of their own vocation?


MENO: I think not, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And what do you think of these Sophists, who are the only

professors? Do they seem to you to be teachers of virtue?


MENO: I often wonder, Socrates, that Gorgias is never heard promising to

teach virtue: and when he hears others promising he only laughs at them; but

he thinks that men should be taught to speak.


SOCRATES: Then do you not think that the Sophists are teachers?


MENO: I cannot tell you, Socrates; like the rest of the world, I am in doubt,

and sometimes I think that they are teachers and sometimes not.


SOCRATES: And are you aware that not you only and other politicians have

doubts whether virtue can be taught or not, but that Theognis the poet says

the very same thing?


MENO: Where does he say so?


SOCRATES: In these elegiac verses (Theog.):


'Eat and drink and sit with the mighty, and make yourself agreeable to them;

for from the good you will learn what is good, but if you mix with the badyou will lose the intelligence which you already have.'


Do you observe that here he seems to imply that virtue can be taught?


MENO: Clearly.


SOCRATES: But in some other verses he shifts about and says (Theog.):


'If understanding could be created and put into a man, then they' (who were

able to perform this feat) 'would have obtained great rewards.'


And again:--


'Never would a bad son have sprung from a good sire, for he would have

heard the voice of instruction; but not by teaching will you ever make a bad

man into a good one.'


And this, as you may remark, is a contradiction of the other.


MENO: Clearly.


SOCRATES: And is there anything else of which the professors are affirmed

not only not to be teachers of others, but to be ignorant themselves, and bad

at  the  knowledge  of  that  which  they  are  professing  to  teach?  or  is  there

anything  about  which  even  the  acknowledged  'gentlemen'  are  sometimes

saying that 'this thing can be taught,' and sometimes the opposite? Can you

say  that  they  are  teachers  in  any  true  sense  whose  ideas  are  in  such

confusion?


MENO: I should say, certainly not.


SOCRATES:  But  if  neither  the  Sophists  nor  the  gentlemen  are  teachers,

clearly there can be no other teachers?


MENO: No.


SOCRATES: And if there are no teachers, neither are there disciples?MENO: Agreed.


SOCRATES: And we have admitted that a thing cannot be taught of which

there are neither teachers nor disciples?


MENO: We have.


SOCRATES: And there are no teachers of virtue to be found anywhere?


MENO: There are not.


SOCRATES: And if there are no teachers, neither are there scholars?


MENO: That, I think, is true.


SOCRATES: Then virtue cannot be taught?


MENO: Not if we are right in our view. But I cannot believe, Socrates, that

there are no good men: And if there are, how did they come into existence?


SOCRATES: I am afraid, Meno, that you and I are not good for much, and

that Gorgias has been as poor an educator of you as Prodicus has been of me.

Certainly we shall have to look to ourselves, and try to find some one who

will help in some way or other to improve us. This I say, because I observe

that in the previous discussion none of us remarked that right and good action

is possible to man under other guidance than that of knowledge (episteme);--

and indeed if this be denied, there is no seeing how there can be any good

men at all.


MENO: How do you mean, Socrates?


SOCRATES: I mean that good men are necessarily useful or profitable. Were

we not right in admitting this? It must be so.


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And in supposing that they will be useful only if they are true

guides to us of action--there we were also right?MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: But when we said that a man cannot be a good guide unless he

have knowledge (phrhonesis), this we were wrong.


MENO: What do you mean by the word 'right'?


SOCRATES: I will explain. If a man knew the way to Larisa, or anywhere

else, and went to the place and led others thither, would he not be a right and

good guide?


MENO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And a person who had a right opinion about the way, but had

never been and did not know, might be a good guide also, might he not?


MENO: Certainly.


SOCRATES:  And  while  he  has  true  opinion  about  that  which  the  other

knows, he will be just as good a guide if he thinks the truth, as he who knows

the truth?


MENO: Exactly.


SOCRATES:  Then  true  opinion  is  as  good  a  guide  to  correct  action  as

knowledge; and that was the point which we omitted in our speculation about

the nature of virtue, when we said that knowledge only is the guide of right

action; whereas there is also right opinion.


MENO: True.


SOCRATES: Then right opinion is not less useful than knowledge?


MENO: The difference, Socrates, is only that he who has knowledge will

always be right; but he who has right opinion will sometimes be right, and

sometimes not.


SOCRATES: What do you mean? Can he be wrong who has right opinion, solong as he has right opinion?


MENO: I admit the cogency of your argument, and therefore, Socrates, I

wonder that knowledge should be preferred to right opinion--or why they

should ever differ.


SOCRATES: And shall I explain this wonder to you?


MENO: Do tell me.


SOCRATES: You would not wonder if you had ever observed the images of

Daedalus (Compare Euthyphro); but perhaps you have not got them in your

country?


MENO: What have they to do with the question?


SOCRATES: Because they require to be fastened in order to keep them, and

if they are not fastened they will play truant and run away.


MENO: Well, what of that?


SOCRATES: I mean to say that they are not very valuable possessions if they

are at liberty, for they will walk off like runaway slaves; but when fastened,

they are of great value, for they are really beautiful works of art. Now this is

an illustration of the nature of true opinions: while they abide with us they are

beautiful and fruitful, but they run away out of the human soul, and do not

remain long, and therefore they are not of much value until they are fastened

by  the  tie  of  the  cause;  and  this  fastening  of  them,  friend  Meno,  is

recollection, as you and I have agreed to call it. But when they are bound, in

the first place, they have the nature of knowledge; and, in the second place,

they  are  abiding.  And  this  is  why  knowledge  is  more  honourable  and

excellent than true opinion, because fastened by a chain.


MENO: What you are saying, Socrates, seems to be very like the truth.


SOCRATES: I too speak rather in ignorance; I only conjecture. And yet that

knowledge  differs  from  true  opinion  is  no  matter  of  conjecture  with  me.

There are not many things which I profess to know, but this is most certainlyone of them.


MENO: Yes, Socrates; and you are quite right in saying so.


SOCRATES: And am I not also right in saying that true opinion leading the

way perfects action quite as well as knowledge?


MENO: There again, Socrates, I think you are right.


SOCRATES: Then right opinion is not a whit inferior to knowledge, or less

useful in action; nor is the man who has right opinion inferior to him who has

knowledge?


MENO: True.


SOCRATES: And surely the good man has been acknowledged by us to be

useful?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: Seeing then that men become good and useful to states, not

only because they have knowledge, but because they have right opinion, and

that  neither  knowledge  nor  right  opinion  is  given  to  man  by  nature  or

acquired by him--(do you imagine either of them to be given by nature?


MENO: Not I.)


SOCRATES: Then if they are not given by nature, neither are the good by

nature good?


MENO: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: And nature being excluded, then came the question whether

virtue is acquired by teaching?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: If virtue was wisdom (or knowledge), then, as we thought, itwas taught?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And if it was taught it was wisdom?


MENO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And if there were teachers, it might be taught; and if there were

no teachers, not?


MENO: True.


SOCRATES: But surely we acknowledged that there were no teachers of

virtue?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then we acknowledged that it was not taught, and was not

wisdom?


MENO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And yet we admitted that it was a good?


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And the right guide is useful and good?


MENO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And the only right guides are knowledge and true opinion--

these are the guides of man; for things which happen by chance are not under

the guidance of man: but the guides of man are true opinion and knowledge.


MENO: I think so too.


SOCRATES: But if virtue is not taught, neither is virtue knowledge.MENO: Clearly not.


SOCRATES: Then of two good and useful things, one, which is knowledge,

has been set aside, and cannot be supposed to be our guide in political life.


MENO: I think not.


SOCRATES: And therefore not by any wisdom, and not because they were

wise,  did  Themistocles  and  those  others  of  whom  Anytus  spoke  govern

states.  This  was  the  reason  why  they  were  unable  to  make  others  like

themselves--because their virtue was not grounded on knowledge.


MENO: That is probably true, Socrates.


SOCRATES: But if not by knowledge, the only alternative which remains is

that statesmen must have guided states by right opinion, which is in politics

what divination is in religion; for diviners and also prophets say many things

truly, but they know not what they say.


MENO: So I believe.


SOCRATES:  And  may  we  not,  Meno,  truly  call  those  men  'divine'  who,

having no understanding, yet succeed in many a grand deed and word?


MENO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Then we shall also be right in calling divine those whom we

were just now speaking of as diviners and prophets, including the whole tribe

of  poets.  Yes,  and  statesmen  above  all  may  be  said  to  be  divine  and

illumined, being inspired and possessed of God, in which condition they say

many grand things, not knowing what they say.


MENO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And the women too, Meno, call good men divine--do they not?

and the Spartans, when they praise a good man, say 'that he is a divine man.'


MENO: And I think, Socrates, that they are right; although very likely ourfriend Anytus may take offence at the word.


SOCRATES: I do not care; as for Anytus, there will be another opportunity

of talking with him. To sum up our enquiry--the result seems to be, if we are

at all right in our view, that virtue is neither natural nor acquired, but an

instinct given by God to the virtuous. Nor is the instinct accompanied by

reason, unless there may be supposed to be among statesmen some one who

is capable of educating statesmen. And if there be such an one, he may be

said to be among the living what Homer says that Tiresias was among the

dead, 'he alone has understanding; but the rest are flitting shades'; and he and

his virtue in like manner will be a reality among shadows.


MENO: That is excellent, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Then, Meno, the conclusion is that virtue comes to the virtuous

by the gift of God. But we shall never know the certain truth until, before

asking how virtue is given, we enquire into the actual nature of virtue. I fear

that  I  must  go  away,  but  do  you,  now  that  you  are  persuaded  yourself,

persuade our friend Anytus. And do not let him be so exasperated; if you can

conciliate him, you will have done good service to the Athenian people.


THE END                        Parmenides Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    Beginning of ParmenidesIntroduction to Plato's Parmenides


  The awe with which Plato regarded the character of 'the great' Parmenides

has extended to the dialogue which he calls by his name. None of the writings

of Plato have been more copiously illustrated, both in ancient and modern

times, and in none of them have the interpreters been more at variance with

one another. Nor is this surprising. For the Parmenides is more fragmentary

and  isolated  than  any  other  dialogue,  and  the  design  of  the  writer  is  not

expressly stated. The date is uncertain; the relation to the other writings of

Plato is also uncertain; the connexion between the two parts is at first sight

extremely obscure; and in the latter of the two we are left in doubt as to

whether Plato is speaking his own sentiments by the lips of Parmenides, and

overthrowing  him  out  of  his  own  mouth,  or  whether  he  is  propounding

consequences  which  would  have  been  admitted  by  Zeno  and  Parmenides

themselves. The contradictions which follow from the hypotheses of the one

and many have been regarded by some as transcendental mysteries; by others

as a mere illustration, taken at random, of a new method. They seem to have

been inspired by a sort of dialectical frenzy, such as may be supposed to have

prevailed in the Megarian School (compare Cratylus, etc.). The criticism on

his own doctrine of Ideas has also been considered, not as a real criticism, but

as an exuberance of the metaphysical imagination which enabled Plato to go

beyond himself. To the latter part of the dialogue we may certainly apply the

words in which he himself describes the earlier philosophers in the Sophist:

'They went on their way rather regardless of whether we understood them or

not.'


  The  Parmenides  in  point  of  style  is  one  of  the  best  of  the  Platonic

writings; the first portion of the dialogue is in no way defective in ease and

grace and dramatic interest; nor in the second part, where there was no room

for such qualities, is there any want of clearness or precision. The latter half

is an exquisite mosaic, of which the small pieces are with the utmost fineness

and  regularity  adapted  to  one  another.  Like  the  Protagoras,  Phaedo,  and

others, the whole is a narrated dialogue, combining with the mere recital of

the words spoken, the observations of the reciter on the effect produced by

them.  Thus  we  are  informed  by  him  that  Zeno  and  Parmenides  were  notaltogether pleased at the request of Socrates that they would examine into the

nature of the one and many in the sphere of Ideas, although they received his

suggestion with approving smiles. And we are glad to be told that Parmenides

was 'aged but well-favoured,' and that Zeno was 'very good-looking'; also that

Parmenides affected to decline the great argument, on which, as Zeno knew

from experience, he was not unwilling to enter. The character of Antiphon,

the half-brother of Plato, who had once been inclined to philosophy, but has

now shown the hereditary disposition for horses, is very naturally described.

He is the sole depositary of the famous dialogue; but, although he receives

the strangers like a courteous gentleman, he is impatient of the trouble of

reciting it. As they enter, he has been giving orders to a bridle-maker; by this

slight  touch  Plato  verifies  the  previous  description  of  him.  After  a  little

persuasion  he  is  induced  to  favour  the  Clazomenians,  who  come  from  a

distance, with a rehearsal. Respecting the visit of Zeno and Parmenides to

Athens, we may observe--first, that such a visit is consistent with dates, and

may  possibly  have  occurred;  secondly,  that  Plato  is  very  likely  to  have

invented  the  meeting  ('You,  Socrates,  can  easily  invent  Egyptian  tales  or

anything  else,'  Phaedrus);  thirdly,  that  no  reliance  can  be  placed  on  the

circumstance as determining the date of Parmenides and Zeno; fourthly, that

the same occasion appears to be referred to by Plato in two other places

(Theaet., Soph.).


  Many  interpreters  have  regarded  the  Parmenides  as  a  'reductio  ad

absurdum' of the Eleatic philosophy. But would Plato have been likely to

place this in the mouth of the great Parmenides himself, who appeared to

him, in Homeric language, to be 'venerable and awful,' and to have a 'glorious

depth  of  mind'?  (Theaet.).  It  may  be  admitted  that  he  has  ascribed  to  an

Eleatic stranger in the Sophist opinions which went beyond the doctrines of

the  Eleatics.  But  the  Eleatic  stranger  expressly  criticises  the  doctrines  in

which he had been brought up; he admits that he is going to 'lay hands on his

father Parmenides.' Nothing of this kind is said of Zeno and Parmenides.

How then, without a word of explanation, could Plato assign to them the

refutation of their own tenets?


  The conclusion at which we must arrive is that the Parmenides is not a

refutation of the Eleatic philosophy. Nor would such an explanation afford

any satisfactory connexion of the first and second parts of the dialogue. Andit is quite inconsistent with Plato's own relation to the Eleatics. For of all the

pre-Socratic philosophers, he speaks of them with the greatest respect. But he

could hardly have passed upon them a more unmeaning slight than to ascribe

to their great master tenets the reverse of those which he actually held.


  Two preliminary remarks may be made. First, that whatever latitude we

may  allow  to  Plato  in  bringing  together  by  a  'tour  de  force,'  as  in  the

Phaedrus,  dissimilar  themes,  yet  he  always  in  some  way  seeks  to  find  a

connexion for them. Many threads join together in one the love and dialectic

of  the  Phaedrus.  We  cannot  conceive  that  the  great  artist  would  place  in

juxtaposition two absolutely divided and incoherent subjects. And hence we

are led to make a second remark: viz. that no explanation of the Parmenides

can be satisfactory which does not indicate the connexion of the first and

second parts. To suppose that Plato would first go out of his way to make

Parmenides attack the Platonic Ideas, and then proceed to a similar but more

fatal  assault  on  his  own  doctrine  of  Being,  appears  to  be  the  height  of

absurdity.


  Perhaps there is no passage in Plato showing greater metaphysical power

than that in which he assails his own theory of Ideas. The arguments are

nearly, if not quite, those of Aristotle; they are the objections which naturally

occur to a modern student of philosophy. Many persons will be surprised to

find Plato criticizing the very conceptions which have been supposed in after

ages to be peculiarly characteristic of him. How can he have placed himself

so completely without them? How can he have ever persisted in them after

seeing  the  fatal  objections  which  might  be  urged  against  them?  The

consideration of this difficulty has led a recent critic (Ueberweg), who in

general accepts the authorised canon of the Platonic writings, to condemn the

Parmenides as spurious. The accidental want of external evidence, at first

sight, seems to favour this opinion.


  In answer, it might be sufficient to say, that no ancient writing of equal

length and excellence is known to be spurious. Nor is the silence of Aristotle

to be hastily assumed; there is at least a doubt whether his use of the same

arguments does not involve the inference that he knew the work. And, if the

Parmenides  is  spurious,  like  Ueberweg,  we  are  led  on  further  than  we

originally intended, to pass a similar condemnation on the Theaetetus and