preserve her families happy and holy; therefore, when the heir of a house has

committed a capital offence, or is in exile for life, the house is to be purified,

and then the kinsmen of the house and the guardians of the law are to find out

a family which has a good name and in which there are many sons, and

introduce one of them to be the heir and priest of the house. He shall assume

the fathers and ancestors of the family, while the first son dies in dishonour

and his name is blotted out.


Some actions are intermediate between the voluntary and involuntary. Those

done from anger are of this class. If a man wound another in anger, let him

pay double the damage, if the injury is curable; or fourfold, if curable, and at

the same time dishonourable; and fourfold, if incurable; the amount is to be

assessed  by  the  judges.  If  the  wounded  person  is  rendered  incapable  of

military service, the injurer, besides the other penalties, shall serve in his

stead, or be liable to a suit for refusing to serve. If brother wounds brother,

then their parents and kindred, of both sexes, shall meet and judge the crime.

The damages shall be assessed by the parents; and if the amount fixed by

them is disputed, an appeal shall be made to the male kindred; or in the last

resort to the guardians of the law. Parents who wound their children are to be

tried by judges of at least sixty years of age, who have children of their own;

and they are to determine whether death, or some lesser punishment, is to be

inflicted upon them--no relatives are to take part in the trial. If a slave in

anger smite a freeman, he is to be delivered up by his master to the injured

person.  If  the  master  suspect  collusion  between  the  slave  and  the  injured

person, he may bring the matter to trial: and if he fail he shall pay three times

the injury; or if he obtain a conviction, the contriver of the conspiracy shall

be liable to an action for kidnapping. He who wounds another unintentionally

shall only pay for the actual harm done.


In all outrages and acts of violence, the elder is to be more regarded than the

younger. An injury done by a younger man to an elder is abominable and

hateful; but the younger man who is struck by an elder is to bear with him

patiently, considering that he who is twenty years older is loco parentis, and

remembering the reverence which is due to the Gods who preside over birth.

Let him keep his hands, too, from the stranger; instead of taking upon himself

to chastise him when he is insolent, he shall bring him before the wardens of

the city, who shall examine into the case, and if they find him guilty, shallscourge him with as many blows as he has given; or if he be innocent, they

shall warn and threaten his accuser. When an equal strikes an equal, whether

an old man an old man, or a young man a young man, let them use only their

fists  and  have  no  weapons.  He  who  being  above  forty  years  of  age

commences a fight, or retaliates, shall be counted mean and base.


To this preamble, let the law be added: If a man smite another who is his

elder by twenty years or more, let the bystander, in case he be older than the

combatants, part them; or if he be younger than the person struck, or of the

same age with him, let him defend him as he would a father or brother; and

let the striker be brought to trial, and if convicted imprisoned for a year or

more at the discretion of the judges. If a stranger smite one who is his elder

by twenty years or more, he shall be imprisoned for two years, and a metic, in

like case, shall suffer three years' imprisonment. He who is standing by and

gives no assistance, shall be punished according to his class in one of four

penalties--a  mina,  fifty,  thirty,  twenty  drachmas.  The  generals  and  other

superior officers of the army shall form the court which tries this class of

offences.


Laws are made to instruct the good, and in the hope that there may be no

need of them; also to control the bad, whose hardness of heart will not be

hindered  from  crime.  The  uttermost  penalty  will  fall  upon  those  who  lay

violent hands upon a parent, having no fear of the Gods above, or of the

punishments which will pursue them in the world below. They are too wise in

their own conceits to believe in such things: wherefore the tortures which

await  them  in  another  life  must  be  anticipated  in  this.  Let  the  law  be  as

follows:--


If a man, being in his right mind, dare to smite his father and mother, or his

grandfather and grandmother, let the passer-by come to the rescue; and if he

be a metic or stranger who comes to the rescue, he shall have the first place at

the games; or if he do not come to the rescue, he shall be a perpetual exile.

Let the citizen in the like case be praised or blamed, and the slave receive

freedom  or  a  hundred  stripes.  The  wardens  of  the  agora,  the  city,  or  the

country, as the case may be, shall see to the execution of the law. And he who

is an inhabitant of the same place and is present shall come to the rescue, or

he shall fall under a curse.If a man be convicted of assaulting his parents, let him be banished for ever

from the city into the country, and let him abstain from all sacred rites; and if

he do not abstain, let him be punished by the wardens of the country; and if

he return to the city, let him be put to death. If any freeman consort with him,

let him be purified before he returns to the city. If a slave strike a freeman,

whether citizen or stranger, let the bystander be obliged to seize and deliver

him into the hands of the injured person, who may inflict upon him as many

blows as he pleases, and shall then return him to his master. The law will be

as follows:--The slave who strikes a freeman shall be bound by his master,

and not set at liberty without the consent of the person whom he has injured.

All these laws apply to women as well as to men.BOOK X


The greatest wrongs arise out of youthful insolence, and the greatest of all are

committed against public temples; they are in the second degree great when

private rites and sepulchres are insulted; in the third degree, when committed

against parents; in the fourth degree, when they are done against the authority

or property of the rulers; in the fifth degree, when the rights of individuals are

violated.  Most  of  these  offences  have  been  already  considered;  but  there

remains the question of admonition and punishment of offences against the

Gods.  Let  the  admonition  be  in  the  following  terms:--No  man  who  ever

intentionally did or said anything impious, had a true belief in the existence

of the Gods; but either he thought that there were no Gods, or that they did

not  care  about  men,  or  that  they  were  easily  appeased  by  sacrifices  and

prayers. 'What shall we say or do to such persons?' My good sir, let us first

hear the jests which they in their superiority will make upon us. 'What will

they  say?'  Probably  something  of  this  kind:--'Strangers  you  are  right  in

thinking that some of us do not believe in the existence of the Gods; while

others assert that they do not care for us, and others that they are propitiated

by  prayers  and  offerings.  But  we  want  you  to  argue  with  us  before  you

threaten; you should prove to us by reasonable evidence that there are Gods,

and that they are too good to be bribed. Poets, priests, prophets, rhetoricians,

even the best of them, speak to us of atoning for evil, and not of avoiding it.

From legislators who profess to be gentle we ask for instruction, which may,

at least, have the persuasive power of truth, if no other.' What have you to

say? 'Well, there is no difficulty in proving the being of the Gods. The sun,

and earth, and stars, moving in their courses, the recurring seasons, furnish

proofs of their existence; and there is the general opinion of mankind.' I fear

that the unbelievers --not that I care for their opinion--will despise us. You

are  not  aware  that  their  impiety  proceeds,  not  from  sensuality,  but  from

ignorance taking the garb of wisdom. 'What do you mean?' At Athens there

are tales current both in prose and verse of a kind which are not tolerated in a

well-regulated state like yours. The oldest of them relate the origin of the

world,  and  the  birth  and  life  of  the  Gods.  These  narratives  have  a  bad

influence on family relations; but as they are old we will let them pass, and

consider  another  kind  of  tales,  invented  by  the  wisdom  of  a  youngergeneration, who, if any one argues for the existence of the Gods and claims

that the stars have a divine being, insist that these are mere earth and stones,

which can have no care of human things, and that all theology is a cooking up

of  words.  Now  what  course  ought  we  to  take?  Shall  we  suppose  some

impious man to charge us with assuming the existence of the Gods, and make

a defence? Or shall we leave the preamble and go on to the laws? 'There is no

hurry, and we have often said that the shorter and worse method should not

be preferred to the longer and better. The proof that there are Gods who are

good, and the friends of justice, is the best preamble of all our laws.' Come,

let us talk with the impious, who have been brought up from their infancy in

the belief of religion, and have heard their own fathers and mothers praying

for them and talking with the Gods as if they were absolutely convinced of

their existence; who have seen mankind prostrate in prayer at the rising and

setting of the sun and moon and at every turn of fortune, and have dared to

despise and disbelieve all this. Can we keep our temper with them, when they

compel us to argue on such a theme? We must; or like them we shall go mad,

though  with  more  reason.  Let  us  select  one  of  them  and  address  him  as

follows:


O my son, you are young; time and experience will make you change many

of your opinions. Do not be hasty in forming a conclusion about the divine

nature; and let me mention to you a fact which I know. You and your friends

are not the first or the only persons who have had these notions about the

Gods. There are always a considerable number who are infected by them: I

have  known  many  myself,  and  can  assure  you  that  no  one  who  was  an

unbeliever in his youth ever persisted till he was old in denying the existence

of the Gods. The two other opinions, first, that the Gods exist and have no

care of men, secondly, that they care for men, but may be propitiated by

sacrifices and prayers, may indeed last through life in a few instances, but

even this is not common. I would beg of you to be patient, and learn the truth

of the legislator and others; in the mean time abstain from impiety. 'So far,

our discourse has gone well.'


I will now speak of a strange doctrine, which is regarded by many as the

crown of philosophy. They affirm that all things come into being either by art

or nature or chance, and that the greater things are done by nature and chance,

and the lesser things by art, which receiving from nature the greater creations,moulds and fashions all those lesser works which are termed works of art.

Their meaning is that fire, water, earth, and air all exist by nature and chance,

and not by art; and that out of these, according to certain chance affinities of

opposites, the sun, the moon, the stars, and the earth have been framed, not

by any action of mind, but by nature and chance only. Thus, in their opinion,

the heaven and earth were created, as well as the animals and plants. Art

came later, and is of mortal birth; by her power were invented certain images

and very partial imitations of the truth, of which kind are the creations of

musicians and painters: but they say that there are other arts which combine

with  nature,  and  have  a  deeper  truth,  such  as  medicine,  husbandry,

gymnastic. Also the greater part of politics they imagine to co-operate with

nature, but in a less degree, having more of art, while legislation is declared

by them to be wholly a work of art. 'How do you mean?' In the first place,

they say that the Gods exist neither by nature nor by art, but by the laws of

states, which are different in different countries; and that virtue is one thing

by  nature  and  another  by  convention;  and  that  justice  is  altogether

conventional, made by law, and having authority for the moment only. This is

repeated to young men by sages and poets, and leads to impiety, and the

pretended life according to nature and in disobedience to law; for nobody

believes the Gods to be such as the law affirms. 'How true! and oh! how

injurious to states and to families!' But then, what should the lawgiver do?

Should  he  stand  up  in  the  state  and  threaten  mankind  with  the  severest

penalties if they persist in their unbelief, while he makes no attempt to win

them by persuasion? 'Nay, Stranger, the legislator ought never to weary of

trying to persuade the world that there are Gods; and he should declare that

law and art exist by nature.' Yes, Cleinias; but these are difficult and tedious

questions. 'And shall our patience, which was not exhausted in the enquiry

about music or drink, fail now that we are discoursing about the Gods? There

may be a difficulty in framing laws, but when written down they remain, and

time and diligence will make them clear; if they are useful there would be

neither reason nor religion in rejecting them on account of their length.' Most

true. And the general spread of unbelief shows that the legislator should do

something in vindication of the laws, when they are being undermined by bad

men. 'He should.' You agree with me, Cleinias, that the heresy consists in

supposing earth, air, fire, and water to be the first of all things. These the

heretics call nature, conceiving them to be prior to the soul. 'I agree.' You

would further agree that natural philosophy is the source of this impiety--thestudy appears to be pursued in a wrong way. 'In what way do you mean?' The

error consists in transposing first and second causes. They do not see that the

soul is before the body, and before all other things, and the author and ruler

of them all. And if the soul is prior to the body, then the things of the soul are

prior to the things of the body. In other words, opinion, attention, mind, art,

law, are prior to sensible qualities; and the first and greater works of creation

are the results of art and mind, whereas the works of nature, as they are

improperly  termed,  are  secondary  and  subsequent.  'Why  do  you  say

"improperly"?' Because when they speak of nature they seem to mean the

first creative power. But if the soul is first, and not fire and air, then the soul

above all things may be said to exist by nature. And this can only be on the

supposition that the soul is prior to the body. Shall we try to prove that it is

so? 'By all means.' I fear that the greenness of our argument will ludicrously

contrast with the ripeness of our ages. But as we must go into the water, and

the stream is strong, I will first attempt to cross by myself, and if I arrive at

the bank, you shall follow. Remembering that you are unaccustomed to such

discussions, I will ask and answer the questions myself, while you listen in

safety. But first I must pray the Gods to assist at the demonstration of their

own existence--if ever we are to call upon them, now is the time. Let me hold

fast to the rope, and enter into the depths: Shall I put the question to myself in

this form?--Are all things at rest, and is nothing in motion? or are some things

in motion, and some things at rest? 'The latter.' And do they move and rest,

some in one place, some in more? 'Yes.' There may be (1) motion in the same

place, as in revolution on an axis, which is imparted swiftly to the larger and

slowly  to  the  lesser  circle;  and  there  may  be  motion  in  different  places,

having  sometimes  (2)  one  centre  of  motion  and  sometimes  (3)  more.  (4)

When bodies in motion come against other bodies which are at rest, they are

divided by them, and (5) when they are caught between other bodies coming

from opposite directions they unite with them; and (6) they grow by union

and (7) waste by dissolution while their constitution remains the same, but

are (8) destroyed when their constitution fails. There is a growth from one

dimension  to  two,  and  from  a  second  to  a  third,  which  then  becomes

perceptible  to  sense;  this  process  is  called  generation,  and  the  opposite,

destruction.  We  have  now  enumerated  all  possible  motions  with  the

exception of two. 'What are they?' Just the two with which our enquiry is

concerned; for our enquiry relates to the soul. There is one kind of motion

which is only able to move other things; there is another which can moveitself as well, working in composition and decomposition, by increase and

diminution, by generation and destruction. 'Granted.' (9) That which moves

and is moved by another is the ninth kind of motion; (10) that which is self-

moved and moves others is the tenth. And this tenth kind of motion is the

mightiest,  and  is  really  the  first,  and  is  followed  by  that  which  was

improperly  called  the  ninth.  'How  do  you  mean?'  Must  not  that  which  is

moved by others finally depend upon that which is moved by itself? Nothing

can  be  affected  by  any  transition  prior  to  self-motion.  Then  the  first  and

eldest principle of motion, whether in things at rest or not at rest, will be the

principle of self-motion; and that which is moved by others and can move

others will be the second. 'True.' Let me ask another question:


What  is  the  name  which  is  given  to  self-motion  when  manifested  in  any

material substance? 'Life.' And soul too is life? 'Very good.' And are there not

three  kinds  of  knowledge--a  knowledge  (1)  of  the  essence,  (2)  of  the

definition, (3) of the name? And sometimes the name leads us to ask the

definition, sometimes the definition to ask the name. For example, number

can be divided into equal parts, and when thus divided is termed even, and

the definition of even and the word 'even' refer to the same thing. 'Very true.'

And what is the definition of the thing which is named 'soul'? Must we not

reply, 'The self-moved'? And have we not proved that the self-moved is the

source of motion in other things? 'Yes.' And the motion which is not self-

moved will be inferior to this? 'True.' And if so, we shall be right in saying

that the soul is prior and superior to the body, and the body by nature subject

and inferior to the soul? 'Quite right.' And we agreed that if the soul was prior

to the body, the things of the soul were prior to the things of the body?

'Certainly.'  And  therefore  desires,  and  manners,  and  thoughts,  and  true

opinions, and recollections, are prior to the length and breadth and force of

bodies. 'To be sure.' In the next place, we acknowledge that the soul is the

cause of good and evil, just and unjust, if we suppose her to be the cause of

all things? 'Certainly.' And the soul which orders all things must also order

the heavens? 'Of course.' One soul or more? More; for less than two are

inconceivable, one good, the other evil. 'Most true.' The soul directs all things

by her movements, which we call will, consideration, attention, deliberation,

opinion true and false, joy, sorrow, courage, fear, hatred, love, and similar

affections. These are the primary movements, and they receive the secondary

movements  of  bodies,  and  guide  all  things  to  increase  and  diminution,separation and union, and to all the qualities which accompany them--cold,

hot, heavy, light, hard, soft, white, black, sweet, bitter; these and other such

qualities the soul, herself a goddess, uses, when truly receiving the divine

mind she leads all things rightly to their happiness; but under the impulse of

folly she works out an opposite result. For the controller of heaven and earth

and the circle of the world is either the wise and good soul, or the foolish and

vicious soul, working in them. 'What do you mean?' If we say that the whole

course and motion of heaven and earth is in accordance with the workings

and  reasonings  of  mind,  clearly  the  best  soul  must  have  the  care  of  the

heaven, and guide it along that better way. 'True.' But if the heavens move

wildly and disorderly, then they must be under the guidance of the evil soul.

'True again.' What is the nature of the movement of the soul? We must not

suppose that we can see and know the soul with our bodily eyes, any more

than we can fix them on the midday sun; it will be safer to look at an image

only. 'How do you mean?' Let us find among the ten kinds of motion an

image of the motion of the mind. You remember, as we said, that all things

are divided into two classes; and some of them were moved and some at rest.

'Yes.' And of those which were moved, some were moved in the same place,

others in more places than one. 'Just so.' The motion which was in one place

was circular, like the motion of a spherical body; and such a motion in the

same place, and in the same relations, is an excellent image of the motion of

mind. 'Very true.' The motion of the other sort, which has no fixed place or

manner or relation or order or proportion, is akin to folly and nonsense. 'Very

true.' After what has been said, it is clear that, since the soul carries round all

things, some soul which is either very good or the opposite carries round the

circumference of heaven. But that soul can be no other than the best. Again,

the soul carries round the sun, moon, and stars, and if the sun has a soul, then

either the soul of the sun is within and moves the sun as the human soul

moves the body; or, secondly, the sun is contained in some external air or

fire, which the soul provides and through which she operates; or, thirdly, the

course of the sun is guided by the soul acting in a wonderful manner without

a body. 'Yes, in one of those ways the soul must guide all things.' And this

soul of the sun, which is better than the sun, whether driving him in a chariot

or employing any other agency, is by every man called a God? 'Yes, by every

man who has any sense.' And of the seasons, stars, moon, and year, in like

manner, it may be affirmed that the soul or souls from which they derive their

excellence are divine; and without insisting on the manner of their working,no one can deny that all things are full of Gods. 'No one.' And now let us

offer an alternative to him who denies that there are Gods. Either he must

show that the soul is not the origin of all things, or he must live for the future

in the belief that there are Gods.


Next, as to the man who believes in the Gods, but refuses to acknowledge

that they take care of human things--let him too have a word of admonition.

'Best of men,' we will say to him, 'some affinity to the Gods leads you to

honour them and to believe in them. But you have heard the happiness of

wicked men sung by poets and admired by the world, and this has drawn you

away from your natural piety. Or you have seen the wicked growing old in

prosperity, and leaving great offices to their children; or you have watched

the tyrant succeeding in his career of crime; and considering all these things

you have been led to believe in an irrational way that the Gods take no care

of human affairs. That your error may not increase, I will endeavour to purify

your soul.' Do you, Megillus and Cleinias, make answer for the youth, and

when we come to a difficulty, I will carry you over the water as I did before.

'Very good.' He will easily be convinced that the Gods care for the small as

well as the great; for he heard what was said of their goodness and of their

having  all  things  under  their  care.  'He  certainly  heard.'  Then  now  let  us

enquire what is meant by the virtue of the Gods. To possess mind belongs to

virtue, and the contrary to vice. 'That is what we say.' And is not courage a

part of virtue, and cowardice of vice? 'Certainly.' And to the Gods we ascribe

virtues; but idleness and indolence are not virtues. 'Of course not.' And is

God to be conceived of as a careless, indolent fellow, such as the poet would

compare to a stingless drone? 'Impossible.' Can we be right in praising any

one  who  cares  for  great  matters  and  leaves  the  small  to  take  care  of

themselves? Whether God or man, he who does so, must either think the

neglect  of  such  matters  to  be  of  no  consequence,  or  he  is  indolent  and

careless. For surely neither of them can be charged with neglect if they fail to

attend to something which is beyond their power? 'Certainly not.'


And now we will examine the two classes of offenders who admit that there

are Gods, but say,--the one that they may be appeased, the other that they

take no care of small matters: do they not acknowledge that the Gods are

omnipotent and omniscient, and also good and perfect? 'Certainly.' Then they

cannot be indolent, for indolence is the offspring of idleness, and idleness ofcowardice, and there is no cowardice in God. 'True.' If the Gods neglect small

matters, they must either know or not know that such things are not to be

regarded.  But  of  course  they  know  that  they  should  be  regarded,  and

knowing, they cannot be supposed to neglect their duty, overcome by the

seductions of pleasure or pain. 'Impossible.' And do not all human things

share in soul, and is not man the most religious of animals and the possession

of the Gods? And the Gods, who are the best of owners, will surely take care

of their property, small or great. Consider further, that the greater the power

of perception, the less the power of action. For it is harder to see and hear the

small than the great, but easier to control them. Suppose a physician who had

to cure a patient-- would he ever succeed if he attended to the great and

neglected the little? 'Impossible.' Is not life made up of littles?--the pilot,

general, householder, statesman, all attend to small matters; and the builder

will tell you that large stones do not lie well without small ones. And God is

not inferior to mortal craftsmen, who in proportion to their skill are careful in

the details of their work; we must not imagine the best and wisest to be a lazy

good-for-nothing, who wearies of his work and hurries over small and easy

matters.  'Never,  never!'  He  who  charges  the  Gods  with  neglect  has  been

forced to admit his error; but I should like further to persuade him that the

author of all has made every part for the sake of the whole, and that the

smallest part has an appointed state of action or passion, and that the least

action or passion of any part has a presiding minister. You, we say to him, are

a minute fraction of this universe, created with a view to the whole; the world

is not made for you, but you for the world; for the good artist considers the

whole first, and afterwards the parts. And you are annoyed at not seeing how

you and the universe are all working together for the best, so far as the laws

of the common creation admit. The soul undergoes many changes from her

contact with bodies; and all that the player does is to put the pieces into their

right places. 'What do you mean?' I mean that God acts in the way which is

simplest and easiest. Had each thing been formed without any regard to the

rest, the transposition of the Cosmos would have been endless; but now there

is not much trouble in the government of the world. For when the king saw

the actions of the living souls and bodies, and the virtue and vice which were

in them, and the indestructibility of the soul and body (although they were

not eternal), he contrived so to arrange them that virtue might conquer and

vice be overcome as far as possible; giving them a seat and room adapted to

them, but leaving the direction of their separate actions to men's own wills,which make our characters to be what they are. 'That is very probable.' All

things which have a soul possess in themselves the principle of change, and

in changing move according to fate and law; natures which have undergone

lesser changes move on the surface; but those which have changed utterly for

the worse, sink into Hades and the infernal world. And in all great changes

for good and evil which are produced either by the will of the soul or the

influence of others, there is a change of place. The good soul, which has

intercourse with the divine nature, passes into a holier and better place; and

the evil soul, as she grows worse, changes her place for the worse. This,--as

we declare to the youth who fancies that he is neglected of the Gods,--is the

law of divine justice--the worse to the worse, the better to the better, like to

like, in life and in death. And from this law no man will ever boast that he has

escaped. Even if you say--'I am small, and will creep into the earth,' or 'I am

high, and will mount to heaven'--you are not so small or so high that you

shall not pay the fitting penalty, either here or in the world below. This is also

the explanation of the seeming prosperity of the wicked, in whose actions as

in  a  mirror  you  imagined  that  you  saw  the  neglect  of  the  Gods,  not

considering that they make all things contribute to the whole. And how then

could you form any idea of true happiness?--If Cleinias and Megillus and I

have succeeded in persuading you that you know not what you say about the

Gods, God will help you; but if there is still any deficiency of proof, hear our

answer to the third opponent.


Enough has been said to prove that the Gods exist and care for us; that they

can be propitiated, or that they receive gifts, is not to be allowed or admitted

for an instant. 'Let us proceed with the argument.' Tell me, by the Gods, I say,

how the Gods are to be propitiated by us? Are they not rulers, who may be

compared  to  charioteers,  pilots,  perhaps  generals,  or  physicians  providing

against  the  assaults  of  disease,  husbandmen  observing  the  perils  of  the

seasons, shepherds watching their flocks? To whom shall we compare them?

We acknowledged that the world is full both of good and evil, but having

more of evil than of good. There is an immortal conflict going on, in which

Gods and demigods are our allies, and we their property; for injustice and

folly and wickedness make war in our souls upon justice and temperance and

wisdom. There is little virtue to be found on earth; and evil natures fawn

upon the Gods, like wild beasts upon their keepers, and believe that they can

win  them  over  by  flattery  and  prayers.  And  this  sin,  which  is  termeddishonesty, is to the soul what disease is to the body, what pestilence is to the

seasons, what injustice is to states. 'Quite so.' And they who maintain that the

Gods can be appeased must say that they forgive the sins of men, if they are

allowed to share in their spoils; as you might suppose wolves to mollify the

dogs by throwing them a portion of the prey. 'That is the argument.' But let us

apply our images to the Gods--are they the pilots who are won by gifts to

wreck their own ships--or the charioteers who are bribed to lose the race --or

the generals, or doctors, or husbandmen, who are perverted from their duty--

or the dogs who are silenced by wolves? 'God forbid.' Are they not rather our

best guardians; and shall we suppose them to fall short even of a moderate

degree  of  human  or  even  canine  virtue,  which  will  not  betray  justice  for

reward? 'Impossible.' He, then, who maintains such a doctrine, is the most

blasphemous of mankind.


And now our three points are proven; and we are agreed (1) that there are

Gods,  (2)  that  they  care  for  men,  (3)  that  they  cannot  be  bribed  to  do

injustice. I have spoken warmly, from a fear lest this impiety of theirs should

lead to a perversion of life. And our warmth will not have been in vain, if we

have succeeded in persuading these men to abominate themselves, and to

change their ways. 'So let us hope.' Then now that the preamble is completed,

we will make a proclamation commanding the impious to renounce their evil

ways; and in case they refuse, the law shall be added:--If a man is guilty of

impiety in word or deed, let the bystander inform the magistrates, and let the

magistrates bring the offender before the court; and if any of the magistrates

refuses to act, he likewise shall be tried for impiety. Any one who is found

guilty of such an offence shall be fined at the discretion of the court, and shall

also be punished by a term of imprisonment. There shall be three prisons--

one for common offences against life and property; another, near by the spot

where the Nocturnal Council will assemble, which is to be called the 'House

of Reformation'; the third, to be situated in some desolate region in the centre

of the country, shall be called by a name indicating retribution. There are

three causes of impiety, and from each of them spring impieties of two kinds,

six in all. First, there is the impiety of those who deny the existence of the

Gods;  these  may  be  honest  men,  haters  of  evil,  who  are  only  dangerous

because they talk loosely about the Gods and make others like themselves;

but there is also a more vicious class, who are full of craft and licentiousness.

To  this  latter  belong  diviners,  jugglers,  despots,  demagogues,  generals,hierophants of private mysteries, and sophists. The first class shall be only

imprisoned and admonished. The second class should be put to death, if they

could be, many times over. The two other sorts of impiety, first of those who

deny the care of the Gods, and secondly, of those who affirm that they may

be propitiated, have similar subdivisions, varying in degree of guilt. Those

who have learnt to blaspheme from mere ignorance shall be imprisoned in the

House of Reformation for five years at least, and not allowed to see any one

but  members  of  the  Nocturnal  Council,  who  shall  converse  with  them

touching their souls health. If any of the prisoners come to their right mind, at

the end of five years let them be restored to sane company; but he who again

offends shall die. As to that class of monstrous natures who not only believe

that the Gods are negligent, or may be propitiated, but pretend to practise on

the souls of quick and dead, and promise to charm the Gods, and to effect the

ruin of houses and states--he, I say, who is guilty of these things, shall be

bound in the central prison, and shall have no intercourse with any freeman,

receiving only his daily rations of food from the public slaves; and when he

dies, let him be cast beyond the border; and if any freeman assist to bury him,

he shall be liable to a suit for impiety. But the sins of the father shall not be

visited upon his children, who, like other orphans, shall be educated by the

state. Further, let there be a general law which will have a tendency to repress

impiety. No man shall have religious services in his house, but he shall go

with his friends to pray and sacrifice in the temples. The reason of this is, that

religious institutions can only be framed by a great intelligence. But women

and weak men are always consecrating the event of the moment; they are

under  the  influence  of  dreams  and  apparitions,  and  they  build  altars  and

temples in every village and in any place where they have had a vision. The

law is designed to prevent this, and also to deter men from attempting to

propitiate  the  Gods  by  secret  sacrifices,  which  only  multiply  their  sins.

Therefore let the law run:--No one shall have private religious rites; and if a

man or woman who has not been previously noted for any impiety offend in

this way, let them be admonished to remove their rites to a public temple; but

if the offender be one of the obstinate sort, he shall be brought to trial before

the guardians, and if he be found guilty, let him die.BOOK XI


As to dealings between man and man, the principle of them is simple--Thou

shalt not take what is not thine; and shalt do to others as thou wouldst that

they should do to thee. First, of treasure trove:--May I never desire to find, or

lift, if I find, or be induced by the counsel of diviners to lift, a treasure which

one who was not my ancestor has laid down; for I shall not gain so much in

money as I shall lose in virtue. The saying, 'Move not the immovable,' may

be repeated in a new sense; and there is a common belief which asserts that

such deeds prevent a man from having a family. To him who is careless of

such consequences, and, despising the word of the wise, takes up a treasure

which  is  not  his--what  will  be  done  by  the  hand  of  the  Gods,  God  only

knows,--but I would have the first person who sees the offender, inform the

wardens  of  the  city  or  the  country;  and  they  shall  send  to  Delphi  for  a

decision, and whatever the oracle orders, they shall carry out. If the informer

be a freeman, he shall be honoured, and if a slave, set free; but he who does

not inform, if he be a freeman, shall be dishonoured, and if a slave, shall be

put to death. If a man leave anywhere anything great or small, intentionally or

unintentionally, let him who may find the property deem the deposit sacred to

the Goddess of ways. And he who appropriates the same, if he be a slave,

shall be beaten with many stripes; if a freeman, he shall pay tenfold, and be

held to have done a dishonourable action. If a person says that another has

something of his, and the other allows that he has the property in dispute, but

maintains it to be his own, let the ownership be proved out of the registers of

property. If the property is registered as belonging to some one who is absent,

possession shall be given to him who offers sufficient security on behalf of

the absentee; or if the property is not registered, let it remain with the three

eldest magistrates, and if it should be an animal, the defeated party must pay

the  cost  of  its  keep.  A  man  may  arrest  his  own  slave,  and  he  may  also

imprison for safe-keeping the runaway slave of a friend. Any one interfering

with him must produce three sureties; otherwise, he will be liable to an action

for violence, and if he be cast, must pay a double amount of damages to him

from whom he has taken the slave. A freedman who does not pay due respect

to his patron, may also be seized. Due respect consists in going three times a

month to the house of his patron, and offering to perform any lawful servicefor him; he must also marry as his master pleases; and if his property be

greater than his master's, he must hand over to him the excess. A freedman

may not remain in the state, except with the consent of the magistrates and of

his master, for more than twenty years; and whenever his census exceeds that

of the third class, he must in any case leave the country within thirty days,

taking his property with him. If he break this regulation, the penalty shall be

death, and his property shall be confiscated. Suits about these matters are to

be decided in the courts of the tribes, unless the parties have settled the matter

before a court of neighbours or before arbiters. If anybody claim a beast, or

anything else, let the possessor refer to the seller or giver of the property

within thirty days, if the latter reside in the city, or, if the goods have been

received from a stranger, within five months, of which the middle month

shall include the summer solstice. All purchases and exchanges are to be

made in the agora, and paid for on the spot; the law will not allow credit to be

given. No law shall protect the money subscribed for clubs. He who sells

anything of greater value than fifty drachmas shall abide in the city for ten

days,  and  let  his  whereabouts  be  known  to  the  buyer,  in  case  of  any

reclamation. When a slave is sold who is subject to epilepsy, stone, or any

other invisible disorder, the buyer, if he be a physician or trainer, or if he be

warned, shall have no redress; but in other cases within six months, or within

twelve months in epileptic disorders, he may bring the matter before a jury of

physicians to be agreed upon by both parties; and the seller who loses the

suit, if he be an expert, shall pay twice the price; or if he be a private person,

the  bargain  shall  be  rescinded,  and  he  shall  simply  refund.  If  a  person

knowingly sells a homicide to another, who  is  informed of his character,

there  is  no  redress.  But  if  the  judges--who  are  to  be  the  five  youngest

guardians of the law--decide that the purchaser was not aware, then the seller

is to pay threefold, and to purify the house of the buyer.


He who exchanges money for money, or beast for beast, must warrant either

of them to be sound and good. As in the case of other laws, let us have a

preamble,  relating  to  all  this  class  of  crime.  Adulteration  is  a  kind  of

falsehood  about  which  the  many  commonly  say  that  at  proper  times  the

practice may often be right, but they do not define at what times. But the

legislator will tell them, that no man should invoke the Gods when he is

practising deceit or fraud, in word or deed. For he is the enemy of heaven,

first, who swears falsely, not thinking of the Gods by whom he swears, andsecondly, he who lies to his superiors. (Now the superiors are the betters of

inferiors,--the elder of the younger, parents of children, men of women, and

rulers of subjects.) The trader who cheats in the agora is a liar and is perjured-

-he respects neither the name of God nor the regulations of the magistrates. If

after hearing this he will still be dishonest, let him listen to the law:--The

seller shall not have two prices on the same day, neither must he puff his

goods, nor offer to swear about them. If he break the law, any citizen not less

than thirty years of age may smite him. If he sell adulterated goods, the slave

or  metic  who  informs  against  him  shall  have  the  goods;  the  citizen  who

brings such a charge, if he prove it, shall offer up the goods in question to the

Gods of the agora; or if he fail to prove it, shall be dishonoured. He who is

detected in selling adulterated goods shall be deprived of them, and shall

receive a stripe for every drachma of their value. The wardens of the agora

and the guardians of the law shall take experienced persons into counsel, and

draw up regulations for the agora. These shall be inscribed on a column in

front of the court of the wardens of the agora.--As to the wardens of the city,

enough has been said already. But if any omissions in the law are afterwards

discovered, the wardens and the guardians shall supply them, and have them

inscribed after the original regulations on a column before the court of the

wardens of the city.


Next in order follows the subject of retail trades, which in their natural use

are the reverse of mischievous; for every man is a benefactor who reduces

what is unequal to symmetry and proportion. Money is the instrument by

which this is accomplished, and the shop-keeper, the merchant, and hotel-

keeper do but supply the wants and equalize the possessions of mankind.

Why, then, does any dishonour attach to a beneficent occupation? Let us

consider the nature of the accusation first, and then see whether it can be

removed. 'What is your drift?' Dear Cleinias, there are few men who are so

gifted by nature, and improved by education, as to be able to control the

desire  of  making  money;  or  who  are  sober  in  their  wishes  and  prefer

moderation to accumulation. The great majority think that they can never

have enough, and the consequence is that retail trade has become a reproach.

Whereas,  however  ludicrous  the  idea  may  seem,  if  noble  men  and  noble

women could be induced to open a shop, and to trade upon incorruptible

principles, then the aspect of things would change, and retail traders would be

regarded as nursing fathers and mothers. In our own day the trader goes andsettles in distant places, and receives the weary traveller hospitably at first,

but in the end treats him as an enemy and a captive, whom he only liberates

for an enormous ransom. This is what has brought retail trade into disrepute,

and against this the legislator ought to provide. Men have said of old, that to

fight against two opponents is hard; and the two opponents of whom I am

thinking are wealth and poverty--the one corrupting men by luxury; the other,

through misery, depriving them of the sense of shame. What remedies can a

city  find  for  this  disease?  First,  to  have  as  few  retail  traders  as  possible;

secondly, to give retail trade over to a class whose corruption will not injure

the state; and thirdly, to restrain the insolence and meanness of the retailers.


Let us make the following laws:--(1) In the city of the Magnetes none of the

5040 citizens shall be a retailer or merchant, or do any service to any private

persons who do not equally serve him, except to his father and mother and

their fathers and mothers, and generally to his elders who are freemen, and

whom he serves as a freeman. He who follows an illiberal pursuit may be

cited for dishonouring his family, and kept in bonds for a year; and if he

offend again, he shall be bound for two years; and for every offence his

punishment  shall  be  doubled:  (2)  Every  retailer  shall  be  a  metic  or  a

foreigner: (3) The guardians of the law shall have a special care of this part of

the community, whose calling exposes them to peculiar temptations. They

shall consult with persons of experience, and find out what prices will yield

the traders a moderate profit, and fix them.


When a man does not fulfil his contract, he being under no legal or other

impediment, the case shall be brought before the court of the tribes, if not

previously  settled  by  arbitration.  The  class  of  artisans  is  consecrated  to

Hephaestus and Athene; the makers of weapons to Ares and Athene: all of

whom, remembering that the Gods are their ancestors, should be ashamed to

deceive in the practice of their craft. If any man is lazy in the fulfilment of his

work, and fancies, foolish fellow, that his patron God will not deal hardly

with him, he will be punished by the God; and let the law follow:--He who

fails  in  his  undertaking  shall  pay  the  value,  and  do  the  work  gratis  in  a

specified time. The contractor, like the seller, is enjoined by law to charge the

simple value of his work; in a free city, art should be a true thing, and the

artist must not practise on the ignorance of others. On the other hand, he who

has ordered any work and does not pay the workman according to agreement,dishonours Zeus and Athene, and breaks the bonds of society. And if he does

not  pay  at  the  time  agreed,  let  him  pay  double;  and  although  interest  is

forbidden in other cases, let the workman receive after the expiration of a

year interest at the rate of an obol a month for every drachma (equal to 200

per  cent.  per  ann.).  And  we  may  observe  by  the  way,  in  speaking  of

craftsmen, that if our military craft do their work well, the state will praise

those who honour them, and blame those who do not honour them. Not that

the first place of honour is to be assigned to the warrior; a higher still is

reserved for those who obey the laws.


Most  of  the  dealings  between  man  and  man  are  now  settled,  with  the

exception of such as relate to orphans and guardianships. These lead us to

speak of the intentions of the dying, about which we must make regulations. I

say 'must'; for mankind cannot be allowed to dispose of their property as they

please, in ways at variance with one another and with law and custom. But a

dying person is a strange being, and is not easily managed; he wants to be

master of all he has, and is apt to use angry words. He will say,--'May I not

do what I will with my own, and give much to my friends, and little to my

enemies?'  'There  is  reason  in  that.'  O  Cleinias,  in  my  judgment  the  older

lawgivers were too soft-hearted, and wanting in insight into human affairs.

They were too ready to listen to the outcry of a dying man, and hence they

were induced to give him an absolute power of bequest. But I would say to

him:--O creature of a day, you know neither what is yours nor yourself: for

you and your property are not your own, but belong to your whole family,

past and to come, and property and family alike belong to the State. And

therefore I must take out of your hands the charge of what you leave behind

you, with a view to the interests of all. And I hope that you will not quarrel

with us, now that you are going the way of all mankind; we will do our best

for you and yours when you are no longer here. Let this be our address to the

living and dying, and let the law be as follows:--The father who has sons

shall appoint one of them to be the heir of the lot; and if he has given any

other son to be adopted by another, the adoption shall also be recorded; and if

he has still a son who has no lot, and has a chance of going to a colony, he

may give him what he has more than the lot; or if he has more than one son

unprovided for, he may divide the money between them. A son who has a

house of his own, and a daughter who is betrothed, are not to share in the

bequest of money; and the son or daughter who, having inherited one lot,acquires another, is to bequeath the new inheritance to the next of kin. If a

man have only daughters, he may adopt the husband of any one of them; or if

he have lost a son, let him make mention of the circumstance in his will and

adopt  another.  If  he  have  no  children,  he  may  give  away  a  tenth  of  his

acquired  property  to  whomsoever  he  likes;  but  he  must  adopt  an  heir  to

inherit the lot, and may leave the remainder to him. Also he may appoint

guardians for his children; or if he die without appointing them or without

making  a  will,  the  nearest  kinsmen,--two  on  the  father's  and  two  on  the

mother's side,--and one friend of the departed, shall be appointed guardians.

The  fifteen  eldest  guardians  of  the  law  are  to  have  special  charge  of  all

orphans, the whole number of fifteen being divided into bodies of three, who

will succeed one another according to seniority every year for five years. If a

man dying intestate leave daughters, he must pardon the law which marries

them for looking, first to kinship, and secondly to the preservation of the lot.

The legislator cannot regard the character of the heir, which to the father is

the first consideration. The law will therefore run as follows:--If the intestate

leave  daughters,  husbands  are  to  be  found  for  them  among  their  kindred

according  to  the  following  table  of  affinity:  first,  their  father's  brothers;

secondly, the sons of their father's brothers; thirdly, of their father's sisters;

fourthly, their great-uncles; fifthly, the sons of a great-uncle; sixthly, the sons

of a great-aunt. The kindred in such cases shall always be reckoned in this

way; the relationship shall proceed upwards through brothers and sisters and

brothers' and sisters' children, and first the male line must be taken and then

the female. If there is a dispute in regard to fitness of age for marriage, this

the judge shall decide, after having made an inspection of the youth naked,

and of the maiden naked down to the waist. If the maiden has no relations

within the degree of third cousin, she may choose whom she likes, with the

consent of her guardians; or she may even select some one who has gone to a

colony, and he, if he be a kinsman, will take the lot by law; if not, he must

have  her  guardians'  consent,  as  well  as  hers.  When  a  man  dies  without

children and without a will, let a young man and a young woman go forth

from the family and take up their abode in the desolate house. The woman

shall be selected from the kindred in the following order of succession:--first,

a  sister  of  the  deceased;  second,  a  brother's  daughter;  third,  a  sister's

daughter; fourth, a father's sister; fifth, a daughter of a father's brother; sixth,

a daughter of a father's sister. For the man the same order shall be observed

as in the preceding case. The legislator foresees that laws of this kind willsometimes press heavily, and that his intention cannot always be fulfilled; as

for example, when there are mental and bodily defects in the persons who are

enjoined  to  marry.  But  he  must  be  excused  for  not  being  always  able  to

reconcile  the  general  principles  of  public  interest  with  the  particular

circumstances of individuals; and he is willing to allow, in like manner, that

the individual cannot always do what the lawgiver wishes. And then arbiters

must be chosen, who will determine equitably the cases which may arise

under the law: e.g. a rich cousin may sometimes desire a grander match, or

the requirements of the law can only be fulfilled by marrying a madwoman.

To  meet  such  cases  let  the  following  law  be  enacted:--If  any  one  comes

forward  and  says  that  the  lawgiver,  had  he  been  alive,  would  not  have

required the carrying out of the law in a particular case, let him go to the

fifteen eldest guardians of the law who have the care of orphans; but if he

thinks that too much power is thus given to them, he may bring the case

before the court of select judges.


Thus will orphans have a second birth. In order to make their sad condition as

light as possible, the guardians of the law shall be their parents, and shall be

admonished  to  take  care  of  them.  And  what  admonition  can  be  more

appropriate than the assurance which we formerly gave, that the souls of the

dead watch over mortal affairs? About this there are many ancient traditions,

which may be taken on trust from the legislator. Let men fear, in the first

place, the Gods above; secondly, the souls of the departed, who naturally care

for their own descendants; thirdly, the aged living, who are quick to hear of

any neglect of family duties, especially in the case of orphans. For they are

the holiest and most sacred of all deposits, and the peculiar care of guardians

and magistrates; and those who try to bring them up well will contribute to

their own good and to that of their families. He who listens to the preamble of

the law will never know the severity of the legislator; but he who disobeys,

and injures the orphan, will pay twice the penalty he would have paid if the

parents had been alive. More laws might have been made about orphans, did

we not suppose that the guardians have children and property of their own

which are protected by the laws; and the duty of the guardian in our state is

the same as that of a father, though his honour or disgrace is greater. A legal

admonition  and  threat  may,  however,  be  of  service:  the  guardian  of  the

orphan and the guardian of the law who is over him, shall love the orphan as

their own children, and take more care of his or her property than of theirown. If the guardian of the child neglect his duty, the guardian of the law

shall fine him; and the guardian may also have the magistrate tried for neglect

in the court of select judges, and he shall pay, if convicted, a double penalty.

Further, the guardian of the orphan who is careless or dishonest may be fined

on the information of any of the citizens in a fourfold penalty, half to go to

the orphan and half to the prosecutor of the suit. When the orphan is of age, if

he thinks that he has been ill-used, his guardian may be brought to trial by

him within five years, and the penalty shall be fixed by the court. Or if the

magistrate has neglected the orphan, he shall pay damages to him; but if he

have defrauded him, he shall make compensation and also be deposed from

his office of guardian of the law.


If irremediable differences arise between fathers and sons, the father may

want to renounce his son, or the son may indict his father for imbecility: such

violent separations only take place when the family are 'a bad lot'; if only one

of the two parties is bad, the differences do not grow to so great a height. But

here arises a difficulty. Although in any other state a son who is disinherited

does not cease to be a citizen, in ours he does; for the number of citizens

cannot exceed 5040. And therefore he who is to suffer such a penalty ought

to be abjured, not only by his father, but by the whole family. The law, then,

should run as follows:--If any man's evil fortune or temper incline him to

disinherit his son, let him not do so lightly or on the instant; but let him have

a council of his own relations and of the maternal relations of his son, and set

forth to them the propriety of disinheriting him, and allow his son to answer.

And if more than half of the kindred male and female, being of full age,

condemn the son, let him be disinherited. If any other citizen desires to adopt

him, he may, for young men's characters often change in the course of life.

But if, after ten years, he remains unadopted, let him be sent to a colony. If

disease, or old age, or evil disposition cause a man to go out of his mind, and

he is ruining his house and property, and his son doubts about indicting him

for insanity, let him lay the case before the eldest guardians of the law, and

consult  with  them.  And  if  they  advise  him  to  proceed,  and  the  father  is

decided to be imbecile, he shall have no more control over his property, but

shall live henceforward like a child in the house.


If a man and his wife are of incompatible tempers, ten guardians of the law

and ten of the matrons who regulate marriage shall take their case in hand,and reconcile them, if possible. If, however, their swelling souls cannot be

pacified, the wife may try and find a new husband, and the husband a new

wife; probably they are not very gentle creatures, and should therefore be

joined to milder natures. The younger of those who are separated should also

select their partners with a view to the procreation of children; while the older

should seek a companion for their declining years. If a woman dies, leaving

children male or female, the law will advise, but not compel, the widower to

abstain  from  a  second  marriage;  if  she  leave  no  children,  he  shall  be

compelled to marry. Also a widow, if she is not old enough to live honestly

without marriage, shall marry again; and in case she have no children, she

should marry for the sake of them. There is sometimes an uncertainty which

parent the offspring is to follow: in unions of a female slave with a male

slave, or with a freedman or free man, or of a free woman with a male slave,

the  offspring  is  to  belong  to  the  master;  but  if  the  master  or  mistress  be

themselves the parent of the child, the slave and the child are to be sent away

to another land.


Concerning duty to parents, let the preamble be as follows:--We honour the

Gods in their lifeless images, and believe that we thus propitiate them. But he

who has an aged father or mother has a living image, which if he cherish it

will do him far more good than any statue. 'What do you mean by cherishing

them?'  I  will  tell  you.  Oedipus  and  Amyntor  and  Theseus  cursed  their

children, and their curses took effect. This proves that the Gods hear the

curses of parents who are wronged; and shall we doubt that they hear and

fulfil their blessings too?' 'Surely not.' And, as we were saying, no image is

more honoured by the Gods than an aged father and mother, to whom when

honour  is  done,  the  God  who  hears  their  prayers  is  rejoiced,  and  their

influence is greater than that of the lifeless statue; for they pray that good or

evil may come to us in proportion as they are honoured or dishonoured, but

the statue is silent. 'Excellent.' Good men are glad when their parents live to

extreme old age, or if they depart early, lament their loss; but to bad man

their parents are always terrible. Wherefore let every one honour his parents,

and if this preamble fails of influencing him, let him hear the law:--If any one

does not take sufficient care of his parents, let the aggrieved person inform

the  three  eldest  guardians  of  the  law  and  three  of  the  women  who  are

concerned with marriages. Women up to forty years of age, and men up to

thirty, who thus offend, shall be beaten and imprisoned. After that age theyare to be brought before a court composed of the eldest citizens, who may

inflict  any  punishment  upon  them  which  they  please.  If  the  injured  party

cannot inform, let any freeman who hears of the case inform; a slave who

does so shall be set free,--if he be the slave of the one of the parties, by the

magistrate,--if  owned  by  another,  at  the  cost  of  the  state;  and  let  the

magistrates, take care that he is not wronged by any one out of revenge.


The injuries which one person does to another by the use of poisons are of

two kinds;--one affects the body by the employment of drugs and potions; the

other works on the mind by the practice of sorcery and magic. Fatal cases of

either  sort  have  been  already  mentioned;  and  now  we  must  have  a  law

respecting cases which are not fatal. There is no use in arguing with a man

whose mind is disturbed by waxen images placed at his own door, or on the

sepulchre of his father or mother, or at a spot where three ways meet. But to

the wizards themselves we must address a solemn preamble, begging them

not to treat the world as if they were children, or compel the legislator to

expose them, and to show men that the poisoner who is not a physician and

the wizard who is not a prophet or diviner are equally ignorant of what they

are doing. Let the law be as follows:--He who by the use of poison does any

injury not fatal to a man or his servants, or any injury whether fatal or not to

another's cattle or bees, is to be punished with death if he be a physician, and

if he be not a physician he is to suffer the punishment awarded by the court:

and he who injures another by sorcery, if he be a diviner or prophet, shall be

put to death; and, if he be not a diviner, the court shall determine what he

ought to pay or suffer.


Any one who injures another by theft or violence shall pay damages at least

equal to the injury; and besides the compensation, a suitable punishment shall

be inflicted. The foolish youth who is the victim of others is to have a lighter

punishment; he whose folly is occasioned by his own jealousy or desire or

anger is to suffer more heavily. Punishment is to be inflicted, not for the sake

of  vengeance,  for  what  is  done  cannot  be  undone,  but  for  the  sake  of

prevention and reformation. And there should be a proportion between the

punishment and the crime, in which the judge, having a discretion left him,

must,  by  estimating  the  crime,  second  the  legislator,  who,  like  a  painter,

furnishes outlines for him to fill up.A madman is not to go about at large in the city, but is to be taken care of by

his relatives. Neglect on their part is to be punished in the first class by a fine

of a hundred drachmas, and proportionally in the others. Now madness is of

various  kinds;  in  addition  to  that  which  arises  from  disease  there  is  the

madness which originates in a passionate temperament, and makes men when

engaged in a quarrel use foul and abusive language against each other. This is

intolerable in a well-ordered state; and therefore our law shall be as follows:--

No one is to speak evil of another, but when men differ in opinion they are to

instruct one another without speaking evil. Nor should any one seek to rouse

the passions which education has calmed; for he who feeds and nurses his

wrath is apt to make ribald jests at his opponent, with a loss of character or

dignity to himself. And for this reason no one may use any abusive word in a

temple, or at sacrifices, or games, or in any public assembly, and he who

offends shall be censured by the proper magistrate; and the magistrate, if he

fail to censure him, shall not claim the prize of virtue. In any other place the

angry man who indulges in revilings, whether he be the beginner or not, may

be chastised by an elder. The reviler is always trying to make his opponent

ridiculous; and the use of ridicule in anger we cannot allow. We forbid the

comic poet to ridicule our citizens, under a penalty of expulsion from the

country or a fine of three minae. Jest in which there is no offence may be

allowed; but the question of offence shall be determined by the director of

education, who is to be the licenser of theatrical performances.


The righteous man who is in adversity will not be allowed to starve in a well-

ordered city; he will never be a beggar. Nor is a man to be pitied, merely

because he is hungry, unless he be temperate. Therefore let the law be as

follows:--Let there be no beggars in our state; and he who begs shall be

expelled by the magistrates both from town and country.


If a slave, male or female, does any harm to the property of another, who is

not himself a party to the harm, the master shall compensate the injury or

give up the offending slave. But if the master argue that the charge has arisen

by collusion, with the view of obtaining the slave, he may put the plaintiff on

his trial for malpractices, and recover from him twice the value of the slave;

or if he is cast he must make good the damage and deliver up the slave. The

injury done by a horse or other animal shall be compensated in like manner.A witness who will not come of himself may be summoned, and if he fail in

appearing, he shall be liable for any harm which may ensue: if he swears that

he does not know, he may leave the court. A judge who is called upon as a

witness must not vote. A free woman, if she is over forty, may bear witness

and plead, and, if she have no husband, she may also bring an action. A slave,

male or female, and a child may witness and plead only in case of murder,

but they must give sureties that they will appear at the trial, if they should be

charged with false witness. Such charges must be made pending the trial, and

the accusations shall be sealed by both parties and kept by the magistrates

until the trial for perjury comes off. If a man is twice convicted of perjury, he

is not to be required, if three times, he is not to be allowed to bear witness, or,

if he persists in bearing witness, is to be punished with death. When more

than half the evidence is proved to be false there must be a new trial.


The  best  and  noblest  things  in  human  life  are  liable  to  be  defiled  and

perverted. Is not justice the civilizer of mankind? And yet upon the noble

profession of the advocate has come an evil name. For he is said to make the

worse  appear  the  better  cause,  and  only  requires  money  in  return  for  his

services.  Such  an  art  will  be  forbidden  by  the  legislator,  and  if  existing

among us will be requested to depart to another city. To the disobedient let

the voice of the law be heard saying:--He who tries to pervert justice in the

minds of the judges, or to increase litigation, shall be brought before the

supreme court. If he does so from contentiousness, let him be silenced for a

time, and, if he offend again, put to death. If he have acted from a love of

gain, let him be sent out of the country if he be a foreigner, or if he be a

citizen let him be put to death.BOOK XII


If a false message be taken to or brought from other states, whether friendly

or  hostile,  by  ambassadors  or  heralds,  they  shall  be  indicted  for  having

dishonoured their sacred office, and, if convicted, shall suffer a penalty.--

Stealing is mean; robbery is shameless. Let no man deceive himself by the

supposed  example  of  the  Gods,  for  no  God  or  son  of  a  God  ever  really

practised either force or fraud. On this point the legislator is better informed

than all the poets put together. He who listens to him shall be for ever happy,

but he who will not listen shall have the following law directed against him:--

He who steals much, or he who steals little of the public property is deserving

of the same penalty; for they are both impelled by the same evil motive.

When the law punishes one man more lightly than another, this is done under

the idea, not that he is less guilty, but that he is more curable. Now a thief

who is a foreigner or slave may be curable; but the thief who is a citizen, and

has  had  the  advantages  of  education,  should  be  put  to  death,  for  he  is

incurable.


Much  consideration  and  many  regulations  are  necessary  about  military

expeditions; the great principal of all is that no one, male or female, in war or

peace, in great matters or small, shall be without a commander. Whether men

stand or walk, or drill, or pursue, or retreat, or wash, or eat, they should all

act together and in obedience to orders. We should practise from our youth

upwards  the  habits  of  command  and  obedience.  All  dances,  relaxations,

endurances  of  meats  and  drinks,  of  cold  and  heat,  and  of  hard  couches,

should have a view to war, and care should be taken not to destroy the natural

covering and use of the head and feet by wearing shoes and caps; for the head

is the lord of the body, and the feet are the best of servants. The soldier

should  have  thoughts  like  these;  and  let  him  hear  the  law:--He  who  is

enrolled  shall  serve,  and  if  he  absent  himself  without  leave  he  shall  be

indicted for failure of service before his own branch of the army when the

expedition returns, and if he be found guilty he shall suffer the penalty which

the courts award, and never be allowed to contend for any prize of valour, or

to accuse another of misbehaviour in military matters. Desertion shall also be

tried and punished in the same manner. After the courts for trying failure ofservice and desertion have been held, the generals shall hold another court, in

which the several arms of the service will award prizes for the expedition

which has just concluded. The prize is to be a crown of olive, which the

victor shall offer up at the temple of his favourite war God...In any suit which

a  man  brings,  let  the  indictment  be  scrupulously  true,  for  justice  is  an

honourable maiden, to whom falsehood is naturally hateful. For example,

when men are prosecuted for having lost their arms, great care should be

taken by the witnesses to distinguish between cases in which they have been

lost from necessity and from cowardice. If the hero Patroclus had not been

killed but had been brought back alive from the field, he might have been

reproached with having lost the divine armour. And a man may lose his arms

in a storm at sea, or from a fall, and under many other circumstances. There is

a distinction of language to be observed in the use of the two terms, 'thrower

away of a shield' (ripsaspis), and 'loser of arms' (apoboleus oplon), one being

the voluntary, the other the involuntary relinquishment of them. Let the law

then be as follows:--If any one is overtaken by the enemy, having arms in his

hands, and he leaves them behind him voluntarily, choosing base life instead

of honourable death, let justice be done. The old legend of Caeneus, who was

changed by Poseidon from a woman into a man, may teach by contraries the

appropriate punishment. Let the thrower away of his shield be changed from

a man into a woman--that is to say, let him be all his life out of danger, and

never again be admitted by any commander into the ranks of his army; and

let him pay a heavy fine according to his class. And any commander who

permits him to serve shall also be punished by a fine.


All magistrates, whatever be their tenure of office, must give an account of

their magistracy. But where shall we find the magistrate who is worthy to

supervise  them  or  look  into  their  short-comings  and  crooked  ways?  The

examiner must be more than man who is sufficient for these things. For the

truth is that there are many causes of the dissolution of states; which, like

ships or animals, have their cords, and girders, and sinews easily relaxed, and

nothing tends more to their welfare and preservation than the supervision of

them by examiners who are better than the magistrates; failing in this they

fall  to  pieces,  and  each  becomes  many  instead  of  one.  Wherefore  let  the

people meet after the summer solstice, in the precincts of Apollo and the Sun,

and appoint three men of not less than fifty years of age. They shall proceed

as follows:--Each citizen shall select some one, not himself, whom he thinksthe best. The persons selected shall be reduced to one half, who have the

greatest number of votes, if they are an even number; but if an odd number,

he who has the smallest number of votes shall be previously withdrawn. The

voting shall continue in the same manner until three only remain; and if the

number  of  votes  cast  for  them  be  equal,  a  distinction  between  the  first,

second, and third shall be made by lot. The three shall be crowned with an

olive wreath, and proclamation made, that the city of the Magnetes, once

more preserved by the Gods, presents her three best men to Apollo and the

Sun,  to  whom  she  dedicates  them  as  long  as  their  lives  answer  to  the

judgment formed of them. They shall choose in the first year of their office

twelve  examiners,  to  continue  until  they  are  seventy-five  years  of  age;

afterwards three shall be added annually. While they hold office, they shall

dwell within the precinct of the God. They are to divide all the magistracies

into twelve classes, and may apply any methods of enquiry, and inflict any

punishments which they please; in some cases singly, in other cases together,

announcing the acquittal or punishment of the magistrate on a tablet which

they will place in the agora. A magistrate who has been condemned by the

examiners may appeal to the select judges, and, if he gain his suit, may in

turn prosecute the examiners; but if the appellant is cast, his punishment shall

be doubled, unless he was previously condemned to death.


And what honours shall be paid to these examiners, whom the whole state

counts worthy of the rewards of virtue? They shall have the first place at all

sacrifices and other ceremonies, and in all assemblies and public places; they

shall go on sacred embassies, and have the exclusive privilege of wearing a

crown of laurel. They are priests of Apollo and the Sun, and he of their

number who is judged first shall be high priest, and give his name to the year.

The  manner  of  their  burial,  too,  shall  be  different  from  that  of  the  other

citizens. The colour of their funeral array shall be white, and, instead of the

voice of lamentation, around the bier shall stand a chorus of fifteen boys and

fifteen maidens, chanting hymns in honour of the deceased in alternate strains

during an entire day; and at dawn a band of a hundred youths shall carry the

bier to the grave, marching in the garb of warriors, and the boys in front of

the bier shall sing their national hymn, while the maidens and women past

child-bearing follow after. Priests and priestesses may also follow, unless the

Pythian  oracle  forbids.  The  sepulchre  shall  be  a  vault  built  underground,

which will last for ever, having couches of stone placed side by side; on oneof these they shall lay the departed saint, and then cover the tomb with a

mound, and plant trees on every side except one, where an opening shall be

left  for  other  interments.  Every  year  there  shall  be  games--musical,

gymnastic, or equestrian, in honour of those who have passed every ordeal.

But if any of them, after having been acquitted on any occasion, begin to

show the wickedness of human nature, he who pleases may bring them to

trial before a court composed of the guardians of the law, and of the select

judges, and of any of the examiners who are alive. If he be convicted he shall

be deprived of his honours, and if the accuser do not obtain a fifth part of the

votes, he shall pay a fine according to his class.


What is called the judgment of Rhadamanthus is suited to 'ages of faith,' but

not to our days. He knew that his contemporaries believed in the Gods, for

many of them were the sons of Gods; and he thought that the easiest and

surest method of ending litigation was to commit the decision to Heaven. In

our own day, men either deny the existence of Gods or their care of men, or

maintain that they may be bribed by attentions and gifts; and the procedure of

Rhadamanthus would therefore be out of date. When the religious ideas of

mankind change, their laws should also change. Thus oaths should no longer

be taken from plaintiff and defendant; simple statements of affirmation and

denial should be substituted. For there is something dreadful in the thought,

that nearly half the citizens of a state are perjured men. There is no objection

to  an  oath,  where  a  man  has  no  interest  in  forswearing  himself;  as,  for

example,  when  a  judge  is  about  to  give  his  decision,  or  in  voting  at  an

election, or in the judgment of games and contests. But where there would be

a  premium  on  perjury,  oaths  and  imprecations  should  be  prohibited  as

irrelevant, like appeals to feeling. Let the principles of justice be learned and

taught without words of evil omen. The oaths of a stranger against a stranger

may be allowed, because strangers are not permitted to become permanent

residents in our state.


Trials  in  private  causes  are  to  be  decided  in  the  same  manner  as  lesser

offences against the state. The non-attendance at a chorus or sacrifice, or the

omission  to  pay  a  war-tax,  may  be  regarded  as  in  the  first  instance

remediable, and the defaulter may give security; but if he forfeits the security,

the goods pledged shall be sold and the money given to the state. And for

obstinate  disobedience,  the  magistrate  shall  have  the  power  of  inflictinggreater penalties.


A city which is without trade or commerce must consider what it will do

about the going abroad of its own people and the admission of strangers. For

out  of  intercourse  with  strangers  there  arises  great  confusion  of  manners,

which in most states is not of any consequence, because the confusion exists

already; but in a well-ordered state it may be a great evil. Yet the absolute

prohibition of foreign travel, or the exclusion of strangers, is impossible, and

would appear barbarous to the rest of mankind. Public opinion should never

be lightly regarded, for the many are not so far wrong in their judgments as in

their lives. Even the worst of men have often a divine instinct, which enables

them to judge of the differences between the good and bad. States are rightly

advised when they desire to have the praise of men; and the greatest and

truest praise is that of virtue. And our Cretan colony should, and probably

will, have a character for virtue, such as few cities have. Let this, then, be our

law  about  foreign  travel  and  the  reception  of  strangers:--No  one  shall  be

allowed  to  leave  the  country  who  is  under  forty  years  of  age--of  course

military service abroad is not included in this regulation--and no one at all

except in a public capacity. To the Olympic, and Pythian, and Nemean, and

Isthmian  games,  shall  be  sent  the  fairest  and  best  and  bravest,  who  shall

support the dignity of the city in time of peace. These, when they come home,

shall teach the youth the inferiority of all other governments. Besides those

who go on sacred missions, other persons shall be sent out by permission of

the  guardians  to  study  the  institutions  of  foreign  countries.  For  a  people

which has no experience, and no knowledge of the characters of men or the

reason of things, but lives by habit only, can never be perfectly civilized.

Moreover, in all states, bad as well as good, there are holy and inspired men;

these the citizen of a well-ordered city should be ever seeking out; he should

go  forth  to  find  them  over  sea  and  over  land,  that  he  may  more  firmly

establish institutions in his own state which are good already and amend the

bad. 'What will be the best way of accomplishing such an object?' In the first

place, let the visitor of foreign countries be between fifty and sixty years of

age, and let him be a citizen of repute, especially in military matters. On his

return he shall appear before the Nocturnal Council: this is a body which sits

from dawn to sunrise, and includes amongst its members the priests who have

gained the prize of virtue, and the ten oldest guardians of the law, and the

director and past directors of education; each of whom has power to bringwith him a younger friend of his own selection, who is between thirty and

forty. The assembly thus constituted shall consider the laws of their own and

other states, and gather information relating to them. Anything of the sort

which is approved by the elder members of the council shall be studied with

all diligence by the younger; who are to be specially watched by the rest of

the citizens, and shall receive honour, if they are deserving of honour, or

dishonour, if they prove inferior. This is the assembly to which the visitor of

foreign countries shall come and tell anything which he has heard from others

in the course of his travels, or which he has himself observed. If he be made

neither better nor worse, let him at least be praised for his zeal; and let him

receive still more praise, and special honour after death, if he be improved.

But if he be deteriorated by his travels, let him be prohibited from speaking to

any one; and if he submit, he may live as a private individual: but if he be

convicted of attempting to make innovations in education and the laws, let

him die.


Next, as to the reception of strangers. Of these there are four classes:-- First,

merchants, who, like birds of passage, find their way over the sea at a certain

time of the year, that they may exhibit their wares. These should be received

in markets and public buildings without the city, by proper officers, who shall

see  that  justice  is  done  them,  and  shall  also  watch  against  any  political

designs which they may entertain; no more intercourse is to be held with

them  than  is  absolutely  necessary.  Secondly,  there  are  the  visitors  at  the

festivals, who shall be entertained by hospitable persons at the temples for a

reasonable time; the priests and ministers of the temples shall have a care of

them. In small suits brought by them or against them, the priests shall be the

judges; but in the more important, the wardens of the agora. Thirdly, there are

ambassadors of foreign states; these are to be honourably received by the

generals and commanders, and placed under the care of the Prytanes and of

the persons with whom they are lodged. Fourthly, there is the philosophical

stranger, who, like our own spectators, from time to time goes to see what is

rich and rare in foreign countries. Like them he must be fifty years of age:

and let him go unbidden to the doors of the wise and rich, that he may learn

from them, and they from him.


These are the rules of missions into foreign countries, and of the reception of

strangers.  Let  Zeus,  the  God  of  hospitality,  be  honoured;  and  let  not  thestranger  be  excluded,  as  in  Egypt,  from  meals  and  sacrifices,  or,  (as  at

Sparta,) driven away by savage proclamations.


Let guarantees be clearly given in writing and before witnesses. The number

of witnesses shall be three when the sum lent is under a thousand drachmas,

or five when above. The agent and principal at a fraudulent sale shall be

equally liable. He who would search another man's house for anything must

swear that he expects to find it there; and he shall enter naked, or having on a

single garment and no girdle. The owner shall place at the disposal of the

searcher all his goods, sealed as well as unsealed; if he refuse, he shall be

liable  in  double  the  value  of  the  property,  if  it  shall  prove  to  be  in  his

possession. If the owner be absent, the searcher may counter-seal the property

which is under seal, and place watchers. If the owner remain absent more

than five days, the searcher shall take the magistrates, and open the sealed

property,  and  seal  it  up  again  in  their  presence.  The  recovery  of  goods

disputed, except in the case of lands and houses, (about which there can be no

dispute in our state), is to be barred by time. The public and unimpeached use

of anything for a year in the city, or for five years in the country, or the

private possession and domestic use for three years in the city, or for ten

years in the country, is to give a right of ownership. But if the possessor have

the  property  in  a  foreign  country,  there  shall  be  no  bar  as  to  time.  The

proceedings of any trial are to be void, in which either the parties or the

witnesses,  whether  bond  or  free,  have  been  prevented  by  violence  from

attending:--if a slave be prevented, the suit shall be invalid; or if a freeman,

he who is guilty of the violence shall be imprisoned for a year, and shall also

be liable to an action for kidnapping. If one competitor forcibly prevents

another from attending at the games, the other may be inscribed as victor in

the temples, and the first, whether victor or not, shall be liable to an action for

damages. The receiver of stolen goods shall undergo the same punishment as

the thief. The receiver of an exile shall be punished with death. A man ought

to have the same friends and enemies as his country; and he who makes war

or peace for himself shall be put to death. And if a party in the state make war

or peace, their leaders shall be indicted by the generals, and, if convicted,

they shall be put to death. The ministers and officers of a country ought not to

receive gifts, even as the reward of good deeds. He who disobeys shall die.


With a view to taxation a man should have his property and income valued:and the government may, at their discretion, levy the tax upon the annual

return, or take a portion of the whole.


The good man will offer moderate gifts to the Gods; his land or hearth cannot

be offered, because they are already consecrated to all Gods. Gold and silver,

which  arouse  envy,  and  ivory,  which  is  taken  from  the  dead  body  of  an

animal, are unsuitable offerings; iron and brass are materials of war. Wood

and stone of a single piece may be offered; also woven work which has not

occupied one woman more than a month in making. White is a colour which

is acceptable to the Gods; figures of birds and similar offerings are the best of

gifts, but they must be such as the painter can execute in a day.


Next concerning lawsuits. Judges, or rather arbiters, may be agreed upon by

the plaintiff and defendant; and if no decision is obtained from them, their

fellow-tribesmen shall judge. At this stage there shall be an increase of the

penalty: the defendant, if he be cast, shall pay a fifth more than the damages

claimed. If he further persist, and appeal a second time, the case shall be

heard before the select judges; and he shall pay, if defeated, the penalty and

half as much again. And the pursuer, if on the first appeal he is defeated, shall

pay one fifth of the damages claimed by him; and if on the second, one half.

Other matters relating to trials, such as the assignment of judges to courts, the

times of sitting, the number of judges, the modes of pleading and procedure,

as we have already said, may be determined by younger legislators.


These are to be the rules of private courts. As regards public courts, many

states have excellent modes of procedure which may serve for models; these,

when duly tested by experience, should be ratified and made permanent by

us.


Let the judge be accomplished in the laws. He should possess writings about

them,  and  make  a  study  of  them;  for  laws  are  the  highest  instrument  of

mental improvement, and derive their name from mind (nous, nomos). They

afford a measure of all censure and praise, whether in verse or prose, in

conversation or in books, and are an antidote to the vain disputes of men and

their equally vain acquiescence in each other's opinions. The just judge, who

imbibes  their  spirit,  makes  the  city  and  himself  to  stand  upright.  He

establishes justice for the good, and cures the tempers of the bad, if they canbe cured; but denounces death, which is the only remedy, to the incurable, the

threads of whose life cannot be reversed.


When the suits of the year are completed, execution is to follow. The court is

to award to the plaintiff the property of the defendant, if he is cast, reserving

to him only his lot of land. If the plaintiff is not satisfied within a month, the

court shall put into his hands the property of the defendant. If the defendant

fails  in  payment  to  the  amount  of  a  drachma,  he  shall  lose  the  use  and

protection of the court; or if he rebel against the authority of the court, he

shall be brought before the guardians of the law, and if found guilty he shall

be put to death.


Man having been born, educated, having begotten and brought up children,

and  gone  to  law,  fulfils  the  debt  of  nature.  The  rites  which  are  to  be

celebrated  after  death  in  honour  of  the  Gods  above  and  below  shall  be

determined  by  the  Interpreters.  The  dead  shall  be  buried  in  uncultivated

places, where they will be out of the way and do least injury to the living. For

no one either in life or after death has any right to deprive other men of the

sustenance which mother earth provides for them. No sepulchral mound is to

be piled higher than five men can raise it in five days, and the grave-stone

shall not be larger than is sufficient to contain an inscription of four heroic

verses. The dead are only to be exposed for three days, which is long enough

to test the reality of death. The legislator will instruct the people that the body

is a mere shadow or image, and that the soul, which is our true being, is gone

to give an account of herself before the Gods below. When they hear this, the

good are full of hope, and the evil are terrified. It is also said that not much

can be done for any one after death. And therefore while in life all man

should be helped by their kindred to pass their days justly and holily, that

they may depart in peace. When a man loses a son or a brother, he should

consider that the beloved one has gone away to fulfil his destiny in another

place, and should not waste money over his lifeless remains. Let the law then

order a moderate funeral of five minae for the first class, of three for the

second, of two for the third, of one for the fourth. One of the guardians of the

law, to be selected by the relatives, shall assist them in arranging the affairs

of the deceased. There would be a want of delicacy in prescribing that there

should  or  should  not  be  mourning  for  the  dead.  But,  at  any  rate,  such

mourning is to be confined to the house; there must be no processions in thestreets, and the dead body shall be taken out of the city before daybreak.

Regulations about other forms of burial and about the non-burial of parricides

and other sacrilegious persons have already been laid down. The work of

legislation is therefore nearly completed; its end will be finally accomplished

when we have provided for the continuance of the state.


Do you remember the names of the Fates? Lachesis, the giver of the lots, is

the first of them; Clotho, the spinster, the second; Atropos, the unchanging

one, is the third and last, who makes the threads of the web irreversible. And

we too want to make our laws irreversible, for the unchangeable quality in

them will be the salvation of the state, and the source of health and order in

the bodies and souls of our citizens. 'But can such a quality be implanted?' I

think that it may; and at any rate we must try; for, after all our labour, to have

been piling up a fabric which has no foundation would be too ridiculous.

'What foundation would you lay?' We have already instituted an assembly

which was composed of the ten oldest guardians of the law, and secondly, of

those who had received prizes of virtue, and thirdly, of the travellers who had

gone abroad to enquire into the laws of other countries. Moreover, each of the

members was to choose a young man, of not less than thirty years of age, to

be approved by the rest; and they were to meet at dawn, when all the world is

at leisure. This assembly will be an anchor to the vessel of state, and provide

the means of permanence; for the constitutions of states, like all other things,

have their proper saviours, which are to them what the head and soul are to

the living being. 'How do you mean?' Mind in the soul, and sight and hearing

in the head, or rather, the perfect union of mind and sense, may be justly

called  every  man's  salvation.  'Certainly.'  Yes;  but  of  what  nature  is  this

union? In the case of a ship, for example, the senses of the sailors are added

to the intelligence of the pilot, and the two together save the ship and the men

in the ship. Again, the physician and the general have their objects; and the

object of the one is health, of the other victory. States, too, have their objects,

and the ruler must understand, first, their nature, and secondly, the means of

attaining them, whether in laws or men. The state which is wanting in this

knowledge cannot be expected to be wise when the time for action arrives.

Now what class or institution is there in our state which has such a saving

power? 'I suspect that you are referring to the Nocturnal Council.' Yes, to that

council which is to have all virtue, and which should aim directly at the mark.

'Very true.' The inconsistency of legislation in most states is not surprising,when the variety of their objects is considered. One of them makes their rule

of  justice  the  government  of  a  class;  another  aims  at  wealth;  another  at

freedom,  or  at  freedom  and  power;  and  some  who  call  themselves

philosophers maintain that you should seek for all of them at once. But our

object is unmistakeably virtue, and virtue is of four kinds. 'Yes; and we said

that mind is the chief and ruler of the three other kinds of virtue and of all

else.' True, Cleinias; and now, having already declared the object which is

present to the mind of the pilot, the general, the physician, we will interrogate

the mind of the statesman. Tell me, I say, as the physician and general have

told us their object, what is the object of the statesman. Can you tell me? 'We

cannot.' Did we not say that there are four virtues--courage, wisdom, and two

others, all of which are called by the common name of virtue, and are in a

sense  one?  'Certainly  we  did.'  The  difficulty  is,  not  in  understanding  the

differences of the virtues, but in apprehending their unity. Why do we call

virtue, which is a single thing, by the two names of wisdom and courage?

The  reason  is  that  courage  is  concerned  with  fear,  and  is  found  both  in

children and in brutes; for the soul may be courageous without reason, but no

soul was, or ever will be, wise without reason. 'That is true.' I have explained

to you the difference, and do you in return explain to me the unity. But first

let us consider whether any one who knows the name of a thing without the

definition has any real knowledge of it. Is not such knowledge a disgrace to a

man of sense, especially where great and glorious truths are concerned? and

can any subject be more worthy of the attention of our legislators than the

four  virtues  of  which  we  are  speaking--courage,  temperance,  justice,

wisdom? Ought not the magistrates and officers of the state to instruct the

citizens in the nature of virtue and vice, instead of leaving them to be taught

by some chance poet or sophist? A city which is without instruction suffers

the usual fate of cities in our day. What then shall we do? How shall we

perfect the ideas of our guardians about virtue? how shall we give our state a

head and eyes? 'Yes, but how do you apply the figure?' The city will be the

body  or  trunk;  the  best  of  our  young  men  will  mount  into  the  head  or

acropolis and be our eyes; they will look about them, and inform the elders,

who are the mind and use the younger men as their instruments: together they

will save the state. Shall this be our constitution, or shall all be educated

alike, and the special training be given up? 'That is impossible.' Let us then

endeavour to attain to some more exact idea of education. Did we not say that

the true artist or guardian ought to have an eye, not only to the many, but tothe one, and to order all things with a view to the one? Can there be any more

philosophical speculation than how to reduce many things which are unlike to

one  idea?  'Perhaps  not.'  Say  rather,  'Certainly  not.'  And  the  rulers  of  our

divine state ought to have an exact knowledge of the common principle in

courage, temperance, justice, wisdom, which is called by the name of virtue;

and unless we know whether virtue is one or many, we shall hardly know

what virtue is. Shall we contrive some means of engrafting this knowledge on

our state, or give the matter up? 'Anything rather than that.' Let us begin by

making an agreement. 'By all means, if we can.' Well, are we not agreed that

our guardians ought to know, not only how the good and the honourable are

many, but also how they are one? 'Yes, certainly.' The true guardian of the

laws  ought  to  know  their  truth,  and  should  also  be  able  to  interpret  and

execute  them?  'He  should.'  And  is  there  any  higher  knowledge  than  the

knowledge  of  the  existence  and  power  of  the  Gods?  The  people  may  be

excused  for  following  tradition;  but  the  guardian  must  be  able  to  give  a

reason of the faith which is in him. And there are two great evidences of

religion--the priority of the soul and the order of the heavens. For no man of

sense,  when  he  contemplates  the  universe,  will  be  likely  to  substitute

necessity for reason and will. Those who maintain that the sun and the stars

are inanimate beings are utterly wrong in their opinions. The men of a former

generation had a suspicion, which has been confirmed by later thinkers, that

things  inanimate  could  never  without  mind  have  attained  such  scientific

accuracy; and some (Anaxagoras) even in those days ventured to assert that

mind had ordered all things in heaven; but they had no idea of the priority of

mind, and they turned the world, or more properly themselves, upside down,

and filled the universe with stones, and earth, and other inanimate bodies.

This led to great impiety, and the poets said many foolish things against the

philosophers,  whom  they  compared  to  'yelping  she-dogs,'  besides  making

other abusive remarks. No man can now truly worship the Gods who does not

believe that the soul is eternal, and prior to the body, and the ruler of all

bodies, and does not perceive also that there is mind in the stars; or who has

not heard the connexion of these things with music, and has not harmonized

them with manners and laws, giving a reason of things which are matters of

reason. He who is unable to acquire this knowledge, as well as the ordinary

virtues of a citizen, can only be a servant, and not a ruler in the state.


Let us then add another law to the effect that the Nocturnal Council shall be aguard set for the salvation of the state. 'Very good.' To establish this will be

our aim, and I hope that others besides myself will assist. 'Let us proceed

along the road in which God seems to guide us.' We cannot, Megillus and

Cleinias, anticipate the details which will hereafter be needed; they must be

supplied by experience. 'What do you mean?' First of all a register will have

to be made of all those whose age, character, or education would qualify

them to be guardians. The subjects which they are to learn, and the order in

which  they  are  to  be  learnt,  are  mysteries  which  cannot  be  explained

beforehand, but not mysteries in any other sense. 'If that is the case, what is to

be done?' We must stake our all on a lucky throw, and I will share the risk by

stating my views on education. And I would have you, Cleinias, who are the

founder  of  the  Magnesian  state,  and  will  obtain  the  greatest  glory  if  you

succeed,  and  will  at  least  be  praised  for  your  courage,  if  you  fail,  take

especial heed of this matter. If we can only establish the Nocturnal Council,

we will hand over the city to its keeping; none of the present company will

hesitate about that. Our dream will then become a reality; and our citizens, if

they are carefully chosen and well educated, will be saviours and guardians

such as the world hitherto has never seen.


The want of completeness in the Laws becomes more apparent in the later

books. There is less arrangement in them, and the transitions are more abrupt

from one subject to another. Yet they contain several noble passages, such as

the 'prelude to the discourse concerning the honour and dishonour of parents,'

or the picture of the dangers attending the 'friendly intercourse of young men

and  maidens  with  one  another,'  or  the  soothing  remonstrance  which  is

addressed to the dying man respecting his right to do what he will with his

own, or the fine description of the burial of the dead. The subject of religion

in Book X is introduced as a prelude to offences against the Gods, and this

portion of the work appears to be executed in Plato's best manner.


In the last four books, several questions occur for consideration: among them

are  (I)  the  detection  and  punishment  of  offences;  (II)  the  nature  of  the

voluntary and involuntary; (III) the arguments against atheism, and against

the opinion that the Gods have no care of human affairs; (IV) the remarks

upon retail trade; (V) the institution of the Nocturnal Council.


I. A weak point in the Laws of Plato is the amount of inquisition into privatelife which is to be made by the rulers. The magistrate is always watching and

waylaying  the  citizens.  He  is  constantly  to  receive  information  against

improprieties of life. Plato does not seem to be aware that espionage can only

have a negative effect. He has not yet discovered the boundary line which

parts the domain of law from that of morality or social life. Men will not tell

of one another; nor will he ever be the most honoured citizen, who gives the

most frequent information about offenders to the magistrates.


As in some writers of fiction, so also in philosophers, we may observe the

effect of age. Plato becomes more conservative as he grows older, and he

would govern the world entirely by men like himself, who are above fifty

years of age; for in them he hopes to find a principle of stability. He does not

remark that, in destroying the freedom he is destroying also the life of the

State. In reducing all the citizens to rule and measure, he would have been

depriving the Magnesian colony of those great men 'whose acquaintance is

beyond  all  price;'  and  he  would  have  found  that  in  the  worst-governed

Hellenic State, there was more of a carriere ouverte for extraordinary genius

and virtue than in his own.


Plato has an evident dislike of the Athenian dicasteries; he prefers a few

judges who take a leading part in the conduct of trials to a great number who

only listen in silence. He allows of two appeals--in each case however with

an increase of the penalty. Modern jurists would disapprove of the redress of

injustice being purchased only at an increasing risk; though indirectly the

burden of legal expenses, which seems to have been little felt among the

Athenians, has a similar effect. The love of litigation, which is a remnant of

barbarism quite as much as a corruption of civilization, and was innate in the

Athenian people, is diminished in the new state by the imposition of severe

penalties. If persevered in, it is to be punished with death.


In the Laws murder and homicide besides being crimes, are also pollutions.

Regarded from this point of view, the estimate of such offences is apt to

depend on accidental circumstances, such as the shedding of blood, and not

on  the  real  guilt  of  the  offender  or  the  injury  done  to  society.  They  are

measured by the horror which they arouse in a barbarous age. For there is a

superstition in law as well as in religion, and the feelings of a primitive age

have a traditional hold on the mass of the people. On the other hand, Plato isinnocent of the barbarity which would visit the sins of the fathers upon the

children, and he is quite aware that punishment has an eye to the future, and

not to the past. Compared with that of most European nations in the last

century  his  penal  code,  though  sometimes  capricious,  is  reasonable  and

humane.


A defect in Plato's criminal jurisprudence is his remission of the punishment

when the homicide has obtained the forgiveness of the murdered person; as if

crime were a personal affair between individuals, and not an offence against

the State. There is a ridiculous disproportion in his punishments. Because a

slave may fairly receive a blow for stealing one fig or one bunch of grapes, or

a tradesman for selling adulterated goods to the value of one drachma, it is

rather hard upon the slave that he should receive as many blows as he has

taken grapes or figs, or upon the tradesman who has sold adulterated goods to

the value of a thousand drachmas that he should receive a thousand blows.


II. But before punishment can be inflicted at all, the legislator must determine

the  nature  of  the  voluntary  and  involuntary.  The  great  question  of  the

freedom of the will, which in modern times has been worn threadbare with

purely abstract discussion, was approached both by Plato and Aristotle--first,

from the judicial; secondly, from the sophistical point of view. They were

puzzled by the degrees and kinds of crime; they observed also that the law

only  punished  hurts  which  are  inflicted  by  a  voluntary  agent  on  an

involuntary patient.


In attempting to distinguish between hurt and injury, Plato says that mere hurt

is not injury; but that a benefit when done in a wrong spirit may sometimes

injure, e.g. when conferred without regard to right and wrong, or to the good

or evil consequences which may follow. He means to say that the good or

evil disposition of the agent is the principle which characterizes actions; and

this is not sufficiently described by the terms voluntary and involuntary. You

may  hurt  another  involuntarily,  and  no  one  would  suppose  that  you  had

injured him; and you may hurt him voluntarily, as in inflicting punishment--

neither is this injury; but if you hurt him from motives of avarice, ambition,

or cowardly fear, this is injury. Injustice is also described as the victory of

desire or passion or self- conceit over reason, as justice is the subordination

of them to reason. In some paradoxical sense Plato is disposed to affirm allinjustice to be involuntary; because no man would do injustice who knew that

it never paid and could calculate the consequences of what he was doing. Yet,

on the other hand, he admits that the distinction of voluntary and involuntary,

taken  in  another  and  more  obvious  sense,  is  the  basis  of  legislation.  His

conception  of  justice  and  injustice  is  complicated  (1)  by  the  want  of  a

distinction  between  justice  and  virtue,  that  is  to  say,  between  the  quality

which primarily regards others, and the quality in which self and others are

equally regarded; (2) by the confusion of doing and suffering justice; (3) by

the  unwillingness  to  renounce  the  old  Socratic  paradox,  that  evil  is

involuntary.


III. The Laws rest on a religious foundation; in this respect they bear the

stamp  of  primitive  legislation.  They  do  not  escape  the  almost  inevitable

consequence of making irreligion penal. If laws are based upon religion, the

greatest offence against them must be irreligion. Hence the necessity for what

in  modern  language,  and  according  to  a  distinction  which  Plato  would

scarcely  have  understood,  might  be  termed  persecution.  But  the  spirit  of

persecution in Plato, unlike that of modern religious bodies, arises out of the

desire to enforce a true and simple form of religion, and is directed against

the superstitions which tend to degrade mankind. Sir Thomas More, in his

Utopia, is in favour of tolerating all except the intolerant, though he would

not promote to high offices those who disbelieved in the immortality of the

soul. Plato has not advanced quite so far as this in the path of toleration. But

in  judging  of  his  enlightenment,  we  must  remember  that  the  evils  of

necromancy and divination were far greater than those of intolerance in the

ancient world. Human nature is always having recourse to the first; but only

when organized into some form of priesthood falls into the other; although in

primitive as in later ages the institution of a priesthood may claim probably to

be an advance on some form of religion which preceded. The Laws would

have rested on a sounder foundation, if Plato had ever distinctly realized to

his mind the difference between crime and sin or vice. Of this, as of many

other controversies, a clear definition might have been the end. But such a

definition belongs to a later age of philosophy.


The arguments which Plato uses for the being of a God, have an extremely

modern character: first, the consensus gentium; secondly, the argument which

has already been adduced in the Phaedrus, of the priority of the self-moved.The answer to those who say that God 'cares not,' is, that He governs by

general laws; and that he who takes care of the great will assuredly take care

of  the  small.  Plato  did  not  feel,  and  has  not  attempted  to  consider,  the

difficulty of reconciling the special with the general providence of God. Yet

he is on the road to a solution, when he regards the world as a whole, of

which all the parts work together towards the final end.


We are surprised to find that the scepticism, which we attribute to young men

in  our  own  day,  existed  then  (compare  Republic);  that  the  Epicureanism

expressed in the line of Horace (borrowed from Lucretius)--


'Namque Deos didici securum agere aevum,'


was already prevalent in the age of Plato; and that the terrors of another world

were freely used in order to gain advantages over other men in this. The same

objection  which  struck  the  Psalmist--'when  I  saw  the  prosperity  of  the

wicked'--is supposed to lie at the root of the better sort of unbelief. And the

answer is substantially the same which the modern theologian would offer:--

that the ways of God in this world cannot be justified unless there be a future

state  of  rewards  and  punishments.  Yet  this  future  state  of  rewards  and

punishments is in Plato's view not any addition of happiness or suffering

imposed from without, but the permanence of good and evil in the soul: here

he  is  in  advance  of  many  modern  theologians.  The  Greek,  too,  had  his

difficulty  about  the  existence  of  evil,  which  in  one  solitary  passage,

remarkable for being inconsistent with his general system, Plato explains,

after  the  Magian  fashion,  by  a  good  and  evil  spirit  (compare  Theaet.,

Statesman). This passage is also remarkable for being at variance with the

general optimism of the Tenth Book--not 'all things are ordered by God for

the best,' but some things by a good, others by an evil spirit.


The Tenth Book of the Laws presents a picture of the state of belief among

the  Greeks  singularly  like  that  of  the  world  in  which  we  live.  Plato  is

disposed to attribute the incredulity of his own age to several causes. First, to

the bad effect of mythological tales, of which he retains his disapproval; but

he has a weak side for antiquity, and is unwilling, as in the Republic, wholly

to proscribe them. Secondly, he remarks the self- conceit of a newly-fledged

generation of philosophers, who declare that the sun, moon, and stars, areearth and stones only; and who also maintain that the Gods are made by the

laws of the state. Thirdly, he notes a confusion in the minds of men arising

out of their misinterpretation of the appearances of the world around them:

they do not always see the righteous rewarded and the wicked punished. So

in modern times there are some whose infidelity has arisen from doubts about

the inspiration of ancient writings; others who have been made unbelievers

by physical science, or again by the seemingly political character of religion;

while there is a third class to whose minds the difficulty of 'justifying the

ways of God to man' has been the chief stumblingblock. Plato is very much

out  of  temper  at  the  impiety  of  some  of  his  contemporaries;  yet  he  is

determined to reason with the victims, as he regards them, of these illusions

before he punishes them. His answer to the unbelievers is twofold: first, that

the soul is prior to the body; secondly, that the ruler of the universe being

perfect has made all things with a view to their perfection. The difficulties

arising out of ancient sacred writings were far less serious in the age of Plato

than in our own.


We too have our popular Epicureanism, which would allow the world to go

on as if there were no God. When the belief in Him, whether of ancient or

modern times, begins to fade away, men relegate Him, either in theory or

practice, into a distant heaven. They do not like expressly to deny God when

it  is  more  convenient  to  forget  Him;  and  so  the  theory  of  the  Epicurean

becomes the practice of mankind in general. Nor can we be said to be free

from that which Plato justly considers to be the worst unbelief --of those who

put superstition in the place of true religion. For the larger half of Christians

continue to assert that the justice of God may be turned aside by gifts, and, if

not by the 'odour of fat, and the sacrifice steaming to heaven,' still by another

kind of sacrifice placed upon the altar--by masses for the quick and dead, by

dispensations, by building churches, by rites and ceremonies--by the same

means  which  the  heathen  used,  taking  other  names  and  shapes.  And  the

indifference  of  Epicureanism  and  unbelief  is  in  two  ways  the  parent  of

superstition, partly because it permits, and also because it creates, a necessity

for its development in religious and enthusiastic temperaments. If men cannot

have  a  rational  belief,  they  will  have  an  irrational.  And  hence  the  most

superstitious  countries  are  also  at  a  certain  point  of  civilization  the  most

unbelieving, and the revolution which takes one direction is quickly followed

by a reaction in the other. So we may read 'between the lines' ancient historyand philosophy into modern, and modern into ancient. Whether we compare

the theory of Greek philosophy with the Christian religion, or the practice of

the Gentile world with the practice of the Christian world, they will be found

to differ more in words and less in reality than we might have supposed. The

greater opposition which is sometimes made between them seems to arise

chiefly out of a comparison of the ideal of the one with the practice of the

other.


To  the  errors  of  superstition  and  unbelief  Plato  opposes  the  simple  and

natural truth of religion; the best and highest, whether conceived in the form

of a person or a principle--as the divine mind or as the idea of good --is

believed by him to be the basis of human life. That all things are working

together for good to the good and evil to the evil in this or in some other

world  to  which  human  actions  are  transferred,  is  the  sum  of  his  faith  or

theology. Unlike Socrates, he is absolutely free from superstition. Religion

and  morality  are  one  and  indivisible  to  him.  He  dislikes  the  'heathen

mythology,' which, as he significantly remarks, was not tolerated in Crete,

and perhaps (for the meaning of his words is not quite clear) at Sparta. He

gives  no  encouragement  to  individual  enthusiasm;  'the  establishment  of

religion could only be the work of a mighty intellect.' Like the Hebrews, he

prohibits private rites; for the avoidance of superstition, he would transfer all

worship  of  the  Gods  to  the  public  temples.  He  would  not  have  men  and

women  consecrating  the  accidents  of  their  lives.  He  trusts  to  human

punishments  and  not  to  divine  judgments;  though  he  is  not  unwilling  to

repeat the old tradition that certain kinds of dishonesty 'prevent a man from

having a family.' He considers that the 'ages of faith' have passed away and

cannot now be recalled. Yet he is far from wishing to extirpate the sentiment

of religion, which he sees to be common to all mankind--Barbarians as well

as Hellenes. He remarks that no one passes through life without, sooner or

later, experiencing its power. To which we may add the further remark that

the  greater  the  irreligion,  the  more  violent  has  often  been  the  religious

reaction.


It is remarkable that Plato's account of mind at the end of the Laws goes

beyond  Anaxagoras,  and  beyond  himself  in  any  of  his  previous  writings.

Aristotle, in a well-known passage (Met.) which is an echo of the Phaedo,

remarks on the inconsistency of Anaxagoras in introducing the agency ofmind, and yet having recourse to other and inferior, probably material causes.

But Plato makes the further criticism, that the error of Anaxagoras consisted,

not in denying the universal agency of mind, but in denying the priority, or,

as  we  should  say,  the  eternity  of  it.  Yet  in  the  Timaeus  he  had  himself

allowed  that  God  made  the  world  out  of  pre-existing  materials:  in  the

Statesman he says that there were seeds of evil in the world arising out of the

remains of a former chaos which could not be got rid of; and even in the

Tenth Book of the Laws he has admitted that there are two souls, a good and

evil.  In  the  Meno,  the  Phaedrus,  and  the  Phaedo,  he  had  spoken  of  the

recovery of ideas from a former state of existence. But now he has attained to

a clearer point of view: he has discarded these fancies. From meditating on

the priority of the human soul to the body, he has learnt the nature of soul

absolutely. The power of the best, of which he gave an intimation in the

Phaedo and in the Republic, now, as in the Philebus, takes the form of an

intelligence or person. He no longer, like Anaxagoras, supposes mind to be

introduced at a certain time into the world and to give order to a pre-existing

chaos,  but  to  be  prior  to  the  chaos,  everlasting  and  evermoving,  and  the

source of order and intelligence in all things. This appears to be the last form

of Plato's religious philosophy, which might almost be summed up in the

words of Kant, 'the starry heaven above and the moral law within.' Or rather,

perhaps, 'the starry heaven above and mind prior to the world.'


IV. The remarks about retail trade, about adulteration, and about mendicity,

have a very modern character. Greek social life was more like our own than

we  are  apt  to  suppose.  There  was  the  same  division  of  ranks,  the  same

aristocratic  and  democratic  feeling,  and,  even  in  a  democracy,  the  same

preference for land and for agricultural pursuits. Plato may be claimed as the

first free trader, when he prohibits the imposition of customs on imports and

exports, though he was clearly not aware of the importance of the principle

which  he  enunciated.  The  discredit  of  retail  trade  he  attributes  to  the

rogueries of traders, and is inclined to believe that if a nobleman would keep

a shop, which heaven forbid! retail trade might become honourable. He has

hardly  lighted  upon  the  true  reason,  which  appears  to  be  the  essential

distinction  between  buyers  and  sellers,  the  one  class  being  necessarily  in

some degree dependent on the other. When he proposes to fix prices 'which

would  allow  a  moderate  gain,'  and  to  regulate  trade  in  several  minute

particulars, we must remember that this is by no means so absurd in a cityconsisting  of  5040  citizens,  in  which  almost  every  one  would  know  and

become known to everybody else, as in our own vast population. Among

ourselves we are very far from allowing every man to charge what he pleases.

Of many things the prices are fixed by law. Do we not often hear of wages

being adjusted in proportion to the profits of employers? The objection to

regulating them by law and thus avoiding the conflicts which continually

arise  between  the  buyers  and  sellers  of  labour,  is  not  so  much  the

undesirableness as the impossibility of doing so. Wherever free competition

is not reconcileable either with the order of society, or, as in the case of

adulteration, with common honesty, the government may lawfully interfere.

The only question is,--Whether the interference will be effectual, and whether

the evil of interference may not be greater than the evil which is prevented by

it.


He would prohibit beggars, because in a well-ordered state no good man

would be left to starve. This again is a prohibition which might have been

easily enforced, for there is no difficulty in maintaining the poor when the

population is small. In our own times the difficulty of pauperism is rendered

far greater, (1) by the enormous numbers, (2) by the facility of locomotion,

(3) by the increasing tenderness for human life and suffering. And the only

way of meeting the difficulty seems to be by modern nations subdividing

themselves into small bodies having local knowledge and acting together in

the spirit of ancient communities (compare Arist. Pol.)


V. Regarded as the framework of a polity the Laws are deemed by Plato to be

a  decline  from  the  Republic,  which  is  the  dream  of  his  earlier  years.  He

nowhere imagines that he has reached a higher point of speculation. He is

only descending to the level of human things, and he often returns to his

original idea. For the guardians of the Republic, who were the elder citizens,

and were all supposed to be philosophers, is now substituted a special body,

who are to review and amend the laws, preserving the spirit of the legislator.

These are the Nocturnal Council, who, although they are not specially trained

in dialectic, are not wholly destitute of it; for they must know the relation of

particular virtues to the general principle of virtue. Plato has been arguing

throughout the Laws that temperance is higher than courage, peace than war,

that the love of both must enter into the character of the good citizen. And at

the end the same thought is summed up by him in an abstract form. The trueartist or guardian must be able to reduce the many to the one, than which, as

he says with an enthusiasm worthy of the Phaedrus or Philebus, 'no more

philosophical method was ever devised by the wit of man.' But the sense of

unity in difference can only be acquired by study; and Plato does not explain

to us the nature of this study, which we may reasonably infer, though there is

a remarkable omission of the word, to be akin to the dialectic of the Republic.


The Nocturnal Council is to consist of the priests who have obtained the

rewards of virtue, of the ten eldest guardians of the law, and of the director

and  ex-directors  of  education;  each  of  whom  is  to  select  for  approval  a

younger coadjutor. To this council the 'Spectator,' who is sent to visit foreign

countries, has to make his report. It is not an administrative body, but an

assembly  of  sages  who  are  to  make  legislation  their  study.  Plato  is  not

altogether disinclined to changes in the law where experience shows them to

be necessary; but he is also anxious that the original spirit of the constitution

should never be lost sight of.


The Laws of Plato contain the latest phase of his philosophy, showing in

many respects an advance, and in others a decline, in his views of life and the

world.  His  Theory  of  Ideas  in  the  next  generation  passed  into  one  of

Numbers, the nature of which we gather chiefly from the Metaphysics of

Aristotle. Of the speculative side of this theory there are no traces in the

Laws, but doubtless Plato found the practical value which he attributed to

arithmetic  greatly  confirmed  by  the  possibility  of  applying  number  and

measure to the revolution of the heavens, and to the regulation of human life.

In the return to a doctrine of numbers there is a retrogression rather than an

advance; for the most barren logical abstraction is of a higher nature than

number and figure. Philosophy fades away into the distance; in the Laws it is

confined  to  the  members  of  the  Nocturnal  Council.  The  speculative  truth

which was the food of the guardians in the Republic, is for the majority of the

citizens  to  be  superseded  by  practical  virtues.  The  law,  which  is  the

expression of mind written down, takes the place of the living word of the

philosopher. (Compare the contrast of Phaedrus, and Laws; also the plays on

the words nous, nomos, nou dianome; and the discussion in the Statesman of

the difference between the personal rule of a king and the impersonal reign of

law.) The State is based on virtue and religion rather than on knowledge; and

virtue is no longer identified with knowledge, being of the commoner sort,and spoken of in the sense generally understood. Yet there are many traces of

advance  as  well  as  retrogression  in  the  Laws  of  Plato.  The  attempt  to

reconcile the ideal with actual life is an advance; to 'have brought philosophy

down from heaven to earth,' is a praise which may be claimed for him as well

as for his master Socrates. And the members of the Nocturnal Council are to

continue students of the 'one in many' and of the nature of God. Education is

the last word with which Plato supposes the theory of the Laws to end and the

reality to begin.


Plato's increasing appreciation of the difficulties of human affairs, and of the

element of chance which so largely influences them, is an indication not of a

narrower, but of a maturer mind, which had become more conversant with

realities. Nor can we fairly attribute any want of originality to him, because

he has borrowed many of his provisions from Sparta and Athens. Laws and

institutions grow out of habits and customs; and they have 'better opinion,

better confirmation,' if they have come down from antiquity and are not mere

literary inventions. Plato would have been the first to acknowledge that the

Book  of  Laws  was  not  the  creation  of  his  fancy,  but  a  collection  of

enactments  which  had  been  devised  by  inspired  legislators,  like  Minos,

Lycurgus,  and  Solon,  to  meet  the  actual  needs  of  men,  and  had  been

approved by time and experience.


In order to do justice therefore to the design of the work, it is necessary to

examine how far it rests on an historical foundation and coincides with the

actual laws of Sparta and Athens. The consideration of the historical aspect of

the Laws has been reserved for this place. In working out the comparison the

writer has been greatly assisted by the excellent essays of C.F. Hermann ('De

vestigiis institutorum veterum, imprimis Atticorum, per Platonis de Legibus

libros  indagandis,'  and  'Juris  domestici  et  familiaris  apud  Platonem  in

Legibus cum veteris Graeciae inque primis Athenarum institutis comparatio':

Marburg, 1836), and by J.B. Telfy's 'Corpus Juris Attici' (Leipzig, 1868).


EXCURSUS ON THE RELATION OF THE LAWS OF PLATO TO THE

INSTITUTIONS OF CRETE AND LACEDAEMON AND TO THE LAWS

AND CONSTITUTION OF ATHENS.


The Laws of Plato are essentially Greek: unlike Xenophon's Cyropaedia, theycontain nothing foreign or oriental. Their aim is to reconstruct the work of the

great lawgivers of Hellas in a literary form. They partake both of an Athenian

and a Spartan character. Some of them too are derived from Crete, and are

appropriately transferred to a Cretan colony. But of Crete so little is known to

us, that although, as Montesquieu (Esprit des Lois) remarks, 'the Laws of

Crete are the original of those of Sparta and the Laws of Plato the correction

of these latter,' there is only one point, viz. the common meals, in which they

can be compared. Most of Plato's provisions resemble the laws and customs

which  prevailed  in  these  three  states  (especially  in  the  two  former),  and

which the personifying instinct of the Greeks attributed to Minos, Lycurgus,

and Solon. A very few particulars may have been borrowed from Zaleucus

(Cic. de Legibus), and Charondas, who is said to have first made laws against

perjury (Arist. Pol.) and to have forbidden credit (Stob. Florileg., Gaisford).

Some enactments are Plato's own, and were suggested by his experience of

defects in the Athenian and other Greek states. The Laws also contain many

lesser  provisions,  which  are  not  found  in  the  ordinary  codes  of  nations,

because  they  cannot  be  properly  defined,  and  are  therefore  better  left  to

custom  and  common  sense.  'The  greater  part  of  the  work,'  as  Aristotle

remarks (Pol.), 'is taken up with laws': yet this is not wholly true, and applies

to the latter rather than to the first half of it. The book rests on an ethical and

religious foundation: the actual laws begin with a hymn of praise in honour of

the soul. And the same lofty aspiration after the good is perpetually recurring,

especially in Books X, XI, XII, and whenever Plato's mind is filled with his

highest themes. In prefixing to most of his laws a prooemium he has two ends

in view, to persuade and also to threaten. They are to have the sanction of

laws and the effect of sermons. And Plato's 'Book of Laws,' if described in

the language of modern philosophy, may be said to be as much an ethical and

educational, as a political or legal treatise.


But although the Laws partake both of an Athenian and a Spartan character,

the  elements  which  are  borrowed  from  either  state  are  necessarily  very

different,  because  the  character  and  origin  of  the  two  governments

themselves differed so widely. Sparta was the more ancient and primitive:

Athens was suited to the wants of a later stage of society. The relation of the

two states to the Laws may be conceived in this manner:--The foundation and

ground-plan  of  the  work  are  more  Spartan,  while  the  superstructure  and

details are more Athenian. At Athens the laws were written down and werevoluminous; more than a thousand fragments of them have been collected by

Telfy.  Like  the  Roman  or  English  law,  they  contained  innumerable

particulars. Those of them which regulated daily life were familiarly known

to the Athenians; for every citizen was his own lawyer, and also a judge, who

decided the rights of his fellow-citizens according to the laws, often after

hearing speeches from the parties interested or from their advocates. It is to

Rome and not to Athens that the invention of law, in the modern sense of the

term, is commonly ascribed. But it must be remembered that long before the

times of the Twelve Tables (B.C. 451), regular courts and forms of law had

existed  at  Athens  and  probably  in  the  Greek  colonies.  And  we  may

reasonably suppose, though without any express proof of the fact, that many

Roman institutions and customs, like Latin literature and mythology, were

partly derived from Hellas and had imperceptibly drifted from one shore of

the Ionian Sea to the other (compare especially the constitutions of Servius

Tullius and of Solon).


It is not proved that the laws of Sparta were in ancient times either written

down in books or engraved on tablets of marble or brass. Nor is it certain

that, if they had been, the Spartans could have read them. They were ancient

customs, some of them older probably than the settlement in Laconia, of

which the origin is unknown; they occasionally received the sanction of the

Delphic oracle, but there was a still stronger obligation by which they were

enforced,--the necessity of self-defence: the Spartans were always living in

the presence of their enemies. They belonged to an age when written law had

not yet taken the place of custom and tradition. The old constitution was very

rarely affected by new enactments, and these only related to the duties of the

Kings or Ephors, or the new relations of classes which arose as time went on.

Hence there was as great a difference as could well be conceived between the

Laws of Athens and Sparta: the one was the creation of a civilized state, and

did not differ in principle from our modern legislation, the other of an age in

which the people were held together and also kept down by force of arms,

and which afterwards retained many traces of its barbaric origin 'surviving in

culture.'


Nevertheless the Lacedaemonian was the ideal of a primitive Greek state.

According to Thucydides it was the first which emerged out of confusion and

became  a  regular  government.  It  was  also  an  army  devoted  to  militaryexercises, but organized with a view to self-defence and not to conquest. It

was not quick to move or easily excited; but stolid, cautious, unambitious,

procrastinating. For many centuries it retained the same character which was

impressed  upon  it  by  the  hand  of  the  legislator.  This  singular  fabric  was

partly  the  result  of  circumstances,  partly  the  invention  of  some  unknown

individual  in  prehistoric  times,  whose  ideal  of  education  was  military

discipline, and who, by the ascendency of his genius, made a small tribe into

a nation which became famous in the world's history. The other Hellenes

wondered at the strength and stability of his work. The rest of Hellas, says

Thucydides, undertook the colonisation of Heraclea the more readily, having

a feeling of security now that they saw the Lacedaemonians taking part in it.

The Spartan state appears to us in the dawn of history as a vision of armed

men, irresistible by any other power then existing in the world. It can hardly

be said to have understood at all the rights or duties of nations to one another,

or indeed to have had any moral principle except patriotism and obedience to

commanders. Men were so trained to act together that they lost the freedom

and spontaneity of human life in cultivating the qualities of the soldier and

ruler.  The  Spartan  state  was  a  composite  body  in  which  kings,  nobles,

citizens, perioeci, artisans, slaves, had to find a 'modus vivendi' with one

another.  All  of  them  were  taught  some  use  of  arms.  The  strength  of  the

family tie was diminished among them by an enforced absence from home

and by common meals. Sparta had no life or growth; no poetry or tradition of

the past; no art, no thought. The Athenians started on their great career some

centuries later, but the Spartans would have been easily conquered by them,

if  Athens  had  not  been  deficient  in  the  qualities  which  constituted  the

strength (and also the weakness) of her rival.


The  ideal  of  Athens  has  been  pictured  for  all  time  in  the  speech  which

Thucydides puts into the mouth of Pericles, called the Funeral Oration. He

contrasts the activity and freedom and pleasantness of Athenian life with the

immobility and severe looks and incessant drill of the Spartans. The citizens

of no city were more versatile, or more readily changed from land to sea or

more quickly moved about from place to place. They 'took their pleasures'

merrily, and yet, when the time for fighting arrived, were not a whit behind

the  Spartans,  who  were  like  men  living  in  a  camp,  and,  though  always

keeping guard, were often too late for the fray. Any foreigner might visit

Athens; her ships found a way to the most distant shores; the riches of thewhole earth poured in upon her. Her citizens had their theatres and festivals;

they  'provided  their  souls  with  many  relaxations';  yet  they  were  not  less

manly than the Spartans or less willing to sacrifice this enjoyable existence

for their country's good. The Athenian was a nobler form of life than that of

their rivals, a life of music as well as of gymnastic, the life of a citizen as well

as  of  a  soldier.  Such  is  the  picture  which  Thucydides  has  drawn  of  the

Athenians in their glory. It is the spirit of this life which Plato would infuse

into the Magnesian state and which he seeks to combine with the common

meals and gymnastic discipline of Sparta.


The two great types of Athens and Sparta had deeply entered into his mind.

He had heard of Sparta at a distance and from common Hellenic fame: he was

a citizen of Athens and an Athenian of noble birth. He must often have sat in

the law-courts, and may have had personal experience of the duties of offices

such as he is establishing. There is no need to ask the question, whence he

derived his knowledge of the Laws of Athens: they were a part of his daily

life. Many of his enactments are recognized to be Athenian laws from the

fragments  preserved  in  the  Orators  and  elsewhere:  many  more  would  be

found to be so if we had better information. Probably also still more of them

would have been incorporated in the Magnesian code, if the work had ever

been finally completed. But it seems to have come down to us in a form

which is partly finished and partly unfinished, having a beginning and end,

but  wanting  arrangement  in  the  middle.  The  Laws  answer  to  Plato's  own

description of them, in the comparison which he makes of himself and his

two friends to gatherers of stones or the beginners of some composite work,

'who are providing materials and partly putting them together:-- having some

of their laws, like stones, already fixed in their places, while others lie about.'


Plato's own life coincided with the period at which Athens rose to her greatest

heights and sank to her lowest depths. It was impossible that he should regard

the  blessings  of  democracy  in  the  same  light  as  the  men  of  a  former

generation, whose view was not intercepted by the evil shadow of the taking

of Athens, and who had only the glories of Marathon and Salamis and the

administration of Pericles to look back upon. On the other hand the fame and

prestige of Sparta, which had outlived so many crimes and blunders, was not

altogether lost at the end of the life of Plato. Hers was the only great Hellenic

government which preserved something of its ancient form; and although theSpartan citizens were reduced to almost one-tenth of their original number

(Arist. Pol.), she still retained, until the rise of Thebes and Macedon, a certain

authority  and  predominance  due  to  her  final  success  in  the  struggle  with

Athens and to the victories which Agesilaus won in Asia Minor.


Plato, like Aristotle, had in his mind some form of a mean state which should

escape  the  evils  and  secure  the  advantages  of  both  aristocracy  and

democracy. It may however be doubted whether the creation of such a state is

not beyond the legislator's art, although there have been examples in history

of forms of government, which through some community of interest or of

origin, through a balance of parties in the state itself, or through the fear of a

common enemy, have for a while preserved such a character of moderation.

But in general there arises a time in the history of a state when the struggle

between the few and the many has to be fought out. No system of checks and

balances, such as Plato has devised in the Laws, could have given equipoise

and stability to an ancient state, any more than the skill of the legislator could

have withstood the tide of democracy in England or France during the last

hundred years, or have given life to China or India.


The basis of the Magnesian constitution is the equal division of land. In the

new state, as in the Republic, there was to be neither poverty nor riches.

Every citizen under all circumstances retained his lot, and as much money as

was necessary for the cultivation of it, and no one was allowed to accumulate

property to the amount of more than five times the value of the lot, inclusive

of it. The equal division of land was a Spartan institution, not known to have

existed elsewhere in Hellas. The mention of it in the Laws of Plato affords

considerable  presumption  that  it  was  of  ancient  origin,  and  not  first

introduced, as Mr. Grote and others have imagined, in the reformation of

Cleomenes III. But at Sparta, if we may judge from the frequent complaints

of the accumulation of property in the hands of a few persons (Arist. Pol.), no

provision  could  have  been  made  for  the  maintenance  of  the  lot.  Plutarch

indeed speaks of a law introduced by the Ephor Epitadeus soon after the

Peloponnesian War, which first allowed the Spartans to sell their land (Agis):

but  from  the  manner  in  which  Aristotle  refers  to  the  subject,  we  should

imagine this evil in the state to be of a much older standing. Like some other

countries  in  which  small  proprietors  have  been  numerous,  the  original

equality passed into inequality, and, instead of a large middle class, there wasprobably at Sparta greater disproportion in the property of the citizens than in

any other state of Hellas. Plato was aware of the danger, and has improved on

the Spartan custom. The land, as at Sparta, must have been tilled by slaves,

since other occupations were found for the citizens. Bodies of young men

between the ages of twenty-five and thirty were engaged in making biennial

peregrinations  of  the  country.  They  and  their  officers  are  to  be  the

magistrates, police, engineers, aediles, of the twelve districts into which the

colony was divided. Their way of life may be compared with that of the

Spartan secret police or Crypteia, a name which Plato freely applies to them

without apparently any consciousness of the odium which has attached to the

word in history.


Another great institution which Plato borrowed from Sparta (or Crete) is the

Syssitia or common meals. These were established in both states, and in some

respects were considered by Aristotle to be better managed in Crete than at

Lacedaemon (Pol.). In the Laws the Cretan custom appears to be adopted

(This is not proved, as Hermann supposes ('De Vestigiis,' etc.)): that is to say,

if we may interpret Plato by Aristotle, the cost of them was defrayed by the

state and not by the individuals (Arist. Pol); so that the members of the mess,

who could not pay their quota, still retained their rights of citizenship. But

this explanation is hardly consistent with the Laws, where contributions to

the Syssitia from private estates are expressly mentioned. Plato goes further

than the legislators of Sparta and Crete, and would extend the common meals

to women as well as men: he desires to curb the disorders, which existed

among the female sex in both states, by the application to women of the same

military discipline to which the men were already subject. It was an extension

of  the  custom  of  Syssitia  from  which  the  ancient  legislators  shrank,  and

which Plato himself believed to be very difficult of enforcement.


Like  Sparta,  the  new  colony  was  not  to  be  surrounded  by  walls,--a  state

should learn to depend upon the bravery of its citizens only--a fallacy or

paradox, if it is not to be regarded as a poetical fancy, which is fairly enough

ridiculed  by  Aristotle  (Pol.).  Women,  too,  must  be  ready  to  assist  in  the

defence of their country: they are not to rush to the temples and altars, but to

arm themselves with shield and spear. In the regulation of the Syssitia, in at

least one of his enactments respecting property, and in the attempt to correct

the  licence  of  women,  Plato  shows,  that  while  he  borrowed  from  theinstitutions of Sparta and favoured the Spartan mode of life, he also sought to

improve upon them.


The enmity to the sea is another Spartan feature which is transferred by Plato

to the Magnesian state. He did not reflect that a non-maritime power would

always be at the mercy of one which had a command of the great highway.

Their many island homes, the vast extent of coast which had to be protected

by them, their struggles first of all with the Phoenicians and Carthaginians,

and secondly with the Persian fleets, forced the Greeks, mostly against their

will, to devote themselves to the sea. The islanders before the inhabitants of

the  continent,  the  maritime  cities  before  the  inland,  the  Corinthians  and

Athenians before the Spartans, were compelled to fit out ships: last of all the

Spartans, by the pressure of the Peloponnesian War, were driven to establish

a  naval  force,  which,  after  the  battle  of  Aegospotami,  for  more  than  a

generation commanded the Aegean. Plato, like the Spartans, had a prejudice

against a navy, because he regarded it as the nursery of democracy. But he

either never considered, or did not care to explain, how a city, set upon an

island and 'distant not more than ten miles from the sea, having a seaboard

provided with excellent harbours,' could have safely subsisted without one.


Neither the Spartans nor the Magnesian colonists were permitted to engage in

trade or commerce. In order to limit their dealings as far as possible to their

own country, they had a separate coinage; the Magnesians were only allowed

to use the common currency of Hellas when they travelled abroad, which

they  were  forbidden  to  do  unless  they  received  permission  from  the

government. Like the Spartans, Plato was afraid of the evils which might be

introduced into his state by intercourse with foreigners; but he also shrinks

from the utter exclusiveness of Sparta, and is not unwilling to allow visitors

of a suitable age and rank to come from other states to his own, as he also

allows citizens of his own state to go to foreign countries and bring back a

report  of  them.  Such  international  communication  seemed  to  him  both

honourable and useful.


We may now notice some points in which the commonwealth of the Laws

approximates to the Athenian model. These are much more numerous than

the previous class of resemblances; we are better able to compare the laws of

Plato with those of Athens, because a good deal more is known to us ofAthens than of Sparta.


The  information  which  we  possess  about  Athenian  law,  though

comparatively  fuller,  is  still  fragmentary.  The  sources  from  which  our

knowledge is derived are chiefly the following:--


(1)  The  Orators,--Antiphon,  Andocides,  Lysias,  Isocrates,  Demosthenes,

Aeschines, Lycurgus, and others.


(2)  Herodotus,  Thucydides,  Xenophon,  Plato,  Aristotle,  as  well  as  later

writers, such as Cicero de Legibus, Plutarch, Aelian, Pausanias.


(3) Lexicographers, such as Harpocration, Pollux, Hesychius, Suidas, and the

compiler of the Etymologicum Magnum, many of whom are of uncertain

date, and to a great extent based upon one another. Their writings extend

altogether over more than eight hundred years, from the second to the tenth

century.


(4) The Scholia on Aristophanes, Plato, Demosthenes.


(5) A few inscriptions.


Our knowledge of a subject derived from such various sources and for the

most part of uncertain date and origin, is necessarily precarious. No critic can

separate the actual laws of Solon from those which passed under his name in

later ages. Nor do the Scholiasts and Lexicographers attempt to distinguish

how many of these laws were still in force at the time when they wrote, or

when they fell into disuse and were to be found in books only. Nor can we

hastily assume that enactments which occur in the Laws of Plato were also a

part of Athenian law, however probable this may appear.


There  are  two  classes  of  similarities  between  Plato's  Laws  and  those  of

Athens: (i) of institutions (ii) of minor enactments.


(i) The constitution of the Laws in its general character resembles much more

nearly the Athenian constitution of Solon's time than that which succeeded it,

or the extreme democracy which prevailed in Plato's own day. It was a meanstate which he hoped to create, equally unlike a Syracusan tyranny or the

mob-government of the Athenian assembly. There are various expedients by

which he sought to impart to it the quality of moderation. (1) The whole

people were to be educated: they could not be all trained in philosophy, but

they  were  to  acquire  the  simple  elements  of  music,  arithmetic,  geometry,

astronomy; they were also to be subject to military discipline, archontes kai

archomenoi. (2) The majority of them were, or had been at some time in their

lives, magistrates, and had the experience which is given by office. (3) The

persons who held the highest offices were to have a further education, not

much inferior to that provided for the guardians in the Republic, though the

range of their studies is narrowed to the nature and divisions of virtue: here

their  philosophy  comes  to  an  end.  (4)  The  entire  number  of  the  citizens

(5040) rarely, if ever, assembled, except for purposes of elections. The whole

people were divided into four classes, each having the right to be represented

by  the  same  number  of  members  in  the  Council.  The  result  of  such  an

arrangement would be, as in the constitution of Servius Tullius, to give a

disproportionate  share  of  power  to  the  wealthier  classes,  who  may  be

supposed to be always much fewer in number than the poorer. This tendency

was qualified by the complicated system of selection by vote, previous to the

final election by lot, of which the object seems to be to hand over to the

wealthy few the power of selecting from the many poor, and vice versa. (5)

The most important body in the state was the Nocturnal Council, which is

borrowed from the Areopagus at Athens, as it existed, or was supposed to

have existed, in the days before Ephialtes and the Eumenides of Aeschylus,

when its power was undiminished. In some particulars Plato appears to have

copied exactly the customs and procedure of the Areopagus: both assemblies

sat at night (Telfy). There was a resemblance also in more important matters.

Like  the  Areopagus,  the  Nocturnal  Council  was  partly  composed  of

magistrates and other state officials, whose term of office had expired. (7)

The constitution included several diverse and even opposing elements, such

as  the  Assembly  and  the  Nocturnal  Council.  (8)  There  was  much  less

exclusiveness  than  at  Sparta;  the  citizens  were  to  have  an  interest  in  the

government of neighbouring states, and to know what was going on in the

rest of the world.--All these were moderating influences.


A striking similarity between Athens and the constitution of the Magnesian

colony is the use of the lot in the election of judges and other magistrates.That such a mode of election should have been resorted to in any civilized

state, or that it should have been transferred by Plato to an ideal or imaginary

one, is very singular to us. The most extreme democracy of modern times has

never thought of leaving government wholly to chance. It was natural that

Socrates should scoff at it, and ask, 'Who would choose a pilot or carpenter or

flute-player by lot' (Xen. Mem.)? Yet there were many considerations which

made this mode of choice attractive both to the oligarch and to the democrat:-

-(1) It seemed to recognize that one man was as good as another, and that all

the members of the governing body, whether few or many, were on a perfect

equality in every sense of the word. (2) To the pious mind it appeared to be a

choice made, not by man, but by heaven (compare Laws). (3) It afforded a

protection against corruption and intrigue...It must also be remembered that,

although elected by lot, the persons so elected were subject to a scrutiny

before they entered on their office, and were therefore liable, after election, if

disqualified, to be rejected (Laws). They were, moreover, liable to be called

to account after the expiration of their office. In the election of councillors

Plato introduces a further check: they are not to be chosen directly by lot

from all the citizens, but from a select body previously elected by vote. In

Plato's state at least, as we may infer from his silence on this point, judges

and magistrates performed their duties without pay, which was a guarantee

both of their disinterestedness and of their belonging probably to the higher

class of citizens (compare Arist. Pol.). Hence we are not surprised that the use

of the lot prevailed, not only in the election of the Athenian Council, but also

in many oligarchies, and even in Plato's colony. The evil consequences of the

lot are to a great extent avoided, if the magistrates so elected do not, like the

dicasts at Athens, receive pay from the state.


Another  parallel  is  that  of  the  Popular  Assembly,  which  at  Athens  was

omnipotent, but in the Laws has only a faded and secondary existence. In

Plato it was chiefly an elective body, having apparently no judicial and little

political  power  entrusted  to  it.  At  Athens  it  was  the  mainspring  of  the

democracy; it had the decision of war or peace, of life and death; the acts of

generals  or  statesmen  were  authorized  or  condemned  by  it;  no  office  or

person was above its control. Plato was far from allowing such a despotic

power  to  exist  in  his  model  community,  and  therefore  he  minimizes  the

importance of the Assembly and narrows its functions. He probably never

asked himself a question, which naturally occurs to the modern reader, wherewas to be the central authority in this new community, and by what supreme

power would the differences of inferior powers be decided. At the same time

he magnifies and brings into prominence the Nocturnal Council (which is in

many  respects  a  reflection  of  the  Areopagus),  but  does  not  make  it  the

governing body of the state.


Between the judicial system of the Laws and that of Athens there was very

great similarity, and a difference almost equally great. Plato not unfrequently

adopts the details when he rejects the principle. At Athens any citizen might

be a judge and member of the great court of the Heliaea. This was ordinarily

subdivided into a number of inferior courts, but an occasion is recorded on

which the whole body, in number six thousand, met in a single court (Andoc.

de Myst.). Plato significantly remarks that a few judges, if they are good, are

better than a great number. He also, at least in capital cases, confines the

plaintiff  and  defendant  to  a  single  speech  each,  instead  of  allowing  two

apiece, as was the common practice at Athens. On the other hand, in all

private suits he gives two appeals, from the arbiters to the courts of the tribes,

and from the courts of the tribes to the final or supreme court. There was

nothing answering to this at Athens. The three courts were appointed in the

following manner:--the arbiters were to be agreed upon by the parties to the

cause; the judges of the tribes to be elected by lot; the highest tribunal to be

chosen at the end of each year by the great officers of state out of their own

number-- they were to serve for a year, to undergo a scrutiny, and, unlike the

Athenian  judges,  to  vote  openly.  Plato  does  not  dwell  upon  methods  of

procedure:  these  are  the  lesser  matters  which  he  leaves  to  the  younger

legislators. In cases of murder and some other capital offences, the cause was

to  be  tried  by  a  special  tribunal,  as  was  the  custom  at  Athens:  military

offences, too, as at Athens, were decided by the soldiers. Public causes in the

Laws,  as  sometimes  at  Athens,  were  voted  upon  by  the  whole  people:

because, as Plato remarks, they are all equally concerned in them. They were

to  be  previously  investigated  by  three  of  the  principal  magistrates.  He

believes also that in private suits all should take part; 'for he who has no share

in the administration of justice is apt to imagine that he has no share in the

state  at  all.'  The  wardens  of  the  country,  like  the  Forty  at  Athens,  also

exercised judicial power in small matters, as well as the wardens of the agora

and city. The department of justice is better organized in Plato than in an

ordinary Greek state, proceeding more by regular methods, and being morerestricted to distinct duties.


The executive of Plato's Laws, like the Athenian, was different from that of a

modern civilized state. The difference chiefly consists in this, that whereas

among ourselves there are certain persons or classes of persons set apart for

the execution of the duties of government, in ancient Greece, as in all other

communities in the earlier stages of their development, they were not equally

distinguished from the rest of the citizens. The machinery of government was

never so well organized as in the best modern states. The judicial department

was not so completely separated from the legislative, nor the executive from

the judicial, nor the people at large from the professional soldier, lawyer, or

priest. To Aristotle (Pol.) it was a question requiring serious consideration--

Who should execute a sentence? There was probably no body of police to

whom were entrusted the lives and properties of the citizens in any Hellenic

state. Hence it might be reasonably expected that every man should be the

watchman of every other, and in turn be watched by him. The ancients do not

seem  to  have  remembered  the  homely  adage  that,  'What  is  every  man's

business is no man's business,' or always to have thought of applying the

principle  of  a  division  of  labour  to  the  administration  of  law  and  to

government. Every Athenian was at some time or on some occasion in his

life  a  magistrate,  judge,  advocate,  soldier,  sailor,  policeman.  He  had  not

necessarily any private business; a good deal of his time was taken up with

the duties of office and other public occupations. So, too, in Plato's Laws. A

citizen was to interfere in a quarrel, if older than the combatants, or to defend

the outraged party, if his junior. He was especially bound to come to the

rescue of a parent who was ill-treated by his children. He was also required to

prosecute the murderer of a kinsman. In certain cases he was allowed to arrest

an offender. He might even use violence to an abusive person. Any citizen

who was not less than thirty years of age at times exercised a magisterial

authority, to be enforced even by blows. Both in the Magnesian state and at

Athens many thousand persons must have shared in the highest duties of

government, if a section only of the Council, consisting of thirty or of fifty

persons, as in the Laws, or at Athens after the days of Cleisthenes, held office

for a month, or for thirty-five days only. It was almost as if, in our own

country,  the  Ministry  or  the  Houses  of  Parliament  were  to  change  every

month. The average ability of the Athenian and Magnesian councillors could

not have been very high, considering there were so many of them. And yetthey were entrusted with the performance of the most important executive

duties. In these respects the constitution of the Laws resembles Athens far

more  than  Sparta.  All  the  citizens  were  to  be,  not  merely  soldiers,  but

politicians and administrators.


(ii)  There  are  numerous  minor  particulars  in  which  the  Laws  of  Plato

resemble those of Athens. These are less interesting than the preceding, but

they show even more strikingly how closely in the composition of his work

Plato has followed the laws and customs of his own country.


(1) Evidence. (a) At Athens a child was not allowed to give evidence (Telfy).

Plato has a similar law: 'A child shall be allowed to give evidence only in

cases of murder.' (b) At Athens an unwilling witness might be summoned;

but he was not required to appear if he was ready to declare on oath that he

knew  nothing  about  the  matter  in  question  (Telfy).  So  in  the  Laws.  (c)

Athenian law enacted that when more than half the witnesses in a case had

been convicted of perjury, there was to be a new trial (anadikos krisis--Telfy).

There is a similar provision in the Laws. (d) False-witness was punished at

Athens by atimia and a fine (Telfy). Plato is at once more lenient and more

severe: 'If a man be twice convicted of false-witness, he shall not be required,

and if thrice, he shall not be allowed to bear witness; and if he dare to witness

after he has been convicted three times,...he shall be punished with death.'


(2)  Murder.  (a)  Wilful  murder  was  punished  in  Athenian  law  by  death,

perpetual  exile,  and  confiscation  of  property  (Telfy).  Plato,  too,  has  the

alternative  of  death  or  exile,  but  he  does  not  confiscate  the  murderer's

property. (b) The Parricide was not allowed to escape by going into exile at

Athens (Telfy), nor, apparently, in the Laws. (c) A homicide, if forgiven by

his victim before death, received no punishment, either at Athens (Telfy), or

in the Magnesian state. In both (Telfy) the contriver of a murder is punished

as severely as the doer; and persons accused of the crime are forbidden to

enter temples or the agora until they have been tried (Telfy). (d) At Athens

slaves who killed their masters and were caught red-handed, were not to be

put to death by the relations of the murdered man, but to be handed over to

the magistrates (Telfy). So in the Laws, the slave who is guilty of wilful

murder has a public execution: but if the murder is committed in anger, it is

punished by the kinsmen of the victim.(3) Involuntary homicide. (a) The guilty person, according to the Athenian

law, had to go into exile, and might not return, until the family of the man

slain  were  conciliated.  Then  he  must  be  purified  (Telfy).  If  he  is  caught

before he has obtained forgiveness, he may be put to death. These enactments

reappear in the Laws. (b) The curious provision of Plato, that a stranger who

has  been  banished  for  involuntary  homicide  and  is  subsequently  wrecked

upon the coast, must 'take up his abode on the sea- shore, wetting his feet in

the sea, and watching for an opportunity of sailing,' recalls the procedure of

the  Judicium  Phreatteum  at  Athens,  according  to  which  an  involuntary

homicide, who, having gone into exile, is accused of a wilful murder, was

tried at Phreatto for this offence in a boat by magistrates on the shore. (c) A

still more singular law, occurring both in the Athenian and Magnesian code,

enacts that a stone or other inanimate object which kills a man is to be tried,

and cast over the border (Telfy).


(4)  Justifiable  or  excusable  homicide.  Plato  and  Athenian  law  agree  in

making homicide justifiable or excusable in the following cases:--(1) at the

games (Telfy); (2) in war (Telfy); (3) if the person slain was found doing

violence to a free woman (Telfy); (4) if a doctor's patient dies; (5) in the case

of a robber (Telfy); (6) in self-defence (Telfy).


(5) Impiety. Death or expulsion was the Athenian penalty for impiety (Telfy).

In the Laws it is punished in various cases by imprisonment for five years, for

life, and by death.


(6) Sacrilege. Robbery of temples at Athens was punished by death, refusal

of burial in the land, and confiscation of property (Telfy). In the Laws the

citizen who is guilty of such a crime is to 'perish ingloriously and be cast

beyond the borders of the land,' but his property is not confiscated.


(7) Sorcery. The sorcerer at Athens was to be executed (Telfy): compare

Laws, where it is enacted that the physician who poisons and the professional

sorcerer shall be punished with death.


(8) Treason. Both at Athens and in the Laws the penalty for treason was death

(Telfy), and refusal of burial in the country (Telfy).(9) Sheltering exiles. 'If a man receives an exile, he shall be punished with

death.' So, too, in Athenian law (Telfy.).


(10) Wounding. Athenian law compelled a man who had wounded another to

go into exile; if he returned, he was to be put to death (Telfy). Plato only

punishes the offence with death when children wound their parents or one

another, or a slave wounds his master.


(11) Bribery. Death was the punishment for taking a bribe, both at Athens

(Telfy)  and  in  the  Laws;  but  Athenian  law  offered  an  alternative--the

payment of a fine of ten times the amount of the bribe.


(12)  Theft.  Plato,  like  Athenian  law  (Telfy),  punishes  the  theft  of  public

property by death; the theft of private property in both involves a fine of

double the value of the stolen goods (Telfy).


(13) Suicide. He 'who slays him who of all men, as they say, is his own best

friend,' is regarded in the same spirit by Plato and by Athenian law. Plato

would have him 'buried ingloriously on the borders of the twelve portions of

the land, in such places as are uncultivated and nameless,' and 'no column or

inscription is to mark the place of his interment.' Athenian law enacted that

the hand which did the deed should be separated from the body and be buried

apart (Telfy).


(14)  Injury.  In  cases  of  wilful  injury,  Athenian  law  compelled  the  guilty

person  to  pay  double  the  damage;  in  cases  of  involuntary  injury,  simple

damages (Telfy). Plato enacts that if a man wounds another in passion, and

the  wound  is  curable,  he  shall  pay  double  the  damage,  if  incurable  or

disfiguring, fourfold damages. If, however, the wounding is accidental, he

shall simply pay for the harm done.


(15) Treatment of parents. Athenian law allowed any one to indict another for

neglect or illtreatment of parents (Telfy). So Plato bids bystanders assist a

father who is assaulted by his son, and allows any one to give information

against children who neglect their parents.


(16) Execution of sentences. Both Plato and Athenian law give to the winnerof a suit power to seize the goods of the loser, if he does not pay within the

appointed time (Telfy). At Athens the penalty was also doubled (Telfy); not

so in Plato. Plato however punishes contempt of court by death, which at

Athens seems only to have been visited with a further fine (Telfy).


(17) Property. (a) Both at Athens and in the Laws a man who has disputed

property in his possession must give the name of the person from whom he

received it (Telfy); and any one searching for lost property must enter a house

naked (Telfy), or, as Plato says, 'naked, or wearing only a short tunic and

without a girdle. (b) Athenian law, as well as Plato, did not allow a father to

disinherit his son without good reason and the consent of impartial persons

(Telfy). Neither grants to the eldest son any special claim on the paternal

estate (Telfy). In the law of inheritance both prefer males to females (Telfy).

(c) Plato and Athenian law enacted that a tree should be planted at a fair

distance from a neighbour's property (Telfy), and that when a man could not

get water, his neighbour must supply him (Telfy). Both at Athens and in Plato

there is a law about bees, the former providing that a beehive must be set up

at not less a distance than 300 feet from a neighbour's (Telfy), and the latter

forbidding the decoying of bees.


(18) Orphans. A ward must proceed against a guardian whom he suspects of

fraud within five years of the expiration of the guardianship. This provision is

common to Plato and to Athenian law (Telfy). Further, the latter enacted that

the nearest male relation should marry or provide a husband for an heiress

(Telfy),--a point in which Plato follows it closely.


(19) Contracts. Plato's law that 'when a man makes an agreement which he

does not fulfil, unless the agreement be of a nature which the law or a vote of

the assembly does not allow, or which he has made under the influence of

some unjust compulsion, or which he is prevented from fulfilling against his

will by some unexpected chance,--the other party may go to law with him,'

according to Pollux (quoted in Telfy's note) prevailed also at Athens.


(20) Trade regulations. (a) Lying was forbidden in the agora both by Plato

and at Athens (Telfy). (b) Athenian law allowed an action of recovery against

a man who sold an unsound slave as sound (Telfy). Plato's enactment is more

explicit: he allows only an unskilled person (i.e. one who is not a trainer orphysician)  to  take  proceedings  in  such  a  case.  (c)  Plato  diverges  from

Athenian practice in the disapproval of credit, and does not even allow the

supply of goods on the deposit of a percentage of their value (Telfy). He

enacts that 'when goods are exchanged by buying and selling, a man shall

deliver them and receive the price of them at a fixed place in the agora, and

have done with the matter,' and that 'he who gives credit must be satisfied

whether he obtain his money or not, for in such exchanges he will not be

protected by law. (d) Athenian law forbad an extortionate rate of interest

(Telfy); Plato allows interest in one case only--if a contractor does not receive

the price of his work within a year of the time agreed--and at the rate of 200

per cent. per annum for every drachma a monthly interest of an obol. (e) Both

at Athens and in the Laws sales were to be registered (Telfy), as well as births

(Telfy).


(21)  Sumptuary  laws.  Extravagance  at  weddings  (Telfy),  and  at  funerals

(Telfy) was forbidden at Athens and also in the Magnesian state.


There remains the subject of family life, which in Plato's Laws partakes both

of an Athenian and Spartan character. Under this head may conveniently be

included the condition of women and of slaves. To family life may be added

citizenship.


As at Sparta, marriages are to be contracted for the good of the state; and they

may be dissolved on the same ground, where there is a failure of issue,--the

interest of the state requiring that every one of the 5040 lots should have an

heir.  Divorces  are  likewise  permitted  by  Plato  where  there  is  an

incompatibility  of  temper,  as  at  Athens  by  mutual  consent.  The  duty  of

having children is also enforced by a still higher motive, expressed by Plato

in the noble words:--'A man should cling to immortality, and leave behind

him children's children to be the servants of God in his place.' Again, as at

Athens, the father is allowed to put away his undutiful son, but only with the

consent of impartial persons (Telfy), and the only suit which may be brought

by a son against a father is for imbecility. The class of elder and younger men

and women are still to regard one another, as in the Republic, as standing in

the relation of parents and children. This is a trait of Spartan character rather

than  of  Athenian.  A  peculiar  sanctity  and  tenderness  was  to  be  shown

towards the aged; the parent or grandparent stricken with years was to beloved and worshipped like the image of a God, and was to be deemed far

more able than any lifeless statue to bring good or ill to his descendants.

Great care is to be taken of orphans: they are entrusted to the fifteen eldest

Guardians  of  the  Law,  who  are  to  be  'lawgivers  and  fathers  to  them  not

inferior  to  their  natural  fathers,'  as  at  Athens  they  were  entrusted  to  the

Archons. Plato wishes to make the misfortune of orphanhood as little sad to

them as possible.


Plato, seeing the disorder into which half the human race had fallen at Athens

and Sparta, is minded to frame for them a new rule of life. He renounces his

fanciful theory of communism, but still desires to place women as far as

possible on an equality with men. They were to be trained in the use of arms,

they are to live in public. Their time was partly taken up with gymnastic

exercises; there could have been little family or private life among them.

Their lot was to be neither like that of Spartan women, who were made hard

and common by excessive practice of gymnastic and the want of all other

education,--nor yet like that of Athenian women, who, at least among the

upper classes, retired into a sort of oriental seclusion,--but something better

than either. They were to be the perfect mothers of perfect children, yet not

wholly taken up with the duties of motherhood, which were to be made easy

to them as far as possible (compare Republic), but able to share in the perils

of  war  and  to  be  the  companions  of  their  husbands.  Here,  more  than

anywhere else, the spirit of the Laws reverts to the Republic. In speaking of

them as the companions of their husbands we must remember that it is an

Athenian and not a Spartan way of life which they are invited to share, a life

of gaiety and brightness, not of austerity and abstinence, which often by a

reaction degenerated into licence and grossness.


In Plato's age the subject of slavery greatly interested the minds of thoughtful

men; and how best to manage this 'troublesome piece of goods' exercised his

own mind a good deal. He admits that they have often been found better than

brethren or sons in the hour of danger, and are capable of rendering important

public  services  by  informing  against  offenders--for  this  they  are  to  be

rewarded; and the master who puts a slave to death for the sake of concealing

some crime which he has committed, is held guilty of murder. But they are

not always treated with equal consideration. The punishments inflicted on

them bear no proportion to their crimes. They are to be addressed only in thelanguage  of  command.  Their  masters  are  not  to  jest  with  them,  lest  they

should increase the hardship of their lot. Some privileges were granted to

them  by  Athenian  law  of  which  there  is  no  mention  in  Plato;  they  were

allowed to purchase their freedom from their master, and if they despaired of

being liberated by him they could demand to be sold, on the chance of falling

into better hands. But there is no suggestion in the Laws that a slave who

tried to escape should be branded with the words--kateche me, pheugo, or

that  evidence  should  be  extracted  from  him  by  torture,  that  the  whole

household was to be executed if the master was murdered and the perpetrator

remained undetected: all these were provisions of Athenian law. Plato is more

consistent than either the Athenians or the Spartans; for at Sparta too the

Helots were treated in a manner almost unintelligible to us. On the one hand,

they had arms put into their hands, and served in the army, not only, as at

Plataea, in attendance on their masters, but, after they had been manumitted,

as a separate body of troops called Neodamodes: on the other hand, they were

the victims of one of the greatest crimes recorded in Greek history (Thucyd.).

The two great philosophers of Hellas sought to extricate themselves from this

cruel condition of human life, but acquiesced in the necessity of it. A noble

and pathetic sentiment of Plato, suggested by the thought of their misery,

may  be  quoted  in  this  place:--'The  right  treatment  of  slaves  is  to  behave

properly to them, and to do to them, if possible, even more justice than to

those who are our equals; for he who naturally and genuinely reverences

justice, and hates injustice, is discovered in his dealings with any class of

men to whom he can easily be unjust. And he who in regard to the natures

and actions of his slaves is undefiled by impiety and injustice, will best sow

the seeds of virtue in them; and this may be truly said of every master, and

tyrant, and of every other having authority in relation to his inferiors.'


All the citizens of the Magnesian state were free and equal; there was no

distinction  of  rank  among  them,  such  as  is  believed  to  have  prevailed  at

Sparta. Their number was a fixed one, corresponding to the 5040 lots. One of

the results of this is the requirement that younger sons or those who have

been disinherited shall go out to a colony. At Athens, where there was not the

same religious feeling against increasing the size of the city, the number of

citizens must have been liable to considerable fluctuations. Several classes of

persons,  who  were  not  citizens  by  birth,  were  admitted  to  the  privilege.

Perpetual exiles from other countries, people who settled there to practise atrade (Telfy), any one who had shown distinguished valour in the cause of

Athens, the Plataeans who escaped from the siege, metics and strangers who

offered to serve in the army, the slaves who fought at Arginusae,--all these

could  or  did  become  citizens.  Even  those  who  were  only  on  one  side  of

Athenian parentage were at more than one period accounted citizens. But at

times there seems to have arisen a feeling against this promiscuous extension

of the citizen body, an expression of which is to be found in the law of

Pericles--monous  Athenaious  einai  tous  ek  duoin  Athenaion  gegonotas

(Plutarch, Pericles); and at no time did the adopted citizen enjoy the full

rights of citizenship--e.g. he might not be elected archon or to the office of

priest (Telfy), although this prohibition did not extend to his children, if born

of a citizen wife. Plato never thinks of making the metic, much less the slave,

a citizen. His treatment of the former class is at once more gentle and more

severe than that which prevailed at Athens. He imposes upon them no tax but

good  behaviour,  whereas  at  Athens  they  were  required  to  pay  twelve

drachmae per annum, and to have a patron: on the other hand, he only allows

them to reside in the Magnesian state on condition of following a trade; they

were required to depart when their property exceeded that of the third class,

and in any case after a residence of twenty years, unless they could show that

they had conferred some great benefit on the state. This privileged position

reflects that of the isoteleis at Athens, who were excused from the metoikion.

It is Plato's greatest concession to the metic, as the bestowal of freedom is his

greatest concession to the slave.


Lastly, there is a more general point of view under which the Laws of Plato

may be considered,--the principles of Jurisprudence which are contained in

them. These are not formally announced, but are scattered up and down, to be

observed by the reflective reader for himself. Some of them are only the

common principles which all courts of justice have gathered from experience;

others are peculiar and characteristic. That judges should sit at fixed times

and hear causes in a regular order, that evidence should be laid before them,

that  false  witnesses  should  be  disallowed,  and  corruption  punished,  that

defendants should be heard before they are convicted,--these are the rules, not

only of the Hellenic courts, but of courts of law in all ages and countries. But

there are also points which are peculiar, and in which ancient jurisprudence

differs considerably from modern; some of them are of great importance...It

could not be said at Athens, nor was it ever contemplated by Plato, that allmen, including metics and slaves, should be equal 'in the eye of the law.'

There was some law for the slave, but not much; no adequate protection was

given  him  against  the  cruelty  of  his  master...It  was  a  singular  privilege

granted, both by the Athenian and Magnesian law, to a murdered man, that he

might, before he died, pardon his murderer, in which case no legal steps were

afterwards to be taken against him. This law is the remnant of an age in

which the punishment of offences against the person was the concern rather

of the individual and his kinsmen than of the state...Plato's division of crimes

into voluntary and involuntary and those done from passion, only partially

agrees with the distinction which modern law has drawn between murder and

manslaughter;  his  attempt  to  analyze  them  is  confused  by  the  Socratic

paradox, that 'All vice is involuntary'...It is singular that both in the Laws and

at Athens theft is commonly punished by a twofold restitution of the article

stolen. The distinction between civil and criminal courts or suits was not yet

recognized...Possession gives a right of property after a certain time...The

religious aspect under which certain offences were regarded greatly interfered

with a just and natural estimate of their guilt...As among ourselves, the intent

to murder was distinguished by Plato from actual murder...We note that both

in Plato and the laws of Athens, libel in the market-place and personality in

the theatre were forbidden...Both in Plato and Athenian law, as in modern

times,  the  accomplice  of  a  crime  is  to  be  punished  as  well  as  the

principal...Plato  does  not  allow  a  witness  in  a  cause  to  act  as  a  judge  of

it...Oaths are not to be taken by the parties to a suit...Both at Athens and in

Plato's Laws capital punishment for murder was not to be inflicted, if the

offender was willing to go into exile...Respect for the dead, duty towards

parents, are to be enforced by the law as well as by public opinion...Plato

proclaims  the  noble  sentiment  that  the  object  of  all  punishment  is  the

improvement of the offender... Finally, he repeats twice over, as with the

voice of a prophet, that the crimes of the fathers are not to be visited upon the

children.  In  this  respect  he  is  nobly  distinguished  from  the  Oriental,  and

indeed from the spirit of Athenian law (compare Telfy,--dei kai autous kai

tous ek touton atimous einai), as the Hebrew in the age of Ezekial is from the

Jewish people of former ages.


Of all Plato's provisions the object is to bring the practice of the law more

into harmony with reason and philosophy; to secure impartiality, and while

acknowledging that every citizen has a right to share in the administration ofjustice,  to  counteract  the  tendency  of  the  courts  to  become  mere  popular

assemblies.


...


Thus we have arrived at the end of the writings of Plato, and at the last stage

of philosophy which was really his. For in what followed, which we chiefly

gather from the uncertain intimations of Aristotle, the spirit of the master no

longer survived. The doctrine of Ideas passed into one of numbers; instead of

advancing from the abstract to the concrete, the theories of Plato were taken

out of their context, and either asserted or refuted with a provoking literalism;

the  Socratic  or  Platonic  element  in  his  teaching  was  absorbed  into  the

Pythagorean  or  Megarian.  His  poetry  was  converted  into  mysticism;  his

unsubstantial visions were assailed secundum artem by the rules of logic. His

political  speculations  lost  their  interest  when  the  freedom  of  Hellas  had

passed away. Of all his writings the Laws were the furthest removed from the

traditions of the Platonic school in the next generation. Both his political and

his metaphysical philosophy are for the most part misinterpreted by Aristotle.

The best of him--his love of truth, and his 'contemplation of all time and all

existence,' was soonest lost; and some of his greatest thoughts have slept in

the ear of mankind almost ever since they were first uttered.


We have followed him during his forty or fifty years of authorship, from the

beginning when he first attempted to depict the teaching of Socrates in a

dramatic  form,  down  to  the  time  at  which  the  character  of  Socrates  had

disappeared, and we have the latest reflections of Plato's own mind upon

Hellas and upon philosophy. He, who was 'the last of the poets,' in his book

of Laws writes prose only; he has himself partly fallen under the rhetorical

influences which in his earlier dialogues he was combating. The progress of

his writings is also the history of his life; we have no other authentic life of

him. They are the true self of the philosopher, stripped of the accidents of

time  and  place.  The  great  effort  which  he  makes  is,  first,  to  realize

abstractions, secondly, to connect them. In the attempt to realize them, he was

carried  into  a  transcendental  region  in  which  he  isolated  them  from

experience, and we pass out of the range of science into poetry or fiction. The

fancies  of  mythology  for  a  time  cast  a  veil  over  the  gulf  which  divides

phenomena from onta (Meno, Phaedrus, Symposium, Phaedo). In his returnto earth Plato meets with a difficulty which has long ceased to be a difficulty

to  us.  He  cannot  understand  how  these  obstinate,  unmanageable  ideas,

residing alone in their heaven of abstraction, can be either combined with one

another,  or  adapted  to  phenomena  (Parmenides,  Philebus,  Sophist).  That

which is the most familiar process of our own minds, to him appeared to be

the crowning achievement of the dialectical art. The difficulty which in his

own  generation  threatened  to  be  the  destruction  of  philosophy,  he  has

rendered unmeaning and ridiculous. For by his conquests in the world of

mind our thoughts are widened, and he has furnished us with new dialectical

instruments which are of greater compass and power. We have endeavoured

to see him as he truly was, a great original genius struggling with unequal

conditions of knowledge, not prepared with a system nor evolving in a series

of dialogues ideas which he had long conceived, but contradictory, enquiring

as he goes along, following the argument, first from one point of view and

then from another, and therefore arriving at opposite conclusions, hovering

around the light, and sometimes dazzled with excess of light, but always

moving in the same element of ideal truth. We have seen him also in his

decline, when the wings of his imagination have begun to droop, but his

experience of life remains, and he turns away from the contemplation of the

eternal to take a last sad look at human affairs.


...


And so having brought into the world 'noble children' (Phaedr.), he rests from

the labours of authorship. More than two thousand two hundred years have

passed away since he returned to the place of Apollo and the Muses. Yet the

echo  of  his  words  continues  to  be  heard  among  men,  because  of  all

philosophers he has the most melodious voice. He is the inspired prophet or

teacher  who  can  never  die,  the  only  one  in  whom  the  outward  form

adequately represents the fair soul within; in whom the thoughts of all who

went  before  him  are  reflected  and  of  all  who  come  after  him  are  partly

anticipated. Other teachers of philosophy are dried up and withered,-- after a

few centuries they have become dust; but he is fresh and blooming, and is

always begetting new ideas in the minds of men. They are one-sided and

abstract; but he has many sides of wisdom. Nor is he always consistent with

himself, because he is always moving onward, and knows that there are many

more things in philosophy than can be expressed in words, and that truth isgreater than consistency. He who approaches him in the most reverent spirit

shall reap most of the fruit of his wisdom; he who reads him by the light of

ancient commentators will have the least understanding of him.


We may see him with the eye of the mind in the groves of the Academy, or

on the banks of the Ilissus, or in the streets of Athens, alone or walking with

Socrates,  full  of  those  thoughts  which  have  since  become  the  common

possession of mankind. Or we may compare him to a statue hid away in some

temple of Zeus or Apollo, no longer existing on earth, a statue which has a

look as of the God himself. Or we may once more imagine him following in

another state of being the great company of heaven which he beheld of old in

a vision (Phaedr.). So, 'partly trifling, but with a certain degree of seriousness'

(Symp.), we linger around the memory of a world which has passed away

(Phaedr.).LAWS


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettBOOK I.


PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: An Athenian Stranger, Cleinias (a Cretan),

Megillus (a Lacedaemonian).


ATHENIAN: Tell me, Strangers, is a God or some man supposed to be the

author of your laws?


CLEINIAS: A God, Stranger; in very truth a God: among us Cretans he is

said to have been Zeus, but in Lacedaemon, whence our friend here comes, I

believe  they  would  say  that  Apollo  is  their  lawgiver:  would  they  not,

Megillus?


MEGILLUS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And do you, Cleinias, believe, as Homer tells, that every ninth

year Minos went to converse with his Olympian sire, and was inspired by

him to make laws for your cities?


CLEINIAS: Yes, that is our tradition; and there was Rhadamanthus, a brother

of his, with whose name you are familiar; he is reputed to have been the

justest of men, and we Cretans are of opinion that he earned this reputation

from his righteous administration of justice when he was alive.


ATHENIAN: Yes, and a noble reputation it was, worthy of a son of Zeus. As

you and Megillus have been trained in these institutions, I dare say that you

will not be unwilling to give an account of your government and laws; on our

way we can pass the time pleasantly in talking about them, for I am told that

the distance from Cnosus to the cave and temple of Zeus is considerable; and

doubtless there are shady places under the lofty trees, which will protect us

from this scorching sun. Being no longer young, we may often stop to rest

beneath them, and get over the whole journey without difficulty, beguiling

the time by conversation.


CLEINIAS:  Yes,  Stranger,  and  if  we  proceed  onward  we  shall  come  to

groves of cypresses, which are of rare height and beauty, and there are greenmeadows, in which we may repose and converse.


ATHENIAN: Very good.


CLEINIAS: Very good, indeed; and still better when we see them; let us

move on cheerily.


ATHENIAN:  I  am  willing--And  first,  I  want  to  know  why  the  law  has

ordained that you shall have common meals and gymnastic exercises, and

wear arms.


CLEINIAS:  I  think,  Stranger,  that  the  aim  of  our  institutions  is  easily

intelligible to any one. Look at the character of our country: Crete is not like

Thessaly, a large plain; and for this reason they have horsemen in Thessaly,

and we have runners--the inequality of the ground in our country is more

adapted to locomotion on foot; but then, if you have runners you must have

light arms--no one can carry a heavy weight when running, and bows and

arrows are convenient because they are light. Now all these regulations have

been  made  with  a  view  to  war,  and  the  legislator  appears  to  me  to  have

looked  to  this  in  all  his  arrangements:--  the  common  meals,  if  I  am  not

mistaken, were instituted by him for a similar reason, because he saw that

while they are in the field the citizens are by the nature of the case compelled

to take their meals together for the sake of mutual protection. He seems to me

to  have  thought  the  world  foolish  in  not  understanding  that  all  men  are

always at war with one another; and if in war there ought to be common

meals  and  certain  persons  regularly  appointed  under  others  to  protect  an

army, they should be continued in peace. For what men in general term peace

would be said by him to be only a name; in reality every city is in a natural

state  of  war  with  every  other,  not  indeed  proclaimed  by  heralds,  but

everlasting. And if you look closely, you will find that this was the intention

of  the  Cretan  legislator;  all  institutions,  private  as  well  as  public,  were

arranged  by  him  with  a  view  to  war;  in  giving  them  he  was  under  the

impression that no possessions or institutions are of any value to him who is

defeated in battle; for all the good things of the conquered pass into the hands

of the conquerors.


ATHENIAN: You appear to me, Stranger, to have been thoroughly trained inthe Cretan institutions, and to be well informed about them; will you tell me a

little more explicitly what is the principle of government which you would

lay down? You seem to imagine that a well-governed state ought to be so

ordered as to conquer all other states in war: am I right in supposing this to be

your meaning?


CLEINIAS: Certainly; and our Lacedaemonian friend, if I am not mistaken,

will agree with me.


MEGILLUS:  Why,  my  good  friend,  how  could  any  Lacedaemonian  say

anything else?


ATHENIAN:  And  is  what  you  say  applicable  only  to  states,  or  also  to

villages?


CLEINIAS: To both alike.


ATHENIAN: The case is the same?


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: And in the village will there be the same war of family against

family, and of individual against individual?


CLEINIAS: The same.


ATHENIAN: And should each man conceive himself to be his own enemy:--

what shall we say?


CLEINIAS: O Athenian Stranger--inhabitant of Attica I will not call you, for

you seem to deserve rather to be named after the goddess herself, because

you go back to first principles,--you have thrown a light upon the argument,

and will now be better able to understand what I was just saying,--that all

men are publicly one another's enemies, and each man privately his own.


(ATHENIAN: My good sir, what do you mean?)--


CLEINIAS:...Moreover, there is a victory and defeat--the first and best ofvictories, the lowest and worst of defeats--which each man gains or sustains

at the hands, not of another, but of himself; this shows that there is a war

against ourselves going on within every one of us.


ATHENIAN: Let us now reverse the order of the argument: Seeing that every

individual is either his own superior or his own inferior, may we say that

there is the same principle in the house, the village, and the state?


CLEINIAS: You mean that in each of them there is a principle of superiority

or inferiority to self?


ATHENIAN: Yes.


CLEINIAS: You are quite right in asking the question, for there certainly is

such a principle, and above all in states; and the state in which the better

citizens win a victory over the mob and over the inferior classes may be truly

said to be better than itself, and may be justly praised, where such a victory is

gained, or censured in the opposite case.


ATHENIAN: Whether the better is ever really conquered by the worse, is a

question which requires more discussion, and may be therefore left for the

present. But I now quite understand your meaning when you say that citizens

who are of the same race and live in the same cities may unjustly conspire,

and having the superiority in numbers may overcome and enslave the few

just; and when they prevail, the state may be truly called its own inferior and

therefore bad; and when they are defeated, its own superior and therefore

good.


CLEINIAS: Your remark, Stranger, is a paradox, and yet we cannot possibly

deny it.


ATHENIAN: Here is another case for consideration;--in a family there may

be several brothers, who are the offspring of a single pair; very possibly the

majority of them may be unjust, and the just may be in a minority.


CLEINIAS: Very possibly.ATHENIAN: And you and I ought not to raise a question of words as to

whether this family and household are rightly said to be superior when they

conquer,  and  inferior  when  they  are  conquered;  for  we  are  not  now

considering  what  may  or  may  not  be  the  proper  or  customary  way  of

speaking, but we are considering the natural principles of right and wrong in

laws.


CLEINIAS: What you say, Stranger, is most true.


MEGILLUS: Quite excellent, in my opinion, as far as we have gone.


ATHENIAN: Again; might there not be a judge over these brethren, of whom

we were speaking?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Now, which would be the better judge--one who destroyed the

bad  and  appointed  the  good  to  govern  themselves;  or  one  who,  while

allowing the good to govern, let the bad live, and made them voluntarily

submit? Or third, I suppose, in the scale of excellence might be placed a

judge, who, finding the family distracted, not only did not destroy any one,

but reconciled them to one another for ever after, and gave them laws which

they mutually observed, and was able to keep them friends.


CLEINIAS: The last would be by far the best sort of judge and legislator.


ATHENIAN: And yet the aim of all the laws which he gave would be the

reverse of war.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: And will he who constitutes the state and orders the life of man

have in view external war, or that kind of intestine war called civil, which no

one, if he could prevent, would like to have occurring in his own state; and

when occurring, every one would wish to be quit of as soon as possible?


CLEINIAS: He would have the latter chiefly in view.ATHENIAN: And would he prefer that this civil war should be terminated by

the destruction of one of the parties, and by the victory of the other, or that

peace  and  friendship  should  be  re-established,  and  that,  being  reconciled,

they should give their attention to foreign enemies?


CLEINIAS: Every one would desire the latter in the case of his own state.


ATHENIAN: And would not that also be the desire of the legislator?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And would not every one always make laws for the sake of the

best?


CLEINIAS: To be sure.


ATHENIAN: But war, whether external or civil, is not the best, and the need

of either is to be deprecated; but peace with one another, and good will, are

best. Nor is the victory of the state over itself to be regarded as a really good

thing, but as a necessity; a man might as well say that the body was in the

best state when sick and purged by medicine, forgetting that there is also a

state of the body which needs no purge. And in like manner no one can be a

true statesman, whether he aims at the happiness of the individual or state,

who looks only, or first of all, to external warfare; nor will he ever be a sound

legislator who orders peace for the sake of war, and not war for the sake of

peace.


CLEINIAS: I suppose that there is truth, Stranger, in that remark of yours;

and yet I am greatly mistaken if war is not the entire aim and object of our

own institutions, and also of the Lacedaemonian.


ATHENIAN: I dare say; but there is no reason why we should rudely quarrel

with one another about your legislators, instead of gently questioning them,

seeing that both we and they are equally in earnest. Please follow me and the

argument  closely:--And  first  I  will  put  forward  Tyrtaeus,  an  Athenian  by

birth, but also a Spartan citizen, who of all men was most eager about war:

Well, he says,'I sing not, I care not, about any man,


even if he were the richest of men, and possessed every good (and then he

gives a whole list of them), if he be not at all times a brave warrior.' I imagine

that you, too, must have heard his poems; our Lacedaemonian friend has

probably heard more than enough of them.


MEGILLUS: Very true.


CLEINIAS: And they have found their way from Lacedaemon to Crete.


ATHENIAN:  Come  now  and  let  us  all  join  in  asking  this  question  of

Tyrtaeus: O most divine poet, we will say to him, the excellent praise which

you have bestowed on those who excel in war sufficiently proves that you are

wise and good, and I and Megillus and Cleinias of Cnosus do, as I believe,

entirely  agree  with  you.  But  we  should  like  to  be  quite  sure  that  we  are

speaking of the same men; tell us, then, do you agree with us in thinking that

there are two kinds of war; or what would you say? A far inferior man to

Tyrtaeus would have no difficulty in replying quite truly, that war is of two

kinds,--one which is universally called civil war, and is, as we were just now

saying, of all wars the worst; the other, as we should all admit, in which we

fall out with other nations who are of a different race, is a far milder form of

warfare.


CLEINIAS: Certainly, far milder.


ATHENIAN: Well, now, when you praise and blame war in this high-flown

strain, whom are you praising or blaming, and to which kind of war are you

referring? I suppose that you must mean foreign war, if I am to judge from

expressions of yours in which you say that you abominate those


'Who refuse to look upon fields of blood, and will not draw near and strike at

their enemies.'


And we shall naturally go on to say to him,--You, Tyrtaeus, as it seems,

praise those who distinguish themselves in external and foreign war; and he

must admit this.CLEINIAS: Evidently.


ATHENIAN: They are good; but we say that there are still better men whose

virtue is displayed in the greatest of all battles. And we too have a poet whom

we summon as a witness, Theognis, citizen of Megara in Sicily:


'Cyrnus,' he says, 'he who is faithful in a civil broil is worth his weight in gold

and silver.'


And such an one is far better, as we affirm, than the other in a more difficult

kind of war, much in the same degree as justice and temperance and wisdom,

when united with courage, are better than courage only; for a man cannot be

faithful and good in civil strife without having all virtue. But in the war of

which Tyrtaeus speaks, many a mercenary soldier will take his stand and be

ready  to  die  at  his  post,  and  yet  they  are  generally  and  almost  without

exception  insolent,  unjust,  violent  men,  and  the  most  senseless  of  human

beings. You will ask what the conclusion is, and what I am seeking to prove:

I maintain that the divine legislator of Crete, like any other who is worthy of

consideration, will always and above all things in making laws have regard to

the greatest virtue; which, according to Theognis, is loyalty in the hour of

danger, and may be truly called perfect justice. Whereas, that virtue which

Tyrtaeus highly praises is well enough, and was praised by the poet at the

right time, yet in place and dignity may be said to be only fourth rate (i.e., it

ranks after justice, temperance, and wisdom.).


CLEINIAS: Stranger, we are degrading our inspired lawgiver to a rank which

is far beneath him.


ATHENIAN:  Nay,  I  think  that  we  degrade  not  him  but  ourselves,  if  we

imagine that Lycurgus and Minos laid down laws both in Lacedaemon and

Crete mainly with a view to war.


CLEINIAS: What ought we to say then?


ATHENIAN: What truth and what justice require of us, if I am not mistaken,

when  speaking  in  behalf  of  divine  excellence;--that  the  legislator  when

making his laws had in view not a part only, and this the lowest part of virtue,but all virtue, and that he devised classes of laws answering to the kinds of

virtue; not in the way in which modern inventors of laws make the classes,

for they only investigate and offer laws whenever a want is felt, and one man

has a class of laws about allotments and heiresses, another about assaults;

others about ten thousand other such matters. But we maintain that the right

way  of  examining  into  laws  is  to  proceed  as  we  have  now  done,  and  I

admired the spirit of your exposition; for you were quite right in beginning

with virtue, and saying that this was the aim of the giver of the law, but I

thought that you went wrong when you added that all his legislation had a

view only to a part, and the least part of virtue, and this called forth my

subsequent remarks. Will you allow me then to explain how I should have

liked to have heard you expound the matter?


CLEINIAS: By all means.


ATHENIAN: You ought to have said, Stranger--The Cretan laws are with

reason famous among the Hellenes; for they fulfil the object of laws, which is

to make those who use them happy; and they confer every sort of good. Now

goods are of two kinds: there are human and there are divine goods, and the

human hang upon the divine; and the state which attains the greater, at the

same time acquires the less, or, not having the greater, has neither. Of the

lesser goods the first is health, the second beauty, the third strength, including

swiftness in running and bodily agility generally, and the fourth is wealth, not

the blind god (Pluto), but one who is keen of sight, if only he has wisdom for

his companion. For wisdom is chief and leader of the divine class of goods,

and next follows temperance; and from the union of these two with courage

springs justice, and fourth in the scale of virtue is courage. All these naturally

take  precedence  of  the  other  goods,  and  this  is  the  order  in  which  the

legislator  must  place  them,  and  after  them  he  will  enjoin  the  rest  of  his

ordinances on the citizens with a view to these, the human looking to the

divine, and the divine looking to their leader mind. Some of his ordinances

will relate to contracts of marriage which they make one with another, and

then to the procreation and education of children, both male and female; the

duty of the lawgiver will be to take charge of his citizens, in youth and age,

and at every time of life, and to give them punishments and rewards; and in

reference to all their intercourse with one another, he ought to consider their

pains and pleasures and desires, and the vehemence of all their passions; heshould keep a watch over them, and blame and praise them rightly by the

mouth of the laws themselves. Also with regard to anger and terror, and the

other  perturbations  of  the  soul,  which  arise  out  of  misfortune,  and  the

deliverances from them which prosperity brings, and the experiences which

come to men in diseases, or in war, or poverty, or the opposite of these; in all

these states he should determine and teach what is the good and evil of the

condition of each. In the next place, the legislator has to be careful how the

citizens make their money and in what way they spend it, and to have an eye

to their mutual contracts and dissolutions of contracts, whether voluntary or

involuntary: he should see how they order all this, and consider where justice

as well as injustice is found or is wanting in their several dealings with one

another; and honour those who obey the law, and impose fixed penalties on

those who disobey, until the round of civil life is ended, and the time has

come for the consideration of the proper funeral rites and honours of the

dead. And the lawgiver reviewing his work, will appoint guardians to preside

over these things,--some who walk by intelligence, others by true opinion

only, and then mind will bind together all his ordinances and show them to be

in harmony with temperance and justice, and not with wealth or ambition.

This is the spirit, Stranger, in which I was and am desirous that you should

pursue the subject. And I want to know the nature of all these things, and how

they are arranged in the laws of Zeus, as they are termed, and in those of the

Pythian Apollo, which Minos and Lycurgus gave; and how the order of them

is discovered to his eyes, who has experience in laws gained either by study

or habit, although they are far from being self-evident to the rest of mankind

like ourselves.


CLEINIAS: How shall we proceed, Stranger?


ATHENIAN: I think that we must begin again as before, and first consider

the habit of courage; and then we will go on and discuss another and then

another form of virtue, if you please. In this way we shall have a model of the

whole; and with these and similar discourses we will beguile the way. And

when we have gone through all the virtues, we will show, by the grace of

God, that the institutions of which I was speaking look to virtue.


MEGILLUS: Very good; and suppose that you first criticize this praiser of

Zeus and the laws of Crete.ATHENIAN: I will try to criticize you and myself, as well as him, for the

argument is a common concern. Tell me,--were not first the syssitia, and

secondly the gymnasia, invented by your legislator with a view to war?


MEGILLUS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: And what comes third, and what fourth? For that, I think, is the

sort of enumeration which ought to be made of the remaining parts of virtue,

no matter whether you call them parts or what their name is, provided the

meaning is clear.


MEGILLUS: Then I, or any other Lacedaemonian, would reply that hunting

is third in order.


ATHENIAN: Let us see if we can discover what comes fourth and fifth.


MEGILLUS: I think that I can get as far as the fourth head, which is the

frequent endurance of pain, exhibited among us Spartans in certain hand- to-

hand fights; also in stealing with the prospect of getting a good beating; there

is,  too,  the  so-called  Crypteia,  or  secret  service,  in  which  wonderful

endurance is shown,--our people wander over the whole country by day and

by night, and even in winter have not a shoe to their foot, and are without

beds to lie upon, and have to attend upon themselves. Marvellous, too, is the

endurance  which  our  citizens  show  in  their  naked  exercises,  contending

against the violent summer heat; and there are many similar practices, to

speak of which in detail would be endless.


ATHENIAN: Excellent, O Lacedaemonian Stranger. But how ought we to

define courage? Is it to be regarded only as a combat against fears and pains,

or also against desires and pleasures, and against flatteries; which exercise

such  a  tremendous  power,  that  they  make  the  hearts  even  of  respectable

citizens to melt like wax?


MEGILLUS: I should say the latter.


ATHENIAN: In what preceded, as you will remember, our Cnosian friend

was speaking of a man or a city being inferior to themselves:--Were you not,Cleinias?


CLEINIAS: I was.


ATHENIAN:  Now,  which  is  in  the  truest  sense  inferior,  the  man  who  is

overcome by pleasure or by pain?


CLEINIAS: I should say the man who is overcome by pleasure; for all men

deem him to be inferior in a more disgraceful sense, than the other who is

overcome by pain.


ATHENIAN: But surely the lawgivers of Crete and Lacedaemon have not

legislated for a courage which is lame of one leg, able only to meet attacks

which come from the left, but impotent against the insidious flatteries which

come from the right?


CLEINIAS: Able to meet both, I should say.


ATHENIAN: Then let me once more ask, what institutions have you in either

of your states which give a taste of pleasures, and do not avoid them any

more than they avoid pains; but which set a person in the midst of them, and

compel or induce him by the prospect of reward to get the better of them?

Where is an ordinance about pleasure similar to that about pain to be found in

your laws? Tell me what there is of this nature among you:-- What is there

which  makes  your  citizen  equally  brave  against  pleasure  and  pain,

conquering what they ought to conquer, and superior to the enemies who are

most dangerous and nearest home?


MEGILLUS: I was able to tell you, Stranger, many laws which were directed

against pain; but I do not know that I can point out any great or obvious

examples of similar institutions which are concerned with pleasure; there are

some lesser provisions, however, which I might mention.


CLEINIAS: Neither can I show anything of that sort which is at all equally

prominent in the Cretan laws.


ATHENIAN: No wonder, my dear friends; and if, as is very likely, in oursearch after the true and good, one of us may have to censure the laws of the

others, we must not be offended, but take kindly what another says.


CLEINIAS: You are quite right, Athenian Stranger, and we will do as you

say.


ATHENIAN:  At  our  time  of  life,  Cleinias,  there  should  be  no  feeling  of

irritation.


CLEINIAS: Certainly not.


ATHENIAN: I will not at present determine whether he who censures the

Cretan or Lacedaemonian polities is right or wrong. But I believe that I can

tell better than either of you what the many say about them. For assuming

that you have reasonably good laws, one of the best of them will be the law

forbidding any young men to enquire which of them are right or wrong; but

with one mouth and one voice they must all agree that the laws are all good,

for they came from God; and any one who says the contrary is not to be

listened  to.  But  an  old  man  who  remarks  any  defect  in  your  laws  may

communicate his observation to a ruler or to an equal in years when no young

man is present.


CLEINIAS: Exactly so, Stranger; and like a diviner, although not there at the

time, you seem to me quite to have hit the meaning of the legislator, and to

say what is most true.


ATHENIAN: As there are no young men present, and the legislator has given

old men free licence, there will be no impropriety in our discussing these

very matters now that we are alone.


CLEINIAS:  True.  And  therefore  you  may  be  as  free  as  you  like  in  your

censure of our laws, for there is no discredit in knowing what is wrong; he

who receives what is said in a generous and friendly spirit will be all the

better for it.


ATHENIAN: Very good; however, I am not going to say anything against

your laws until to the best of my ability I have examined them, but I amgoing to raise doubts about them. For you are the only people known to us,

whether Greek or barbarian, whom the legislator commanded to eschew all

great pleasures and amusements and never to touch them; whereas in the

matter of pains or fears which we have just been discussing, he thought that

they  who  from  infancy  had  always  avoided  pains  and  fears  and  sorrows,

when they were compelled to face them would run away from those who

were hardened in them, and would become their subjects. Now the legislator

ought to have considered that this was equally true of pleasure; he should

have  said  to  himself,  that  if  our  citizens  are  from  their  youth  upward

unacquainted  with  the  greatest  pleasures,  and  unused  to  endure  amid  the

temptations of pleasure, and are not disciplined to refrain from all things evil,

the sweet feeling of pleasure will overcome them just as fear would overcome

the former class; and in another, and even a worse manner, they will be the

slaves of those who are able to endure amid pleasures, and have had the

opportunity of enjoying them, they being often the worst of mankind. One

half of their souls will be a slave, the other half free; and they will not be

worthy to be called in the true sense men and freemen. Tell me whether you

assent to my words?


CLEINIAS: On first hearing, what you say appears to be the truth; but to be

hasty in coming to a conclusion about such important matters would be very

childish and simple.


ATHENIAN: Suppose, Cleinias and Megillus, that we consider the virtue

which follows next of those which we intended to discuss (for after courage

comes temperance), what institutions shall we find relating to temperance,

either in Crete or Lacedaemon, which, like your military institutions, differ

from those of any ordinary state.


MEGILLUS: That is not an easy question to answer; still I should say that the

common meals and gymnastic exercises have been excellently devised for the

promotion both of temperance and courage.


ATHENIAN: There seems to be a difficulty, Stranger, with regard to states,

in making words and facts coincide so that there can be no dispute about

them. As in the human body, the regimen which does good in one way does

harm in another; and we can hardly say that any one course of treatment isadapted to a particular constitution. Now the gymnasia and common meals do

a great deal of good, and yet they are a source of evil in civil troubles; as is

shown in the case of the Milesian, and Boeotian, and Thurian youth, among

whom these institutions seem always to have had a tendency to degrade the

ancient and natural custom of love below the level, not only of man, but of

the beasts. The charge may be fairly brought against your cities above all

others,  and  is  true  also  of  most  other  states  which  especially  cultivate

gymnastics. Whether such matters are to be regarded jestingly or seriously, I

think  that  the  pleasure  is  to  be  deemed  natural  which  arises  out  of  the

intercourse between men and women; but that the intercourse of men with

men,  or  of  women  with  women,  is  contrary  to  nature,  and  that  the  bold

attempt was originally due to unbridled lust. The Cretans are always accused

of having invented the story of Ganymede and Zeus because they wanted to

justify themselves in the enjoyment of unnatural pleasures by the practice of

the god whom they believe to have been their lawgiver. Leaving the story, we

may observe that any speculation about laws turns almost entirely on pleasure

and pain, both in states and in individuals: these are two fountains which

nature lets flow, and he who draws from them where and when, and as much

as he ought, is happy; and this holds of men and animals--of individuals as

well as states; and he who indulges in them ignorantly and at the wrong time,

is the reverse of happy.


MEGILLUS: I admit, Stranger, that your words are well spoken, and I hardly

know what to say in answer to you; but still I think that the Spartan lawgiver

was quite right in forbidding pleasure. Of the Cretan laws, I shall leave the

defence to my Cnosian friend. But the laws of Sparta, in as far as they relate

to pleasure, appear to me to be the best in the world; for that which leads

mankind in general into the wildest pleasure and licence, and every other

folly, the law has clean driven out; and neither in the country nor in towns

which are under the control of Sparta, will you find revelries and the many

incitements of every kind of pleasure which accompany them; and any one

who meets a drunken and disorderly person, will immediately have him most

severely punished, and will not let him off on any pretence, not even at the

time of a Dionysiac festival; although I have remarked that this may happen

at  your  performances  'on  the  cart,'  as  they  are  called;  and  among  our

Tarentine colonists I have seen the whole city drunk at a Dionysiac festival;

but nothing of the sort happens among us.ATHENIAN: O Lacedaemonian Stranger, these festivities are praiseworthy

where there is a spirit of endurance, but are very senseless when they are

under no regulations. In order to retaliate, an Athenian has only to point out

the  licence  which  exists  among  your  women.  To  all  such  accusations,

whether they are brought against the Tarentines, or us, or you, there is one

answer which exonerates the practice in question from impropriety. When a

stranger expresses wonder at the singularity of what he sees, any inhabitant

will naturally answer him:--Wonder not, O stranger; this is our custom, and

you may very likely have some other custom about the same things. Now we

are speaking, my friends, not about men in general, but about the merits and

defects of the lawgivers themselves. Let us then discourse a little more at

length  about  intoxication,  which  is  a  very  important  subject,  and  will

seriously  task  the  discrimination  of  the  legislator.  I  am  not  speaking  of

drinking, or not drinking, wine at all, but of intoxication. Are we to follow

the custom of the Scythians, and Persians, and Carthaginians, and Celts, and

Iberians,  and  Thracians,  who  are  all  warlike  nations,  or  that  of  your

countrymen, for they, as you say, altogether abstain? But the Scythians and

Thracians, both men and women, drink unmixed wine, which they pour on

their  garments,  and  this  they  think  a  happy  and  glorious  institution.  The

Persians, again, are much given to other practices of luxury which you reject,

but they have more moderation in them than the Thracians and Scythians.


MEGILLUS: O best of men, we have only to take arms into our hands, and

we send all these nations flying before us.


ATHENIAN: Nay, my good friend, do not say that; there have been, as there

always will be, flights and pursuits of which no account can be given, and

therefore we cannot say that victory or defeat in battle affords more than a

doubtful  proof  of  the  goodness  or  badness  of  institutions.  For  when  the

greater states conquer and enslave the lesser, as the Syracusans have done the

Locrians,  who  appear  to  be  the  best-governed  people  in  their  part  of  the

world, or as the Athenians have done the Ceans (and there are ten thousand

other instances of the same sort of thing), all this is not to the point; let us

endeavour rather to form a conclusion about each institution in itself and say

nothing, at present, of victories and defeats. Let us only say that such and

such a custom is honourable, and another not. And first permit me to tell you

how good and bad are to be estimated in reference to these very matters.MEGILLUS: How do you mean?


ATHENIAN:  All  those  who  are  ready  at  a  moment's  notice  to  praise  or

censure any practice which is matter of discussion, seem to me to proceed in

a wrong way. Let me give you an illustration of what I mean:--You may

suppose a person to be praising wheat as a good kind of food, whereupon

another person instantly blames wheat, without ever enquiring into its effect

or use, or in what way, or to whom, or with what, or in what state and how,

wheat is to be given. And that is just what we are doing in this discussion. At

the very mention of the word intoxication, one side is ready with their praises

and the other with their censures; which is absurd. For either side adduce

their  witnesses  and  approvers,  and  some  of  us  think  that  we  speak  with

authority because we have many witnesses; and others because they see those

who abstain conquering in battle, and this again is disputed by us. Now I

cannot  say  that  I  shall  be  satisfied,  if  we  go  on  discussing  each  of  the

remaining laws in the same way. And about this very point of intoxication I

should like to speak in another way, which I hold to be the right one; for if

number is to be the criterion, are there not myriads upon myriads of nations

ready to dispute the point with you, who are only two cities?


MEGILLUS: I shall gladly welcome any method of enquiry which is right.


ATHENIAN: Let me put the matter thus:--Suppose a person to praise the

keeping of goats, and the creatures themselves as capital things to have, and

then some one who had seen goats feeding without a goatherd in cultivated

spots, and doing mischief, were to censure a goat or any other animal who

has no keeper, or a bad keeper, would there be any sense or justice in such

censure?


MEGILLUS: Certainly not.


ATHENIAN:  Does  a  captain  require  only  to  have  nautical  knowledge  in

order to be a good captain, whether he is sea-sick or not? What do you say?


MEGILLUS: I say that he is not a good captain if, although he have nautical

skill, he is liable to sea-sickness.ATHENIAN: And what would you say of the commander of an army? Will

he  be  able  to  command  merely  because  he  has  military  skill  if  he  be  a

coward, who, when danger comes, is sick and drunk with fear?


MEGILLUS: Impossible.


ATHENIAN: And what if besides being a coward he has no skill?


MEGILLUS: He is a miserable fellow, not fit to be a commander of men, but

only of old women.


ATHENIAN: And what would you say of some one who blames or praises

any sort of meeting which is intended by nature to have a ruler, and is well

enough when under his presidency? The critic, however, has never seen the

society meeting together at an orderly feast under the control of a president,

but always without a ruler or with a bad one:--when observers of this class

praise or blame such meetings, are we to suppose that what they say is of any

value?


MEGILLUS: Certainly not, if they have never seen or been present at such a

meeting when rightly ordered.


ATHENIAN: Reflect; may not banqueters and banquets be said to constitute

a kind of meeting?


MEGILLUS: Of course.


ATHENIAN: And did any one ever see this sort of convivial meeting rightly

ordered? Of course you two will answer that you have never seen them at all,

because they are not customary or lawful in your country; but I have come

across many of them in many different places, and moreover I have made

enquiries about them wherever I went, as I may say, and never did I see or

hear of anything of the kind which was carried on altogether rightly; in some

few particulars they might be right, but in general they were utterly wrong.


CLEINIAS: What do you mean, Stranger, by this remark? Explain. For we,

as you say, from our inexperience in such matters, might very likely notknow,  even  if  they  came  in  our  way,  what  was  right  or  wrong  in  such

societies.


ATHENIAN:  Likely  enough;  then  let  me  try  to  be  your  instructor:  You

would acknowledge, would you not, that in all gatherings of mankind, of

whatever sort, there ought to be a leader?


CLEINIAS: Certainly I should.


ATHENIAN: And we were saying just now, that when men are at war the

leader ought to be a brave man?


CLEINIAS: We were.


ATHENIAN: The brave man is less likely than the coward to be disturbed by

fears?


CLEINIAS: That again is true.


ATHENIAN: And if there were a possibility of having a general of an army

who was absolutely fearless and imperturbable, should we not by all means

appoint him?


CLEINIAS: Assuredly.


ATHENIAN: Now, however, we are speaking not of a general who is to

command an army, when foe meets foe in time of war, but of one who is to

regulate meetings of another sort, when friend meets friend in time of peace.


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: And that sort of meeting, if attended with drunkenness, is apt to

be unquiet.


CLEINIAS: Certainly; the reverse of quiet.


ATHENIAN: In the first place, then, the revellers as well as the soldiers will

require a ruler?CLEINIAS: To be sure; no men more so.


ATHENIAN: And we ought, if possible, to provide them with a quiet ruler?


CLEINIAS: Of course.


ATHENIAN: And he should be a man who understands society; for his duty

is to preserve the friendly feelings which exist among the company at the

time, and to increase them for the future by his use of the occasion.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: Must we not appoint a sober man and a wise to be our master

of the revels? For if the ruler of drinkers be himself young and drunken, and

not  over-wise,  only  by  some  special  good  fortune  will  he  be  saved  from

doing some great evil.


CLEINIAS: It will be by a singular good fortune that he is saved.


ATHENIAN: Now suppose such associations to be framed in the best way

possible in states, and that some one blames the very fact of their existence--

he may very likely be right. But if he blames a practice which he only sees

very much mismanaged, he shows in the first place that he is not aware of the

mismanagement, and also not aware that everything done in this way will

turn out to be wrong, because done without the superintendence of a sober

ruler. Do you not see that a drunken pilot or a drunken ruler of any sort will

ruin ship, chariot, army--anything, in short, of which he has the direction?


CLEINIAS: The last remark is very true, Stranger; and I see quite clearly the

advantage of an army having a good leader--he will give victory in war to his

followers, which is a very great advantage; and so of other things. But I do

not see any similar advantage which either individuals or states gain from the

good management of a feast; and I want you to tell me what great good will

be effected, supposing that this drinking ordinance is duly established.


ATHENIAN: If you mean to ask what great good accrues to the state from

the right training of a single youth, or of a single chorus--when the question isput  in  that  form,  we  cannot  deny  that  the  good  is  not  very  great  in  any

particular instance. But if you ask what is the good of education in general,

the answer is easy--that education makes good men, and that good men act

nobly, and conquer their enemies in battle, because they are good. Education

certainly gives victory, although victory sometimes produces forgetfulness of

education;  for  many  have  grown  insolent  from  victory  in  war,  and  this

insolence has engendered in them innumerable evils; and many a victory has

been and will be suicidal to the victors; but education is never suicidal.


CLEINIAS: You seem to imply, my friend, that convivial meetings, when

rightly ordered, are an important element of education.


ATHENIAN: Certainly I do.


CLEINIAS: And can you show that what you have been saying is true?


ATHENIAN: To be absolutely sure of the truth of matters concerning which

there  are  many  opinions,  is  an  attribute  of  the  Gods  not  given  to  man,

Stranger; but I shall be very happy to tell you what I think, especially as we

are now proposing to enter on a discussion concerning laws and constitutions.


CLEINIAS: Your opinion, Stranger, about the questions which are now being

raised, is precisely what we want to hear.


ATHENIAN: Very good; I will try to find a way of explaining my meaning,

and you shall try to have the gift of understanding me. But first let me make

an apology. The Athenian citizen is reputed among all the Hellenes to be a

great talker, whereas Sparta is renowned for brevity, and the Cretans have

more wit than words. Now I am afraid of appearing to elicit a very long

discourse out of very small materials. For drinking indeed may appear to be a

slight matter, and yet is one which cannot be rightly ordered according to

nature, without correct principles of music; these are


necessary to any clear or satisfactory treatment of the subject, and music

again runs up into education generally, and there is much to be said about all

this. What would you say then to leaving these matters for the present, and

passing on to some other question of law?MEGILLUS: O Athenian Stranger, let me tell you what perhaps you do not

know, that our family is the proxenus of your state. I imagine that from their

earliest youth all boys, when they are told that they are the proxeni of a

particular  state,  feel  kindly  towards  their  second  country;  and  this  has

certainly been my own feeling. I can well remember from the days of my

boyhood, how, when any Lacedaemonians praised or blamed the Athenians,

they used to say to me,--'See, Megillus, how ill or how well,' as the case

might be, 'has your state treated us'; and having always had to fight your

battles  against  detractors  when  I  heard  you  assailed,  I  became  warmly

attached to you. And I always like to hear the Athenian tongue spoken; the

common saying is quite true, that a good Athenian is more than ordinarily

good, for he is the only man who is freely and genuinely good by the divine

inspiration of his own nature, and is not manufactured. Therefore be assured

that I shall like to hear you say whatever you have to say.


CLEINIAS: Yes, Stranger; and when you have heard me speak, say boldly

what is in your thoughts. Let me remind you of a tie which unites you to

Crete. You must have heard here the story of the prophet Epimenides, who

was of my family, and came to Athens ten years before the Persian war, in

accordance with the response of the Oracle, and offered certain sacrifices

which the God commanded. The Athenians were at that time in dread of the

Persian invasion; and he said that for ten years they would not come, and that

when they came, they would go away again without accomplishing any of

their objects, and would suffer more evil than they inflicted. At that time my

forefathers formed ties of hospitality with you; thus ancient is the friendship

which I and my parents have had for you.


ATHENIAN: You seem to be quite ready to listen; and I am also ready to

perform  as  much  as  I  can  of  an  almost  impossible  task,  which  I  will

nevertheless attempt. At the outset of the discussion, let me define the nature

and power of education; for this is the way by which our argument must

travel onwards to the God Dionysus.


CLEINIAS: Let us proceed, if you please.


ATHENIAN: Well, then, if I tell you what are my notions of education, will

you consider whether they satisfy you?CLEINIAS: Let us hear.


ATHENIAN: According to my view, any one who would be good at anything

must practise that thing from his youth upwards, both in sport and earnest, in

its several branches: for example, he who is to be a good builder, should play

at building children's houses; he who is to be a good husbandman, at tilling

the ground; and those who have the care of their education should provide

them  when  young  with  mimic  tools.  They  should  learn  beforehand  the

knowledge which they will afterwards require for their art. For example, the

future carpenter should learn to measure or apply the line in play; and the

future warrior should learn riding, or some other exercise, for amusement,

and  the  teacher  should  endeavour  to  direct  the  children's  inclinations  and

pleasures, by the help of amusements, to their final aim in life. The most

important part of education is right training in the nursery. The soul of the

child in his play should be guided to the love of that sort of excellence in

which when he grows up to manhood he will have to be perfected. Do you

agree with me thus far?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Then let us not leave the meaning of education ambiguous or

ill- defined. At present, when we speak in terms of praise or blame about the

bringing-up  of  each  person,  we  call  one  man  educated  and  another

uneducated,  although  the  uneducated  man  may  be  sometimes  very  well

educated for the calling of a retail trader, or of a captain of a ship, and the

like. For we are not speaking of education in this narrower sense, but of that

other education in virtue from youth upwards, which makes a man eagerly

pursue the ideal perfection of citizenship, and teaches him how rightly to rule

and how to obey. This is the only education which, upon our view, deserves

the name; that other sort of training, which aims at the acquisition of wealth

or bodily strength, or mere cleverness apart from intelligence and justice, is

mean and illiberal, and is not worthy to be called education at all. But let us

not  quarrel  with  one  another  about  a  word,  provided  that  the  proposition

which has just been granted hold good: to wit, that those who are rightly

educated generally become good men. Neither must we cast a slight upon

education, which is the first and fairest thing that the best of men can ever

have,  and  which,  though  liable  to  take  a  wrong  direction,  is  capable  ofreformation. And this work of reformation is the great business of every man

while he lives.


CLEINIAS: Very true; and we entirely agree with you.


ATHENIAN: And we agreed before that they are good men who are able to

rule themselves, and bad men who are not.


CLEINIAS: You are quite right.


ATHENIAN: Let me now proceed, if I can, to clear up the subject a little

further by an illustration which I will offer you.


CLEINIAS: Proceed.


ATHENIAN: Do we not consider each of ourselves to be one?


CLEINIAS: We do.


ATHENIAN: And each one of us has in his bosom two counsellors, both

foolish and also antagonistic; of which we call the one pleasure, and the other

pain.


CLEINIAS: Exactly.


ATHENIAN:  Also  there  are  opinions  about  the  future,  which  have  the

general  name  of  expectations;  and  the  specific  name  of  fear,  when  the

expectation is of pain; and of hope, when of pleasure; and further, there is

reflection  about  the  good  or  evil  of  them,  and  this,  when  embodied  in  a

decree by the State, is called Law.


CLEINIAS: I am hardly able to follow you; proceed, however, as if I were.


MEGILLUS: I am in the like case.


ATHENIAN: Let us look at the matter thus: May we not conceive each of us

living  beings  to  be  a  puppet  of  the  Gods,  either  their  plaything  only,  or

created with a purpose--which of the two we cannot certainly know? But wedo know, that these affections in us are like cords and strings, which pull us

different  and  opposite  ways,  and  to  opposite  actions;  and  herein  lies  the

difference between virtue and vice. According to the argument there is one

among these cords which every man ought to grasp and never let go, but to

pull with it against all the rest; and this is the sacred and golden cord of

reason, called by us the common law of the State; there are others which are

hard and of iron, but this one is soft because golden; and there are several

other kinds. Now we ought always to cooperate with the lead of the best,

which is law. For inasmuch as reason is beautiful and gentle, and not violent,

her rule must needs have ministers in order to help the golden principle in

vanquishing the other principles. And thus the moral of the tale about our

being puppets will not have been lost, and the meaning of the expression

'superior or inferior to a man's self' will become clearer; and the individual,

attaining to right reason in this matter of pulling the strings of the puppet,

should live according to its rule; while the city, receiving the same from some

god or from one who has knowledge of these things, should embody it in a

law, to be her guide in her dealings with herself and with other states. In this

way virtue and vice will be more clearly distinguished by us. And when they

have  become  clearer,  education  and  other  institutions  will  in  like  manner

become clearer; and in particular that question of convivial entertainment,

which may seem, perhaps, to have been a very trifling matter, and to have

taken a great many more words than were necessary.


CLEINIAS: Perhaps, however, the theme may turn out not to be unworthy of

the length of discourse.


ATHENIAN: Very good; let us proceed with any enquiry which really bears

on our present object.


CLEINIAS: Proceed.


ATHENIAN: Suppose that we give this puppet of ours drink,--what will be

the effect on him?


CLEINIAS: Having what in view do you ask that question?


ATHENIAN: Nothing as yet; but I ask generally, when the puppet is broughtto the drink, what sort of result is likely to follow. I will endeavour to explain

my meaning more clearly: what I am now asking is this--Does the drinking of

wine heighten and increase pleasures and pains, and passions and loves?


CLEINIAS: Very greatly.


ATHENIAN: And are perception and memory, and opinion and prudence,

heightened and increased? Do not these qualities entirely desert a man if he

becomes saturated with drink?


CLEINIAS: Yes, they entirely desert him.


ATHENIAN: Does he not return to the state of soul in which he was when a

young child?


CLEINIAS: He does.


ATHENIAN: Then at that time he will have the least control over himself?


CLEINIAS: The least.


ATHENIAN: And will he not be in a most wretched plight?


CLEINIAS: Most wretched.


ATHENIAN:  Then  not  only  an  old  man  but  also  a  drunkard  becomes  a

second time a child?


CLEINIAS: Well said, Stranger.


ATHENIAN: Is there any argument which will prove to us that we ought to

encourage the taste for drinking instead of doing all we can to avoid it?


CLEINIAS: I suppose that there is; you at any rate, were just now saying that

you were ready to maintain such a doctrine.


ATHENIAN: True, I was; and I am ready still, seeing that you have both

declared that you are anxious to hear me.CLEINIAS: To be sure we are, if only for the strangeness of the paradox,

which  asserts  that  a  man  ought  of  his  own  accord  to  plunge  into  utter

degradation.


ATHENIAN: Are you speaking of the soul?


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: And what would you say about the body, my friend? Are you

not surprised at any one of his own accord bringing upon himself deformity,

leanness, ugliness, decrepitude?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Yet when a man goes of his own accord to a doctor's shop, and

takes medicine, is he not aware that soon, and for many days afterwards, he

will  be  in  a  state  of  body  which  he  would  die  rather  than  accept  as  the

permanent condition of his life? Are not those who train in gymnasia, at first

beginning reduced to a state of weakness?


CLEINIAS: Yes, all that is well known.


ATHENIAN:  Also  that  they  go  of  their  own  accord  for  the  sake  of  the

subsequent benefit?


CLEINIAS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: And we may conceive this to be true in the same way of other

practices?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And the same view may be taken of the pastime of drinking

wine, if we are right in supposing that the same good effect follows?


CLEINIAS: To be sure.


ATHENIAN: If such convivialities should turn out to have any advantageequal in importance to that of gymnastic, they are in their very nature to be

preferred to mere bodily exercise, inasmuch as they have no accompaniment

of pain.


CLEINIAS: True; but I hardly think that we shall be able to discover any

such benefits to be derived from them.


ATHENIAN: That is just what we must endeavour to show. And let me ask

you a question:--Do we not distinguish two kinds of fear, which are very

different?


CLEINIAS: What are they?


ATHENIAN: There is the fear of expected evil.


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: And there is the fear of an evil reputation; we are afraid of

being thought evil, because we do or say some dishonourable thing, which

fear we and all men term shame.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: These are the two fears, as I called them; one of which is the

opposite of pain and other fears, and the opposite also of the greatest and

most numerous sort of pleasures.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: And does not the legislator and every one who is good for

anything,  hold  this  fear  in  the  greatest  honour?  This  is  what  he  terms

reverence, and the confidence which is the reverse of this he terms insolence;

and the latter he always deems to be a very great evil both to individuals and

to states.


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: Does not this kind of fear preserve us in many important ways?What is there which so surely gives victory and safety in war? For there are

two  things  which  give  victory--confidence  before  enemies,  and  fear  of

disgrace before friends.


CLEINIAS: There are.


ATHENIAN: Then each of us should be fearless and also fearful; and why

we should be either has now been determined.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And when we want to make any one fearless, we and the law

bring him face to face with many fears.


CLEINIAS: Clearly.


ATHENIAN: And when we want to make him rightly fearful, must we not

introduce him to shameless pleasures, and train him to take up arms against

them, and to overcome them? Or does this principle apply to courage only,

and must he who would be perfect in valour fight against and overcome his

own natural character,--since if he be unpractised and inexperienced in such

conflicts, he will not be half the man which he might have been,--and are we

to suppose, that with temperance it is otherwise, and that he who has never

fought with the shameless and unrighteous temptations of his pleasures and

lusts, and conquered them, in earnest and in play, by word, deed, and act, will

still be perfectly temperate?


CLEINIAS: A most unlikely supposition.


ATHENIAN: Suppose that some God had given a fear-potion to men, and

that the more a man drank of this the more he regarded himself at every

draught as a child of misfortune, and that he feared everything happening or

about to happen to him; and that at last the most courageous of men utterly

lost his presence of mind for a time, and only came to himself again when he

had slept off the influence of the draught.


CLEINIAS: But has such a draught, Stranger, ever really been known amongmen?


ATHENIAN: No; but, if there had been, might not such a draught have been

of use to the legislator as a test of courage? Might we not go and say to him,

'O legislator, whether you are legislating for the Cretan, or for any other state,

would you not like to have a touchstone of the courage and cowardice of your

citizens?'


CLEINIAS: 'I should,' will be the answer of every one.


ATHENIAN: 'And you would rather have a touchstone in which there is no

risk and no great danger than the reverse?'


CLEINIAS: In that proposition every one may safely agree.


ATHENIAN: 'And in order to make use of the draught, you would lead them

amid these imaginary terrors, and prove them, when the affection of fear was

working  upon  them,  and  compel  them  to  be  fearless,  exhorting  and

admonishing them; and also honouring them, but dishonouring any one who

will not be persuaded by you to be in all respects such as you command him;

and  if  he  underwent  the  trial  well  and  manfully,  you  would  let  him  go

unscathed; but if ill, you would inflict a punishment upon him? Or would you

abstain from using the potion altogether, although you have no reason for

abstaining?'


CLEINIAS: He would be certain, Stranger, to use the potion.


ATHENIAN: This would be a mode of testing and training which would be

wonderfully easy in comparison with those now in use, and might be applied

to a single person, or to a few, or indeed to any number; and he would do

well who provided himself with the potion only, rather than with any number

of other things, whether he preferred to be by himself in solitude, and there

contend with his fears, because he was ashamed to be seen by the eye of man

until he was perfect; or trusting to the force of his own nature and habits, and

believing that he had been already disciplined sufficiently, he did not hesitate

to train himself in company with any number of others, and display his power

in conquering the irresistible change effected by the draught--his virtue beingsuch, that he never in any instance fell into any great unseemliness, but was

always himself, and left off before he arrived at the last cup, fearing that he,

like all other men, might be overcome by the potion.


CLEINIAS: Yes, Stranger, in that last case, too, he might equally show his

self-control.


ATHENIAN: Let us return to the lawgiver, and say to him:--'Well, lawgiver,

there is certainly no such fear-potion which man has either received from the

Gods or himself discovered; for witchcraft has no place at our board. But is

there any potion which might serve as a test of overboldness and excessive

and indiscreet boasting?


CLEINIAS: I suppose that he will say, Yes,--meaning that wine is such a

potion.


ATHENIAN: Is not the effect of this quite the opposite of the effect of the

other? When a man drinks wine he begins to be better pleased with himself,

and the more he drinks the more he is filled full of brave hopes, and conceit

of his power, and at last the string of his tongue is loosened, and fancying

himself wise, he is brimming over with lawlessness, and has no more fear or

respect, and is ready to do or say anything.


CLEINIAS: I think that every one will admit the truth of your description.


MEGILLUS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Now, let us remember, as we were saying, that there are two

things  which  should  be  cultivated  in  the  soul:  first,  the  greatest  courage;

secondly, the greatest fear--


CLEINIAS: Which you said to be characteristic of reverence, if I am not

mistaken.


ATHENIAN: Thank you for reminding me. But now, as the habit of courage

and  fearlessness  is  to  be  trained  amid  fears,  let  us  consider  whether  the

opposite quality is not also to be trained among opposites.CLEINIAS: That is probably the case.


ATHENIAN: There are times and seasons at which we are by nature more

than commonly valiant and bold; now we ought to train ourselves on these

occasions to be as free from impudence and shamelessness as possible, and to

be afraid to say or suffer or do anything that is base.


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN:  Are  not  the  moments  in  which  we  are  apt  to  be  bold  and

shameless such as these?--when we are under the influence of anger, love,

pride, ignorance, avarice, cowardice? or when wealth, beauty, strength, and

all the intoxicating workings of pleasure madden us? What is better adapted

than the festive use of wine, in the first place to test, and in the second place

to train the character of a man, if care be taken in the use of it? What is there

cheaper, or more innocent? For do but consider which is the greater risk:--

Would you rather test a man of a morose and savage nature, which is the

source of ten thousand acts of injustice, by making bargains with him at a risk

to yourself, or by having him as a companion at the festival of Dionysus? Or

would you, if you wanted to apply a touchstone to a man who is prone to

love, entrust your wife, or your sons, or daughters to him, perilling your

dearest interests in order to have a view of the condition of his soul? I might

mention  numberless  cases,  in  which  the  advantage  would  be  manifest  of

getting  to  know  a  character  in  sport,  and  without  paying  dearly  for

experience. And I do not believe that either a Cretan, or any other man, will

doubt that such a test is a fair test, and safer, cheaper, and speedier than any

other.


CLEINIAS: That is certainly true.


ATHENIAN: And this knowledge of the natures and habits of men's souls

will be of the greatest use in that art which has the management of them; and

that art, if I am not mistaken, is politics.


CLEINIAS: Exactly so.BOOK II.


ATHENIAN: And now we have to consider whether the insight into human

nature is the only benefit derived from well-ordered potations, or whether

there are not other advantages great and much to be desired. The argument

seems to imply that there are. But how and in what way these are to be

attained, will have to be considered attentively, or we may be entangled in

error.


CLEINIAS: Proceed.


ATHENIAN: Let me once more recall our doctrine of right education; which,

if I am not mistaken, depends on the due regulation of convivial intercourse.


CLEINIAS: You talk rather grandly.


ATHENIAN:  Pleasure  and  pain  I  maintain  to  be  the  first  perceptions  of

children, and I say that they are the forms under which virtue and vice are

originally present to them. As to wisdom and true and fixed opinions, happy

is the man who acquires them, even when declining in years; and we may say

that he who possesses them, and the blessings which are contained in them, is

a perfect man. Now I mean by education that training which is given by

suitable habits to the first instincts of virtue in children;-- when pleasure, and

friendship, and pain, and hatred, are rightly implanted in souls not yet capable

of understanding the nature of them, and who find them, after they have

attained reason, to be in harmony with her. This harmony of the soul, taken as

a whole, is virtue; but the particular training in respect of pleasure and pain,

which leads you always to hate what you ought to hate, and love what you

ought to love from the beginning of life to the end, may be separated off; and,

in my view, will be rightly called education.


CLEINIAS: I think, Stranger, that you are quite right in all that you have said

and are saying about education.


ATHENIAN:  I  am  glad  to  hear  that  you  agree  with  me;  for,  indeed,  the

discipline of pleasure and pain which, when rightly ordered, is a principle ofeducation, has been often relaxed and corrupted in human life. And the Gods,

pitying  the  toils  which  our  race  is  born  to  undergo,  have  appointed  holy

festivals, wherein men alternate rest with labour; and have given them the

Muses and Apollo, the leader of the Muses, and Dionysus, to be companions

in their revels, that they may improve their education by taking part in the

festivals of the Gods, and with their help. I should like to know whether a

common saying is in our opinion true to nature or not. For men say that the

young of all creatures cannot be quiet in their bodies or in their voices; they

are always wanting to move and cry out; some leaping and skipping, and

overflowing with sportiveness and delight at something, others uttering all

sorts  of  cries.  But,  whereas  the  animals  have  no  perception  of  order  or

disorder in their movements, that is, of rhythm or harmony, as they are called,

to us, the Gods, who, as we say, have been appointed to be our companions in

the dance, have given the pleasurable sense of harmony and rhythm; and so

they stir us into life, and we follow them, joining hands together in dances

and songs; and these they call choruses, which is a term naturally expressive

of  cheerfulness.  Shall  we  begin,  then,  with  the  acknowledgment  that

education is first given through Apollo and the Muses? What do you say?


CLEINIAS: I assent.


ATHENIAN:  And  the  uneducated  is  he  who  has  not  been  trained  in  the

chorus, and the educated is he who has been well trained?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And the chorus is made up of two parts, dance and song?


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: Then he who is well educated will be able to sing and dance

well?


CLEINIAS: I suppose that he will.


ATHENIAN: Let us see; what are we saying?CLEINIAS: What?


ATHENIAN: He sings well and dances well; now must we add that he sings

what is good and dances what is good?


CLEINIAS: Let us make the addition.


ATHENIAN: We will suppose that he knows the good to be good, and the

bad to be bad, and makes use of them accordingly: which now is the better

trained in dancing and music--he who is able to move his body and to use his

voice in what is understood to be the right manner, but has no delight in good

or hatred of evil; or he who is incorrect in gesture and voice, but is right in

his sense of pleasure and pain, and welcomes what is good, and is offended at

what is evil?


CLEINIAS:  There  is  a  great  difference,  Stranger,  in  the  two  kinds  of

education.


ATHENIAN: If we three know what is good in song and dance, then we truly

know  also  who  is  educated  and  who  is  uneducated;  but  if  not,  then  we

certainly shall not know wherein lies the safeguard of education, and whether

there is any or not.


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: Let us follow the scent like hounds, and go in pursuit of beauty

of figure, and melody, and song, and dance; if these escape us, there will be

no use in talking about true education, whether Hellenic or barbarian.


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: And what is beauty of figure, or beautiful melody? When a

manly soul is in trouble, and when a cowardly soul is in similar case, are they

likely to use the same figures and gestures, or to give utterance to the same

sounds?


CLEINIAS: How can they, when the very colours of their faces differ?ATHENIAN: Good, my friend; I may observe, however, in passing, that in

music  there  certainly  are  figures  and  there  are  melodies:  and  music  is

concerned with harmony and rhythm, so that you may speak of a melody or

figure having good rhythm or good harmony--the term is correct enough; but

to speak metaphorically of a melody or figure having a 'good colour,' as the

masters  of  choruses  do,  is  not  allowable,  although  you  can  speak  of  the

melodies  or  figures  of  the  brave  and  the  coward,  praising  the  one  and

censuring the other. And not to be tedious, let us say that the figures and

melodies which are expressive of virtue of soul or body, or of images of

virtue, are without exception good, and those which are expressive of vice are

the reverse of good.


CLEINIAS: Your suggestion is excellent; and let us answer that these things

are so.


ATHENIAN: Once more, are all of us equally delighted with every sort of

dance?


CLEINIAS: Far otherwise.


ATHENIAN: What, then, leads us astray? Are beautiful things not the same

to us all, or are they the same in themselves, but not in our opinion of them?

For no one will admit that forms of vice in the dance are more beautiful than

forms of virtue, or that he himself delights in the forms of vice, and others in

a muse of another character. And yet most persons say, that the excellence of

music  is  to  give  pleasure  to  our  souls.  But  this  is  intolerable  and

blasphemous;  there  is,  however,  a  much  more  plausible  account  of  the

delusion.


CLEINIAS: What?


ATHENIAN:  The  adaptation  of  art  to  the  characters  of  men.  Choric

movements are imitations of manners occurring in various actions, fortunes,

dispositions,--each particular is imitated, and those to whom the words, or

songs, or dances are suited, either by nature or habit or both, cannot help

feeling pleasure in them and applauding them, and calling them beautiful. But

those whose natures, or ways, or habits are unsuited to them, cannot delightin them or applaud them, and they call them base. There are others, again,

whose natures are right and their habits wrong, or whose habits are right and

their natures wrong, and they praise one thing, but are pleased at another. For

they  say  that  all  these  imitations  are  pleasant,  but  not  good.  And  in  the

presence of those whom they think wise, they are ashamed of dancing and

singing in the baser manner, or of deliberately lending any countenance to

such proceedings; and yet, they have a secret pleasure in them.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: And is any harm done to the lover of vicious dances or songs,

or any good done to the approver of the opposite sort of pleasure?


CLEINIAS: I think that there is.


ATHENIAN: 'I think' is not the word, but I would say, rather, 'I am certain.'

For must they not have the same effect as when a man associates with bad

characters,  whom  he  likes  and  approves  rather  than  dislikes,  and  only

censures playfully because he has a suspicion of his own badness? In that

case, he who takes pleasure in them will surely become like those in whom

he  takes  pleasure,  even  though  he  be  ashamed  to  praise  them.  And  what

greater good or evil can any destiny ever make us undergo?


CLEINIAS: I know of none.


ATHENIAN: Then in a city which has good laws, or in future ages is to have

them, bearing in mind the instruction and amusement which are given by

music, can we suppose that the poets are to be allowed to teach in the dance

anything which they themselves like, in the way of rhythm, or melody, or

words, to the young children of any well-conditioned parents? Is the poet to

train his choruses as he pleases, without reference to virtue or vice?


CLEINIAS: That is surely quite unreasonable, and is not to be thought of.


ATHENIAN: And yet he may do this in almost any state with the exception

of Egypt.CLEINIAS: And what are the laws about music and dancing in Egypt?


ATHENIAN: You will wonder when I tell you: Long ago they appear to have

recognized the very principle of which we are now speaking--that their young

citizens must be habituated to forms and strains of virtue. These they fixed,

and exhibited the patterns of them in their temples; and no painter or artist is

allowed to innovate upon them, or to leave the traditional forms and invent

new ones. To this day, no alteration is allowed either in these arts, or in music

at all. And you will find that their works of art are painted or moulded in the

same forms which they had ten thousand years ago;--this is literally true and

no exaggeration,-- their ancient paintings and sculptures are not a whit better

or worse than the work of to-day, but are made with just the same skill.


CLEINIAS: How extraordinary!


ATHENIAN:  I  should  rather  say,  How  statesmanlike,  how  worthy  of  a

legislator! I know that other things in Egypt are not so well. But what I am

telling  you  about  music  is  true  and  deserving  of  consideration,  because

showing that a lawgiver may institute melodies which have a natural truth

and correctness without any fear of failure. To do this, however, must be the

work of God, or of a divine person; in Egypt they have a tradition that their

ancient  chants  which  have  been  preserved  for  so  many  ages  are  the

composition of the Goddess Isis. And therefore, as I was saying, if a person

can only find in any way the natural melodies, he may confidently embody

them in a fixed and legal form. For the love of novelty which arises out of

pleasure in the new and weariness of the old, has not strength enough to

corrupt the consecrated song and dance, under the plea that they have become

antiquated. At any rate, they are far from being corrupted in Egypt.


CLEINIAS: Your arguments seem to prove your point.


ATHENIAN: May we not confidently say that the true use of music and of

choral festivities is as follows: We rejoice when we think that we prosper,

and again we think that we prosper when we rejoice?


CLEINIAS: Exactly.ATHENIAN: And when rejoicing in our good fortune, we are unable to be

still?


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: Our young men break forth into dancing and singing, and we

who are their elders deem that we are fulfilling our part in life when we look

on at them. Having lost our agility, we delight in their sports and merry-

making, because we love to think of our former selves; and gladly institute

contests for those who are able to awaken in us the memory of our youth.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: Is it altogether unmeaning to say, as the common people do

about festivals, that he should be adjudged the wisest of men, and the winner

of the palm, who gives us the greatest amount of pleasure and mirth? For on

such occasions, and when mirth is the order of the day, ought not he to be

honoured most, and, as I was saying, bear the palm, who gives most mirth to

the greatest number? Now is this a true way of speaking or of acting?


CLEINIAS: Possibly.


ATHENIAN: But, my dear friend, let us distinguish between different cases,

and not be hasty in forming a judgment: One way of considering the question

will be to imagine a festival at which there are entertainments of all sorts,

including  gymnastic,  musical,  and  equestrian  contests:  the  citizens  are

assembled; prizes are offered, and proclamation is made that any one who

likes may enter the lists, and that he is to bear the palm who gives the most

pleasure to the spectators--there is to be no regulation about the manner how;

but he who is most successful in giving pleasure is to be crowned victor, and

deemed to be the pleasantest of the candidates: What is likely to be the result

of such a proclamation?


CLEINIAS: In what respect?


ATHENIAN: There would be various exhibitions: one man, like Homer, will

exhibit  a  rhapsody,  another  a  performance  on  the  lute;  one  will  have  atragedy, and another a comedy. Nor would there be anything astonishing in

some one imagining that he could gain the prize by exhibiting a puppet-

show.  Suppose  these  competitors  to  meet,  and  not  these  only,  but

innumerable others as well--can you tell me who ought to be the victor?


CLEINIAS: I do not see how any one can answer you, or pretend to know,

unless he has heard with his own ears the several competitors; the question is

absurd.


ATHENIAN: Well, then, if neither of you can answer, shall I answer this

question which you deem so absurd?


CLEINIAS: By all means.


ATHENIAN: If very small children are to determine the question, they will

decide for the puppet show.


CLEINIAS: Of course.


ATHENIAN:  The  older  children  will  be  advocates  of  comedy;  educated

women, and young men, and people in general, will favour tragedy.


CLEINIAS: Very likely.


ATHENIAN: And I believe that we old men would have the greatest pleasure

in  hearing  a  rhapsodist  recite  well  the  Iliad  and  Odyssey,  or  one  of  the

Hesiodic poems, and would award the victory to him. But, who would really

be the victor?--that is the question.


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: Clearly you and I will have to declare that those whom we old

men adjudge victors ought to win; for our ways are far and away better than

any which at present exist anywhere in the world.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Thus far I too should agree with the many, that the excellenceof music is to be measured by pleasure. But the pleasure must not be that of

chance persons; the fairest music is that which delights the best and best

educated, and especially that which delights the one man who is pre- eminent

in virtue and education. And therefore the judges must be men of character,

for they will require both wisdom and courage; the true judge must not draw

his inspiration from the theatre, nor ought he to be unnerved by the clamour

of the many and his own incapacity; nor again, knowing the truth, ought he

through cowardice and unmanliness carelessly to deliver a lying judgment,

with  the  very  same  lips  which  have  just  appealed  to  the  Gods  before  he

judged. He is sitting not as the disciple of the theatre, but, in his proper place,

as  their  instructor,  and  he  ought  to  be  the  enemy  of  all  pandering  to  the

pleasure of the spectators. The ancient and common custom of Hellas, which

still prevails in Italy and Sicily, did certainly leave the judgment to the body

of spectators, who determined the victor by show of hands. But this custom

has  been  the  destruction  of  the  poets;  for  they  are  now  in  the  habit  of

composing with a view to please the bad taste of their judges, and the result is

that the spectators instruct themselves;--and also it has been the ruin of the

theatre; they ought to be having characters put before them better than their

own,  and  so  receiving  a  higher  pleasure,  but  now  by  their  own  act  the

opposite result follows. What inference is to be drawn from all this? Shall I

tell you?


CLEINIAS: What?


ATHENIAN: The inference at which we arrive for the third or fourth time is,

that education is the constraining and directing of youth towards that right

reason, which the law affirms, and which the experience of the eldest and

best has agreed to be truly right. In order, then, that the soul of the child may

not be habituated to feel joy and sorrow in a manner at variance with the law,

and those who obey the law, but may rather follow the law and rejoice and

sorrow at the same things as the aged--in order, I say, to produce this effect,

chants appear to have been invented, which really enchant, and are designed

to implant that harmony of which we speak. And, because the mind of the

child  is  incapable  of  enduring  serious  training,  they  are  called  plays  and

songs, and are performed in play; just as when men are sick and ailing in

their bodies, their attendants give them wholesome diet in pleasant meats and

drinks, but unwholesome diet in disagreeable things, in order that they maylearn, as they ought, to like the one, and to dislike the other. And similarly the

true legislator will persuade, and, if he cannot persuade, will compel the poet

to express, as he ought, by fair and noble words, in his rhythms, the figures,

and in his melodies, the music of temperate and brave and in every way good

men.


CLEINIAS: But do you really imagine, Stranger, that this is the way in which

poets generally compose in States at the present day? As far as I can observe,

except among us and among the Lacedaemonians, there are no regulations

like those of which you speak; in other places novelties are always being

introduced in dancing and in music, generally not under the authority of any

law, but at the instigation of lawless pleasures; and these pleasures are so far

from being the same, as you describe the Egyptian to be, or having the same

principles, that they are never the same.


ATHENIAN: Most true, Cleinias; and I daresay that I may have expressed

myself obscurely, and so led you to imagine that I was speaking of some

really existing state of things, whereas I was only saying what regulations I

would like to have about music; and hence there occurred a misapprehension

on  your  part.  For  when  evils  are  far  gone  and  irremediable,  the  task  of

censuring them is never pleasant, although at times necessary. But as we do

not  really  differ,  will  you  let  me  ask  you  whether  you  consider  such

institutions  to  be  more  prevalent  among  the  Cretans  and  Lacedaemonians

than among the other Hellenes?


CLEINIAS: Certainly they are.


ATHENIAN: And if they were extended to the other Hellenes, would it be an

improvement on the present state of things?


CLEINIAS: A very great improvement, if the customs which prevail among

them were such as prevail among us and the Lacedaemonians, and such as

you were just now saying ought to prevail.


ATHENIAN: Let us see whether we understand one another:--Are not the

principles of education and music which prevail among you as follows: you

compel your poets to say that the good man, if he be temperate and just, isfortunate and happy; and this whether he be great and strong or small and

weak, and whether he be rich or poor; and, on the other hand, if he have a

wealth passing that of Cinyras or Midas, and be unjust, he is wretched and

lives in misery? As the poet says, and with truth: I sing not, I care not about

him  who  accomplishes  all  noble  things,  not  having  justice;  let  him  who

'draws near and stretches out his hand against his enemies be a just man.' But

if he be unjust, I would not have him 'look calmly upon bloody death,' nor

'surpass in swiftness the Thracian Boreas; ' and let no other thing that is

called good ever be his. For the goods of which the many speak are not really

good: first in the catalogue is placed health, beauty next, wealth third; and

then innumerable others, as for example to have a keen eye or a quick ear,

and in general to have all the senses perfect; or, again, to be a tyrant and do as

you like; and the final consummation of happiness is to have acquired all

these things, and when you have acquired them to become at once immortal.

But you and I say, that while to the just and holy all these things are the best

of possessions, to the unjust they are all, including even health, the greatest of

evils. For in truth, to have sight, and hearing, and the use of the senses, or to

live at all without justice and virtue, even though a man be rich in all the so-

called goods of fortune, is the greatest of evils, if life be immortal; but not so

great, if the bad man lives only a very short time. These are the truths which,

if I am not mistaken, you will persuade or compel your poets to utter with

suitable accompaniments of harmony and rhythm, and in these they must

train up your youth. Am I not right? For I plainly declare that evils as they are

termed are goods to the unjust, and only evils to the just, and that goods are

truly good to the good, but evil to the evil. Let me ask again, Are you and I

agreed about this?


CLEINIAS: I think that we partly agree and partly do not.


ATHENIAN: When a man has health and wealth and a tyranny which lasts,

and  when  he  is  pre-eminent  in  strength  and  courage,  and  has  the  gift  of

immortality,  and  none  of  the  so-called  evils  which  counter-balance  these

goods, but only the injustice and insolence of his own nature--of such an one

you are, I suspect, unwilling to believe that he is miserable rather than happy.


CLEINIAS: That is quite true.ATHENIAN:  Once  more:  Suppose  that  he  be  valiant  and  strong,  and

handsome and rich, and does throughout his whole life whatever he likes,

still, if he be unrighteous and insolent, would not both of you agree that he

will of necessity live basely? You will surely grant so much?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And an evil life too?


CLEINIAS: I am not equally disposed to grant that.


ATHENIAN: Will he not live painfully and to his own disadvantage?


CLEINIAS: How can I possibly say so?


ATHENIAN: How! Then may Heaven make us to be of one mind, for now

we are of two. To me, dear Cleinias, the truth of what I am saying is as plain

as the fact that Crete is an island. And, if I were a lawgiver, I would try to

make the poets and all the citizens speak in this strain, and I would inflict the

heaviest penalties on any one in all the land who should dare to say that there

are bad men who lead pleasant lives, or that the profitable and gainful is one

thing, and the just another; and there are many other matters about which I

should make my citizens speak in a manner different from the Cretans and

Lacedaemonians  of  this  age,  and  I  may  say,  indeed,  from  the  world  in

general. For tell me, my good friends, by Zeus and Apollo tell me, if I were

to ask these same Gods who were your legislators,--Is not the most just life

also the pleasantest? or are there two lives, one of which is the justest and the

other  the  pleasantest?--and  they  were  to  reply  that  there  are  two;  and

thereupon I proceeded to ask, (that would be the right way of pursuing the

enquiry), Which are the happier--those who lead the justest, or those who

lead the pleasantest life? and they replied, Those who lead the pleasantest--

that would be a very strange answer, which I should not like to put into the

mouth of the Gods. The words will come with more propriety from the lips of

fathers and legislators, and therefore I will repeat my former questions to one

of them, and suppose him to say again that he who leads the pleasantest life is

the happiest. And to that I rejoin:--O my father, did you not wish me to live

as happily as possible? And yet you also never ceased telling me that I shouldlive as justly as possible. Now, here the giver of the rule, whether he be

legislator or father, will be in a dilemma, and will in vain endeavour to be

consistent with himself. But if he were to declare that the justest life is also

the happiest, every one hearing him would enquire, if I am not mistaken,

what is that good and noble principle in life which the law approves, and

which is superior to pleasure. For what good can the just man have which is

separated from pleasure? Shall we say that glory and fame, coming from

Gods  and  men,  though  good  and  noble,  are  nevertheless  unpleasant,  and

infamy pleasant? Certainly not, sweet legislator. Or shall we say that the not-

doing  of  wrong  and  there  being  no  wrong  done  is  good  and  honourable,

although there is no pleasure in it, and that the doing wrong is pleasant, but

evil and base?


CLEINIAS: Impossible.


ATHENIAN: The view which identifies the pleasant and the pleasant and the

just  and  the  good  and  the  noble  has  an  excellent  moral  and  religious

tendency. And the opposite view is most at variance with the designs of the

legislator, and is, in his opinion, infamous; for no one, if he can help, will be

persuaded to do that which gives him more pain than pleasure. But as distant

prospects are apt to make us dizzy, especially in childhood, the legislator will

try to purge away the darkness and exhibit the truth; he will persuade the

citizens, in some way or other, by customs and praises and words, that just

and  unjust  are  shadows  only,  and  that  injustice,  which  seems  opposed  to

justice, when contemplated by the unjust and evil man appears pleasant and

the just most unpleasant; but that from the just man's point of view, the very

opposite is the appearance of both of them.


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: And which may be supposed to be the truer judgment--that of

the inferior or of the better soul?


CLEINIAS: Surely, that of the better soul.


ATHENIAN: Then the unjust life must not only be more base and depraved,

but also more unpleasant than the just and holy life?CLEINIAS: That seems to be implied in the present argument.


ATHENIAN:  And  even  supposing  this  were  otherwise,  and  not  as  the

argument has proven, still the lawgiver, who is worth anything, if he ever

ventures to tell a lie to the young for their good, could not invent a more

useful lie than this, or one which will have a better effect in making them do

what is right, not on compulsion but voluntarily.


CLEINIAS: Truth, Stranger, is a noble thing and a lasting, but a thing of

which men are hard to be persuaded.


ATHENIAN:  And  yet  the  story  of  the  Sidonian  Cadmus,  which  is  so

improbable, has been readily believed, and also innumerable other tales.


CLEINIAS: What is that story?


ATHENIAN: The story of armed men springing up after the sowing of teeth,

which the legislator may take as a proof that he can persuade the minds of the

young of anything; so that he has only to reflect and find out what belief will

be of the greatest public advantage, and then use all his efforts to make the

whole community utter one and the same word in their songs and tales and

discourses all their life long. But if you do not agree with me, there is no

reason why you should not argue on the other side.


CLEINIAS: I do not see that any argument can fairly be raised by either of us

against what you are now saying.


ATHENIAN: The next suggestion which I have to offer is, that all our three

choruses shall sing to the young and tender souls of children, reciting in their

strains all the noble thoughts of which we have already spoken, or are about

to speak; and the sum of them shall be, that the life which is by the Gods

deemed to be the happiest is also the best;--we shall affirm this to be a most

certain truth; and the minds of our young disciples will be more likely to

receive these words of ours than any others which we might address to them.


CLEINIAS: I assent to what you say.ATHENIAN: First will enter in their natural order the sacred choir composed

of children, which is to sing lustily the heaven-taught lay to the whole city.

Next will follow the choir of young men under the age of thirty, who will call

upon the God Paean to testify to the truth of their words, and will pray him to

be gracious to the youth and to turn their hearts. Thirdly, the choir of elder

men, who are from thirty to sixty years of age, will also sing. There remain

those who are too old to sing, and they will tell stories, illustrating the same

virtues, as with the voice of an oracle.


CLEINIAS: Who are those who compose the third choir, Stranger? for I do

not clearly understand what you mean to say about them.


ATHENIAN: And yet almost all that I have been saying has been said with a

view to them.


CLEINIAS: Will you try to be a little plainer?


ATHENIAN: I was speaking at the commencement of our discourse, as you

will remember, of the fiery nature of young creatures: I said that they were

unable to keep quiet either in limb or voice, and that they called out and

jumped about in a disorderly manner; and that no other animal attained to any

perception of order, but man only. Now the order of motion is called rhythm,

and the order of the voice, in which high and low are duly mingled, is called

harmony; and both together are termed choric song. And I said that the Gods

had pity on us, and gave us Apollo and the Muses to be our playfellows and

leaders in the dance; and Dionysus, as I dare say that you will remember, was

the third.


CLEINIAS: I quite remember.


ATHENIAN: Thus far I have spoken of the chorus of Apollo and the Muses,

and I have still to speak of the remaining chorus, which is that of Dionysus.


CLEINIAS: How is that arranged? There is something strange, at any rate on

first hearing, in a Dionysiac chorus of old men, if you really mean that those

who are above thirty, and may be fifty, or from fifty to sixty years of age, are

to dance in his honour.ATHENIAN: Very true; and therefore it must be shown that there is good

reason for the proposal.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Are we agreed thus far?


CLEINIAS: About what?


ATHENIAN: That every man and boy, slave and free, both sexes, and the

whole city, should never cease charming themselves with the strains of which

we have spoken; and that there should be every sort of change and variation

of them in order to take away the effect of sameness, so that the singers may

always receive pleasure from their hymns, and may never weary of them?


CLEINIAS: Every one will agree.


ATHENIAN: Where, then, will that best part of our city which, by reason of

age and intelligence, has the greatest influence, sing these fairest of strains,

which are to do so much good? Shall we be so foolish as to let them off who

would give us the most beautiful and also the most useful of songs?


CLEINIAS: But, says the argument, we cannot let them off.


ATHENIAN: Then how can we carry out our purpose with decorum? Will

this be the way?


CLEINIAS: What?


ATHENIAN: When a man is advancing in years, he is afraid and reluctant to

sing;--he has no pleasure in his own performances; and if compulsion is used,

he will be more and more ashamed, the older and more discreet he grows;--is

not this true?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Well, and will he not be yet more ashamed if he has to stand up

and sing in the theatre to a mixed audience?--and if moreover when he isrequired to do so, like the other choirs who contend for prizes, and have been

trained under a singing master, he is pinched and hungry, he will certainly

have a feeling of shame and discomfort which will make him very unwilling

to exhibit.


CLEINIAS: No doubt.


ATHENIAN: How, then, shall we reassure him, and get him to sing? Shall

we  begin  by  enacting  that  boys  shall  not  taste  wine  at  all  until  they  are

eighteen years of age; we will tell them that fire must not be poured upon fire,

whether in the body or in the soul, until they begin to go to work-- this is a

precaution  which  has  to  be  taken  against  the  excitableness  of  youth;--

afterwards they may taste wine in moderation up to the age of thirty, but

while a man is young he should abstain altogether from intoxication and from

excess of wine; when, at length, he has reached forty years, after dinner at a

public mess, he may invite not only the other Gods, but Dionysus above all,

to the mystery and festivity of the elder men, making use of the wine which

he has given men to lighten the sourness of old age; that in age we may

renew our youth, and forget our sorrows; and also in order that the nature of

the  soul,  like  iron  melted  in  the  fire,  may  become  softer  and  so  more

impressible. In the first place, will not any one who is thus mellowed be more

ready and less ashamed to sing--I do not say before a large audience, but

before  a  moderate  company;  nor  yet  among  strangers,  but  among  his

familiars, and, as we have often said, to chant, and to enchant?


CLEINIAS: He will be far more ready.


ATHENIAN: There will be no impropriety in our using such a method of

persuading them to join with us in song.


CLEINIAS: None at all.


ATHENIAN: And what strain will they sing, and what muse will they hymn?

The strain should clearly be one suitable to them.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.ATHENIAN: And what strain is suitable for heroes? Shall they sing a choric

strain?


CLEINIAS: Truly, Stranger, we of Crete and Lacedaemon know no strain

other than that which we have learnt and been accustomed to sing in our

chorus.


ATHENIAN: I dare say; for you have never acquired the knowledge of the

most beautiful kind of song, in your military way of life, which is modelled

after the camp, and is not like that of dwellers in cities; and you have your

young men herding and feeding together like young colts. No one takes his

own individual colt and drags him away from his fellows against his will,

raging and foaming, and gives him a groom to attend to him alone, and trains

and rubs him down privately, and gives him the qualities in education which

will make him not only a good soldier, but also a governor of a state and of

cities. Such an one, as we said at first, would be a greater warrior than he of

whom Tyrtaeus sings; and he would honour courage everywhere, but always

as the fourth, and not as the first part of virtue, either in individuals or states.


CLEINIAS: Once more, Stranger, I must complain that you depreciate our

lawgivers.


ATHENIAN: Not intentionally, if at all, my good friend; but whither the

argument leads, thither let us follow; for if there be indeed some strain of

song more beautiful than that of the choruses or the public theatres, I should

like to impart it to those who, as we say, are ashamed of these, and want to

have the best.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN:  When  things  have  an  accompanying  charm,  either  the  best

thing  in  them  is  this  very  charm,  or  there  is  some  rightness  or  utility

possessed by them;--for example, I should say that eating and drinking, and

the  use  of  food  in  general,  have  an  accompanying  charm  which  we  call

pleasure; but that this rightness and utility is just the healthfulness of the

things served up to us, which is their true rightness.CLEINIAS: Just so.


ATHENIAN:  Thus,  too,  I  should  say  that  learning  has  a  certain

accompanying  charm  which  is  the  pleasure;  but  that  the  right  and  the

profitable, the good and the noble, are qualities which the truth gives to it.


CLEINIAS: Exactly.


ATHENIAN:  And  so  in  the  imitative  arts--if  they  succeed  in  making

likenesses, and are accompanied by pleasure, may not their works be said to

have a charm?


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: But equal proportions, whether of quality or quantity, and not

pleasure, speaking generally, would give them truth or rightness.


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN:  Then  that  only  can  be  rightly  judged  by  the  standard  of

pleasure, which makes or furnishes no utility or truth or likeness, nor on the

other hand is productive of any hurtful quality, but exists solely for the sake

of the accompanying charm; and the term 'pleasure' is most appropriately

applied to it when these other qualities are absent.


CLEINIAS: You are speaking of harmless pleasure, are you not?


ATHENIAN: Yes; and this I term amusement, when doing neither harm nor

good in any degree worth speaking of.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: Then, if such be our principles, we must assert that imitation is

not to be judged of by pleasure and false opinion; and this is true of all

equality, for the equal is not equal or the symmetrical symmetrical, because

somebody thinks or likes something, but they are to be judged of by the

standard of truth, and by no other whatever.CLEINIAS: Quite true.


ATHENIAN: Do we not regard all music as representative and imitative?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Then, when any one says that music is to be judged of by

pleasure, his doctrine cannot be admitted; and if there be any music of which

pleasure is the criterion, such music is not to be sought out or deemed to have

any real excellence, but only that other kind of music which is an imitation of

the good.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: And those who seek for the best kind of song and music ought

not to seek for that which is pleasant, but for that which is true; and the truth

of  imitation  consists,  as  we  were  saying,  in  rendering  the  thing  imitated

according to quantity and quality.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And every one will admit that musical compositions are all

imitative and representative. Will not poets and spectators and actors all agree

in this?


CLEINIAS: They will.


ATHENIAN: Surely then he who would judge correctly must know what

each  composition  is;  for  if  he  does  not  know  what  is  the  character  and

meaning of the piece, and what it represents, he will never discern whether

the intention is true or false.


CLEINIAS: Certainly not.


ATHENIAN:  And  will  he  who  does  not  know  what  is  true  be  able  to

distinguish what is good and bad? My statement is not very clear; but perhaps

you will understand me better if I put the matter in another way.CLEINIAS: How?


ATHENIAN: There are ten thousand likenesses of objects of sight?


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: And can he who does not know what the exact object is which

is  imitated,  ever  know  whether  the  resemblance  is  truthfully  executed?  I

mean, for example, whether a statue has the proportions of a body, and the

true situation of the parts; what those proportions are, and how the parts fit

into  one  another  in  due  order;  also  their  colours  and  conformations,  or

whether this is all confused in the execution: do you think that any one can

know about this, who does not know what the animal is which has been

imitated?


CLEINIAS: Impossible.


ATHENIAN: But even if we know that the thing pictured or sculptured is a

man,  who  has  received  at  the  hand  of  the  artist  all  his  proper  parts  and

colours and shapes, must we not also know whether the work is beautiful or

in any respect deficient in beauty?


CLEINIAS: If this were not required, Stranger, we should all of us be judges

of beauty.


ATHENIAN: Very true; and may we not say that in everything imitated,

whether in drawing, music, or any other art, he who is to be a competent

judge must possess three things;--he must know, in the first place, of what the

imitation is; secondly, he must know that it is true; and thirdly, that it has

been well executed in words and melodies and rhythms?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Then let us not faint in discussing the peculiar difficulty of

music.  Music  is  more  celebrated  than  any  other  kind  of  imitation,  and

therefore requires the greatest care of them all. For if a man makes a mistake

here, he may do himself the greatest injury by welcoming evil dispositions,and the mistake may be very difficult to discern, because the poets are artists

very inferior in character to the Muses themselves, who would never fall into

the monstrous error of assigning to the words of men the gestures and songs

of women; nor after combining the melodies with the gestures of freemen

would they add on the rhythms of slaves and men of the baser sort; nor,

beginning with the rhythms and gestures of freemen, would they assign to

them a melody or words which are of an opposite character; nor would they

mix up the voices and sounds of animals and of men and instruments, and

every other sort of noise, as if they were all one. But human poets are fond of

introducing  this  sort  of  inconsistent  mixture,  and  so  make  themselves

ridiculous  in  the  eyes  of  those  who,  as  Orpheus  says,  'are  ripe  for  true

pleasure.' The experienced see all this confusion, and yet the poets go on and

make still further havoc by separating the rhythm and the figure of the dance

from the melody, setting bare words to metre, and also separating the melody

and the rhythm from the words, using the lyre or the flute alone. For when

there  are  no  words,  it  is  very  difficult  to  recognize  the  meaning  of  the

harmony and rhythm, or to see that any worthy object is imitated by them.

And we must acknowledge that all this sort of thing, which aims only at

swiftness and smoothness and a brutish noise, and uses the flute and the lyre

not as the mere accompaniments of the dance and song, is exceedingly coarse

and tasteless. The use of either instrument, when unaccompanied, leads to

every sort of irregularity and trickery. This is all rational enough. But we are

considering not how our choristers, who are from thirty to fifty years of age,

and may be over fifty, are not to use the Muses, but how they are to use them.

And the considerations which we have urged seem to show in what way these

fifty  years'  old  choristers  who  are  to  sing,  may  be  expected  to  be  better

trained.  For  they  need  to  have  a  quick  perception  and  knowledge  of

harmonies  and  rhythms;  otherwise,  how  can  they  ever  know  whether  a

melody would be rightly sung to the Dorian mode, or to the rhythm which the

poet has assigned to it?


CLEINIAS: Clearly they cannot.


ATHENIAN: The many are ridiculous in imagining that they know what is in

proper harmony and rhythm, and what is not, when they can only be made to

sing  and  step  in  rhythm  by  force;  it  never  occurs  to  them  that  they  are

ignorant of what they are doing. Now every melody is right when it hassuitable harmony and rhythm, and wrong when unsuitable.


CLEINIAS: That is most certain.


ATHENIAN: But can a man who does not know a thing, as we were saying,

know that the thing is right?


CLEINIAS: Impossible.


ATHENIAN: Then now, as would appear, we are making the discovery that

our newly-appointed choristers, whom we hereby invite and, although they

are their own masters, compel to sing, must be educated to such an extent as

to be able to follow the steps of the rhythm and the notes of the song, that

they may know the harmonies and rhythms, and be able to select what are

suitable for men of their age and character to sing; and may sing them, and

have innocent pleasure from their own performance, and also lead younger

men to welcome with dutiful delight good dispositions. Having such training,

they  will  attain  a  more  accurate  knowledge  than  falls  to  the  lot  of  the

common people, or even of the poets themselves. For the poet need not know

the third point, viz., whether the imitation is good or not, though he can

hardly help knowing the laws of melody and rhythm. But the aged chorus

must know all the three, that they may choose the best, and that which is

nearest to the best; for otherwise they will never be able to charm the souls of

young men in the way of virtue. And now the original design of the argument

which was intended to bring eloquent aid to the Chorus of Dionysus, has

been accomplished to the best of our ability, and let us see whether we were

right:--I should imagine that a drinking assembly is likely to become more

and more tumultuous as the drinking goes on: this, as we were saying at first,

will certainly be the case.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Every man has a more than natural elevation; his heart is glad

within him, and he will say anything and will be restrained by nobody at such

a time; he fancies that he is able to rule over himself and all mankind.


CLEINIAS: Quite true.ATHENIAN: Were we not saying that on such occasions the souls of the

drinkers become like iron heated in the fire, and grow softer and younger, and

are easily moulded by him who knows how to educate and fashion them, just

as when they were young, and that this fashioner of them is the same who

prescribed for them in the days of their youth, viz., the good legislator; and

that he ought to enact laws of the banquet, which, when a man is confident,

bold, and impudent, and unwilling to wait his turn and have his share of

silence and speech, and drinking and music, will change his character into the

opposite--such laws as will infuse into him a just and noble fear, which will

take up arms at the approach of insolence, being that divine fear which we

have called reverence and shame?


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: And the guardians of these laws and fellow-workers with them

are the calm and sober generals of the drinkers; and without their help there is

greater difficulty in fighting against drink than in fighting against enemies

when  the  commander  of  an  army  is  not  himself  calm;  and  he  who  is

unwilling to obey them and the commanders of Dionysiac feasts who are

more  than  sixty  years  of  age,  shall  suffer  a  disgrace  as  great  as  he  who

disobeys military leaders, or even greater.


CLEINIAS: Right.


ATHENIAN: If, then, drinking and amusement were regulated in this way,

would not the companions of our revels be improved? they would part better

friends than they were, and not, as now, enemies. Their whole intercourse

would be regulated by law and observant of it, and the sober would be the

leaders of the drunken.


CLEINIAS: I think so too, if drinking were regulated as you propose.


ATHENIAN: Let us not then simply censure the gift of Dionysus as bad and

unfit to be received into the State. For wine has many excellences, and one

pre-eminent one, about which there is a difficulty in speaking to the many,

from a fear of their misconceiving and misunderstanding what is said.CLEINIAS: To what do you refer?


ATHENIAN: There is a tradition or story, which has somehow crept about

the world, that Dionysus was robbed of his wits by his stepmother Here, and

that  out  of  revenge  he  inspires  Bacchic  furies  and  dancing  madnesses  in

others; for which reason he gave men wine. Such traditions concerning the

Gods I leave to those who think that they may be safely uttered (compare

Euthyph.; Republic); I only know that no animal at birth is mature or perfect

in  intelligence;  and  in  the  intermediate  period,  in  which  he  has  not  yet

acquired his own proper sense, he rages and roars without rhyme or reason;

and when he has once got on his legs he jumps about without rhyme or

reason; and this, as you will remember, has been already said by us to be the

origin of music and gymnastic.


CLEINIAS: To be sure, I remember.


ATHENIAN: And did we not say that the sense of harmony and rhythm

sprang from this beginning among men, and that Apollo and the Muses and

Dionysus were the Gods whom we had to thank for them?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN:  The  other  story  implied  that  wine  was  given  man  out  of

revenge, and in order to make him mad; but our present doctrine, on the

contrary, is, that wine was given him as a balm, and in order to implant

modesty in the soul, and health and strength in the body.


CLEINIAS: That, Stranger, is precisely what was said.


ATHENIAN: Then half the subject may now be considered to have been

discussed; shall we proceed to the consideration of the other half?


CLEINIAS: What is the other half, and how do you divide the subject?


ATHENIAN:  The  whole  choral  art  is  also  in  our  view  the  whole  of

education; and of this art, rhythms and harmonies form the part which has to

do with the voice.CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: The movement of the body has rhythm in common with the

movement of the voice, but gesture is peculiar to it, whereas song is simply

the movement of the voice.


CLEINIAS: Most true.


ATHENIAN: And the sound of the voice which reaches and educates the

soul, we have ventured to term music.


CLEINIAS: We were right.


ATHENIAN:  And  the  movement  of  the  body,  when  regarded  as  an

amusement, we termed dancing; but when extended and pursued with a view

to the excellence of the body, this scientific training may be called gymnastic.


CLEINIAS: Exactly.


ATHENIAN: Music, which was one half of the choral art, may be said to

have been completely discussed. Shall we proceed to the other half or not?

What would you like?


CLEINIAS:  My  good  friend,  when  you  are  talking  with  a  Cretan  and

Lacedaemonian,  and  we  have  discussed  music  and  not  gymnastic,  what

answer are either of us likely to make to such an enquiry?


ATHENIAN: An answer is contained in your question; and I understand and

accept what you say not only as an answer, but also as a command to proceed

with gymnastic.


CLEINIAS: You quite understand me; do as you say.


ATHENIAN:  I  will;  and  there  will  not  be  any  difficulty  in  speaking

intelligibly  to  you  about  a  subject  with  which  both  of  you  are  far  more

familiar than with music.


CLEINIAS: There will not.ATHENIAN:  Is  not  the  origin  of  gymnastics,  too,  to  be  sought  in  the

tendency to rapid motion which exists in all animals; man, as we were saying,

having  attained  the  sense  of  rhythm,  created  and  invented  dancing;  and

melody arousing and awakening rhythm, both united formed the choral art?


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: And one part of this subject has been already discussed by us,

and there still remains another to be discussed?


CLEINIAS: Exactly.


ATHENIAN: I have first a final word to add to my discourse about drink, if

you will allow me to do so.


CLEINIAS: What more have you to say?


ATHENIAN: I should say that if a city seriously means to adopt the practice

of  drinking  under  due  regulation  and  with  a  view  to  the  enforcement  of

temperance, and in like manner, and on the same principle, will allow of

other pleasures, designing to gain the victory over them--in this way all of

them may be used. But if the State makes drinking an amusement only, and

whoever likes may drink whenever he likes, and with whom he likes, and add

to this any other indulgences, I shall never agree or allow that this city or this

man  should  practise  drinking.  I  would  go  further  than  the  Cretans  and

Lacedaemonians, and am disposed rather to the law of the Carthaginians, that

no one while he is on a campaign should be allowed to taste wine at all, but

that he should drink water during all that time, and that in the city no slave,

male or female, should ever drink wine; and that no magistrates should drink

during their year of office, nor should pilots of vessels or judges while on

duty taste wine at all, nor any one who is going to hold a consultation about

any matter of importance; nor in the day-time at all, unless in consequence of

exercise or as medicine; nor again at night, when any one, either man or

woman, is minded to get children. There are numberless other cases also in

which those who have good sense and good laws ought not to drink wine, so

that if what I say is true, no city will need many vineyards. Their husbandry

and their way of life in general will follow an appointed order, and theircultivation of the vine will be the most limited and the least common of their

employments. And this, Stranger, shall be the crown of my discourse about

wine, if you agree.


CLEINIAS: Excellent: we agree.BOOK III.


ATHENIAN: Enough of this. And what, then, is to be regarded as the origin

of government? Will not a man be able to judge of it best from a point of

view in which he may behold the progress of states and their transitions to

good or evil?


CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN: I mean that he might watch them from the point of view of

time, and observe the changes which take place in them during infinite ages.


CLEINIAS: How so?


ATHENIAN: Why, do you think that you can reckon the time which has

elapsed since cities first existed and men were citizens of them?


CLEINIAS: Hardly.


ATHENIAN: But are sure that it must be vast and incalculable?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN:  And  have  not  thousands  and  thousands  of  cities  come  into

being during this period and as many perished? And has not each of them had

every  form  of  government  many  times  over,  now  growing  larger,  now

smaller, and again improving or declining?


CLEINIAS: To be sure.


ATHENIAN: Let us endeavour to ascertain the cause of these changes; for

that  will  probably  explain  the  first  origin  and  development  of  forms  of

government.


CLEINIAS: Very good. You shall endeavour to impart your thoughts to us,

and we will make an effort to understand you.ATHENIAN: Do you believe that there is any truth in ancient traditions?


CLEINIAS: What traditions?


ATHENIAN: The traditions about the many destructions of mankind which

have been occasioned by deluges and pestilences, and in many other ways,

and of the survival of a remnant?


CLEINIAS: Every one is disposed to believe them.


ATHENIAN: Let us consider one of them, that which was caused by the

famous deluge.


CLEINIAS: What are we to observe about it?


ATHENIAN: I mean to say that those who then escaped would only be hill

shepherds,--small  sparks  of  the  human  race  preserved  on  the  tops  of

mountains.


CLEINIAS: Clearly.


ATHENIAN: Such survivors would necessarily be unacquainted with the arts

and  the  various  devices  which  are  suggested  to  the  dwellers  in  cities  by

interest or ambition, and with all the wrongs which they contrive against one

another.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: Let us suppose, then, that the cities in the plain and on the sea-

coast were utterly destroyed at that time.


CLEINIAS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: Would not all implements have then perished and every other

excellent  invention  of  political  or  any  other  sort  of  wisdom  have  utterly

disappeared?


CLEINIAS: Why, yes, my friend; and if things had always continued as theyare at present ordered, how could any discovery have ever been made even in

the least particular? For it is evident that the arts were unknown during ten

thousand times ten thousand years. And no more than a thousand or two

thousand years have elapsed since the discoveries of Daedalus, Orpheus and

Palamedes,--since Marsyas and Olympus invented music, and Amphion the

lyre--not to speak of numberless other inventions which are but of yesterday.


ATHENIAN:  Have  you  forgotten,  Cleinias,  the  name  of  a  friend  who  is

really of yesterday?


CLEINIAS: I suppose that you mean Epimenides.


ATHENIAN: The same, my friend; he does indeed far overleap the heads of

all mankind by his invention; for he carried out in practice, as you declare,

what of old Hesiod (Works and Days) only preached.


CLEINIAS: Yes, according to our tradition.


ATHENIAN: After the great destruction, may we not suppose that the state

of man was something of this sort:--In the beginning of things there was a

fearful illimitable desert and a vast expanse of land; a herd or two of oxen

would be the only survivors of the animal world; and there might be a few

goats, these too hardly enough to maintain the shepherds who tended them?


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: And of cities or governments or legislation, about which we are

now talking, do you suppose that they could have any recollection at all?


CLEINIAS: None whatever.


ATHENIAN: And out of this state of things has there not sprung all that we

now are and have: cities and governments, and arts and laws, and a great deal

of vice and a great deal of virtue?


CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN: Why, my good friend, how can we possibly suppose that thosewho knew nothing of all the good and evil of cities could have attained their

full development, whether of virtue or of vice?


CLEINIAS: I understand your meaning, and you are quite right.


ATHENIAN: But, as time advanced and the race multiplied, the world came

to be what the world is.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: Doubtless the change was not made all in a moment, but little

by little, during a very long period of time.


CLEINIAS: A highly probable supposition.


ATHENIAN: At first, they would have a natural fear ringing in their ears

which would prevent their descending from the heights into the plain.


CLEINIAS: Of course.


ATHENIAN: The fewness of the survivors at that time would have made

them all the more desirous of seeing one another; but then the means of

travelling either by land or sea had been almost entirely lost, as I may say,

with  the  loss  of  the  arts,  and  there  was  great  difficulty  in  getting  at  one

another; for iron and brass and all metals were jumbled together and had

disappeared in the chaos; nor was there any possibility of extracting ore from

them; and they had scarcely any means of felling timber. Even if you suppose

that some implements might have been preserved in the mountains, they must

quickly have worn out and vanished, and there would be no more of them

until the art of metallurgy had again revived.


CLEINIAS: There could not have been.


ATHENIAN: In how many generations would this be attained?


CLEINIAS: Clearly, not for many generations.


ATHENIAN: During this period, and for some time afterwards, all the artswhich require iron and brass and the like would disappear.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Faction and war would also have died out in those days, and

for many reasons.


CLEINIAS: How would that be?


ATHENIAN: In the first place, the desolation of these primitive men would

create in them a feeling of affection and goodwill towards one another; and,

secondly, they would have no occasion to quarrel about their subsistence, for

they  would  have  pasture  in  abundance,  except  just  at  first,  and  in  some

particular cases; and from their pasture-land they would obtain the greater

part  of  their  food  in  a  primitive  age,  having  plenty  of  milk  and  flesh;

moreover they would procure other food by the chase, not to be despised

either in quantity or quality. They would also have abundance of clothing,

and bedding, and dwellings, and utensils either capable of standing on the fire

or not; for the plastic and weaving arts do not require any use of iron: and

God has given these two arts to man in order to provide him with all such

things, that, when reduced to the last extremity, the human race may still

grow and increase. Hence in those days mankind were not very poor; nor was

poverty a cause of difference among them; and rich they could not have been,

having neither gold nor silver:--such at that time was their condition. And the

community which has neither poverty nor riches will always have the noblest

principles; in it there is no insolence or injustice, nor, again, are there any

contentions or envyings. And therefore they were good, and also because

they were what is called simple-minded; and when they were told about good

and evil, they in their simplicity believed what they heard to be very truth and

practised it. No one had the wit to suspect another of a falsehood, as men do

now; but what they heard about Gods and men they believed to be true, and

lived accordingly; and therefore they were in all respects such as we have

described them.


CLEINIAS: That quite accords with my views, and with those of my friend

here.ATHENIAN: Would not many generations living on in a simple manner,

although  ruder,  perhaps,  and  more  ignorant  of  the  arts  generally,  and  in

particular of those of land or naval warfare, and likewise of other arts, termed

in  cities  legal  practices  and  party  conflicts,  and  including  all  conceivable

ways of hurting one another in word and deed;--although inferior to those

who lived before the deluge, or to the men of our day in these respects, would

they not, I say, be simpler and more manly, and also more temperate and

altogether more just? The reason has been already explained.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: I should wish you to understand that what has preceded and

what is about to follow, has been, and will be said, with the intention of

explaining what need the men of that time had of laws, and who was their

lawgiver.


CLEINIAS: And thus far what you have said has been very well said.


ATHENIAN: They could hardly have wanted lawgivers as yet; nothing of

that sort was likely to have existed in their days, for they had no letters at this

early period; they lived by habit and the customs of their ancestors, as they

are called.


CLEINIAS: Probably.


ATHENIAN: But there was already existing a form of government which, if I

am not mistaken, is generally termed a lordship, and this still remains in

many places, both among Hellenes and barbarians (compare Arist. Pol.), and

is the government which is declared by Homer to have prevailed among the

Cyclopes:--


'They have neither councils nor judgments, but they dwell in hollow caves on

the tops of high mountains, and every one gives law to his wife and children,

and they do not busy themselves about one another.' (Odyss.)


CLEINIAS: That seems to be a charming poet of yours; I have read some

other verses of his, which are very clever; but I do not know much of him, forforeign poets are very little read among the Cretans.


MEGILLUS: But they are in Lacedaemon, and he appears to be the prince of

them all; the manner of life, however, which he describes is not Spartan, but

rather Ionian, and he seems quite to confirm what you are saying, when he

traces up the ancient state of mankind by the help of tradition to barbarism.


ATHENIAN: Yes, he does confirm it; and we may accept his witness to the

fact that such forms of government sometimes arise.


CLEINIAS: We may.


ATHENIAN:  And  were  not  such  states  composed  of  men  who  had  been

dispersed in single habitations and families by the poverty which attended the

devastations; and did not the eldest then rule among them, because with them

government originated in the authority of a father and a mother, whom, like a

flock of birds, they followed, forming one troop under the patriarchal rule

and sovereignty of their parents, which of all sovereignties is the most just?


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: After this they came together in greater numbers, and increased

the size of their cities, and betook themselves to husbandry, first of all at the

foot  of  the  mountains,  and  made  enclosures  of  loose  walls  and  works  of

defence, in order to keep off wild beasts; thus creating a single large and

common habitation.


CLEINIAS: Yes; at least we may suppose so.


ATHENIAN: There is another thing which would probably happen.


CLEINIAS: What?


ATHENIAN: When these larger habitations grew up out of the lesser original

ones, each of the lesser ones would survive in the larger; every family would

be  under  the  rule  of  the  eldest,  and,  owing  to  their  separation  from  one

another, would have peculiar customs in things divine and human, which they

would have received from their several parents who had educated them; andthese customs would incline them to order, when the parents had the element

of  order  in  their  nature,  and  to  courage,  when  they  had  the  element  of

courage. And they would naturally stamp upon their children, and upon their

children's children, their own likings; and, as we are saying, they would find

their way into the larger society, having already their own peculiar laws.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And every man surely likes his own laws best, and the laws of

others not so well.


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: Then now we seem to have stumbled upon the beginnings of

legislation.


CLEINIAS: Exactly.


ATHENIAN: The next step will be that these persons who have met together,

will select some arbiters, who will review the laws of all of them, and will

publicly present such as they approve to the chiefs who lead the tribes, and

who are in a manner their kings, allowing them to choose those which they

think  best.  These  persons  will  themselves  be  called  legislators,  and  will

appoint  the  magistrates,  framing  some  sort  of  aristocracy,  or  perhaps

monarchy, out of the dynasties or lordships, and in this altered state of the

government they will live.


CLEINIAS: Yes, that would be the natural order of things.


ATHENIAN: Then, now let us speak of a third form of government, in which

all other forms and conditions of polities and cities concur.


CLEINIAS: What is that?


ATHENIAN:  The  form  which  in  fact  Homer  indicates  as  following  the

second. This third form arose when, as he says, Dardanus founded Dardania:-

-'For not as yet had the holy Ilium been built on the plain to be a city of

speaking men; but they were still dwelling at the foot of many-fountained

Ida.'


For indeed, in these verses, and in what he said of the Cyclopes, he speaks

the words of God and nature; for poets are a divine race, and often in their

strains, by the aid of the Muses and the Graces, they attain truth.


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: Then now let us proceed with the rest of our tale, which will

probably be found to illustrate in some degree our proposed design:--Shall we

do so?


CLEINIAS: By all means.


ATHENIAN: Ilium was built, when they descended from the mountain, in a

large and fair plain, on a sort of low hill, watered by many rivers descending

from Ida.


CLEINIAS: Such is the tradition.


ATHENIAN: And we must suppose this event to have taken place many ages

after the deluge?


ATHENIAN:  A  marvellous  forgetfulness  of  the  former  destruction  would

appear to have come over them, when they placed their town right under

numerous streams flowing from the heights, trusting for their security to not

very high hills, either.


CLEINIAS: There must have been a long interval, clearly.


ATHENIAN: And, as population increased, many other cities would begin to

be inhabited.


CLEINIAS: Doubtless.


ATHENIAN: Those cities made war against Troy--by sea as well as land--forat that time men were ceasing to be afraid of the sea.


CLEINIAS: Clearly.


ATHENIAN: The Achaeans remained ten years, and overthrew Troy.


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: And during the ten years in which the Achaeans were besieging

Ilium, the homes of the besiegers were falling into an evil plight. Their youth

revolted; and when the soldiers returned to their own cities and families, they

did not receive them properly, and as they ought to have done, and numerous

deaths, murders, exiles, were the consequence. The exiles came again, under

a new name, no longer Achaeans, but Dorians,--a name which they derived

from Dorieus; for it was he who gathered them together. The rest of the story

is told by you Lacedaemonians as part of the history of Sparta.


MEGILLUS: To be sure.


ATHENIAN: Thus, after digressing from the original subject of laws into

music and drinking-bouts, the argument has, providentially, come back to the

same  point,  and  presents  to  us  another  handle.  For  we  have  reached  the

settlement  of  Lacedaemon;  which,  as  you  truly  say,  is  in  laws  and  in

institutions the sister of Crete. And we are all the better for the digression,

because  we  have  gone  through  various  governments  and  settlements,  and

have  been  present  at  the  foundation  of  a  first,  second,  and  third  state,

succeeding  one  another  in  infinite  time.  And  now  there  appears  on  the

horizon a fourth state or nation which was once in process of settlement and

has continued settled to this day. If, out of all this, we are able to discern what

is  well  or  ill  settled,  and  what  laws  are  the  salvation  and  what  are  the

destruction of cities, and what changes would make a state happy, O Megillus

and Cleinias, we may now begin again, unless we have some fault to find

with the previous discussion.


MEGILLUS: If some God, Stranger, would promise us that our new enquiry

about legislation would be as good and full as the present, I would go a great

way to hear such another, and would think that a day as long as this --and weare  now  approaching  the  longest  day  of  the  year--was  too  short  for  the

discussion.


ATHENIAN: Then I suppose that we must consider this subject?


MEGILLUS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN:  Let  us  place  ourselves  in  thought  at  the  moment  when

Lacedaemon and Argos and Messene and the rest of the Peloponnesus were

all in complete subjection, Megillus, to your ancestors; for afterwards, as the

legend informs us, they divided their army into three portions, and settled

three cities, Argos, Messene, Lacedaemon.


MEGILLUS: True.


ATHENIAN:  Temenus  was  the  king  of  Argos,  Cresphontes  of  Messene,

Procles and Eurysthenes of Lacedaemon.


MEGILLUS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: To these kings all the men of that day made oath that they

would assist them, if any one subverted their kingdom.


MEGILLUS: True.


ATHENIAN: But can a kingship be destroyed, or was any other form of

government ever destroyed, by any but the rulers themselves? No indeed, by

Zeus. Have we already forgotten what was said a little while ago?


MEGILLUS: No.


ATHENIAN:  And  may  we  not  now  further  confirm  what  was  then

mentioned? For we have come upon facts which have brought us back again

to the same principle; so that, in resuming the discussion, we shall not be

enquiring about an empty theory, but about events which actually happened.

The case was as follows:--Three royal heroes made oath to three cities which

were under a kingly government, and the cities to the kings, that both rulers

and subjects should govern and be governed according to the laws whichwere common to all of them: the rulers promised that as time and the race

went forward they would not make their rule more arbitrary; and the subjects

said that, if the rulers observed these conditions, they would never subvert or

permit others to subvert those kingdoms; the kings were to assist kings and

peoples when injured, and the peoples were to assist peoples and kings in like

manner. Is not this the fact?


MEGILLUS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: And the three states to whom these laws were given, whether

their kings or any others were the authors of them, had therefore the greatest

security for the maintenance of their constitutions?


MEGILLUS: What security?


ATHENIAN: That the other two states were always to come to the rescue

against a rebellious third.


MEGILLUS: True.


ATHENIAN: Many persons say that legislators ought to impose such laws as

the mass of the people will be ready to receive; but this is just as if one were

to command gymnastic masters or physicians to treat or cure their pupils or

patients in an agreeable manner.


MEGILLUS: Exactly.


ATHENIAN: Whereas the physician may often be too happy if he can restore

health, and make the body whole, without any very great infliction of pain.


MEGILLUS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: There was also another advantage possessed by the men of that

day, which greatly lightened the task of passing laws.


MEGILLUS: What advantage?


ATHENIAN:  The  legislators  of  that  day,  when  they  equalized  property,escaped the great accusation which generally arises in legislation, if a person

attempts to disturb the possession of land, or to abolish debts, because he sees

that without this reform there can never be any real equality. Now, in general,

when the legislator attempts to make a new settlement of such matters, every

one  meets  him  with  the  cry,  that  'he  is  not  to  disturb  vested  interests,'--

declaring  with  imprecations  that  he  is  introducing  agrarian  laws  and

cancelling of debts, until a man is at his wits' end; whereas no one could

quarrel  with  the  Dorians  for  distributing  the  land,--there  was  nothing  to

hinder them; and as for debts, they had none which were considerable or of

old standing.


MEGILLUS: Very true.


ATHENIAN:  But  then,  my  good  friends,  why  did  the  settlement  and

legislation of their country turn out so badly?


MEGILLUS: How do you mean; and why do you blame them?


ATHENIAN:  There  were  three  kingdoms,  and  of  these,  two  quickly

corrupted  their  original  constitution  and  laws,  and  the  only  one  which

remained was the Spartan.


MEGILLUS: The question which you ask is not easily answered.


ATHENIAN: And yet must be answered when we are enquiring about laws,

this being our old man's sober game of play, whereby we beguile the way, as

I was saying when we first set out on our journey.


MEGILLUS: Certainly; and we must find out why this was.


ATHENIAN: What laws are more worthy of our attention than those which

have regulated such cities? or what settlements of states are greater or more

famous?


MEGILLUS: I know of none.


ATHENIAN: Can we doubt that your ancestors intended these institutions

not only for the protection of Peloponnesus, but of all the Hellenes, in casethey were attacked by the barbarian? For the inhabitants of the region about

Ilium, when they provoked by their insolence the Trojan war, relied upon the

power of the Assyrians and the Empire of Ninus, which still existed and had a

great prestige; the people of those days fearing the united Assyrian Empire

just as we now fear the Great King. And the second capture of Troy was a

serious offence against them, because Troy was a portion of the Assyrian

Empire. To meet the danger the single army was distributed between three

cities by the royal brothers, sons of Heracles, --a fair device, as it seemed, and

a far better arrangement than the expedition against Troy. For, firstly, the

people of that day had, as they thought, in the Heraclidae better leaders than

the Pelopidae; in the next place, they considered that their army was superior

in valour to that which went against Troy; for, although the latter conquered

the Trojans, they were themselves conquered by the Heraclidae--Achaeans by

Dorians. May we not suppose that this was the intention with which the men

of those days framed the constitutions of their states?


MEGILLUS: Quite true.


ATHENIAN: And would not men who had shared with one another many

dangers, and were governed by a single race of royal brothers, and had taken

the advice of oracles, and in particular of the Delphian Apollo, be likely to

think that such states would be firmly and lastingly established?


MEGILLUS: Of course they would.


ATHENIAN: Yet these institutions, of which such great expectations were

entertained, seem to have all rapidly vanished away; with the exception, as I

was saying, of that small part of them which existed in your land. And this

third  part  has  never  to  this  day  ceased  warring  against  the  two  others;

whereas, if the original idea had been carried out, and they had agreed to be

one, their power would have been invincible in war.


MEGILLUS: No doubt.


ATHENIAN: But what was the ruin of this glorious confederacy? Here is a

subject well worthy of consideration.MEGILLUS: Certainly, no one will ever find more striking instances of laws

or governments being the salvation or destruction of great and noble interests,

than are here presented to his view.


ATHENIAN:  Then  now  we  seem  to  have  happily  arrived  at  a  real  and

important question.


MEGILLUS: Very true.


ATHENIAN:  Did  you  never  remark,  sage  friend,  that  all  men,  and  we

ourselves  at  this  moment,  often  fancy  that  they  see  some  beautiful  thing

which might have effected wonders if any one had only known how to make

a right use of it in some way; and yet this mode of looking at things may turn

out after all to be a mistake, and not according to nature, either in our own

case or in any other?


MEGILLUS: To what are you referring, and what do you mean?


ATHENIAN: I was thinking of my own admiration of the aforesaid Heracleid

expedition, which was so noble, and might have had such wonderful results

for the Hellenes, if only rightly used; and I was just laughing at myself.


MEGILLUS: But were you not right and wise in speaking as you did, and we

in assenting to you?


ATHENIAN: Perhaps; and yet I cannot help observing that any one who sees

anything great or powerful, immediately has the feeling that--'If the owner

only knew how to use his great and noble possession, how happy would he

be, and what great results would he achieve!'


MEGILLUS: And would he not be justified?


ATHENIAN: Reflect; in what point of view does this sort of praise appear

just: First, in reference to the question in hand:--If the then commanders had

known how to arrange their army properly, how would they have attained

success? Would not this have been the way? They would have bound them all

firmly  together  and  preserved  them  for  ever,  giving  them  freedom  anddominion at pleasure, combined with the power of doing in the whole world,

Hellenic and barbarian, whatever they and their descendants desired. What

other aim would they have had?


MEGILLUS: Very good.


ATHENIAN:  Suppose  any  one  were  in  the  same  way  to  express  his

admiration at the sight of great wealth or family honour, or the like, he would

praise them under the idea that through them he would attain either all or the

greater and chief part of what he desires.


MEGILLUS: He would.


ATHENIAN: Well, now, and does not the argument show that there is one

common desire of all mankind?


MEGILLUS: What is it?


ATHENIAN: The desire which a man has, that all things, if possible,--at any

rate, things human,--may come to pass in accordance with his soul's desire.


MEGILLUS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And having this desire always, and at every time of life, in

youth, in manhood, in age, he cannot help always praying for the fulfilment

of it.


MEGILLUS: No doubt.


ATHENIAN: And we join in the prayers of our friends, and ask for them

what they ask for themselves.


MEGILLUS: We do.


ATHENIAN: Dear is the son to the father--the younger to the elder.


MEGILLUS: Of course.