Sophist,  and  therefore  on  the  Politicus  (compare  Theaet.,  Soph.).  But  the

objection is in reality fanciful, and rests on the assumption that the doctrine

of the Ideas was held by Plato throughout his life in the same form. For the

truth  is,  that  the  Platonic  Ideas  were  in  constant  process  of  growth  and

transmutation;  sometimes  veiled  in  poetry  and  mythology,  then  again

emerging as fixed Ideas, in some passages regarded as absolute and eternal,

and in others as relative to the human mind, existing in and derived from

external objects as well as transcending them. The anamnesis of the Ideas is

chiefly insisted upon in the mythical portions of the dialogues, and really

occupies a very small space in the entire works of Plato. Their transcendental

existence is not asserted, and is therefore implicitly denied in the Philebus;

different forms are ascribed to them in the Republic, and they are mentioned

in  the  Theaetetus,  the  Sophist,  the  Politicus,  and  the  Laws,  much  as

Universals would be spoken of in modern books. Indeed, there are very faint

traces of the transcendental doctrine of Ideas, that is, of their existence apart

from the mind, in any of Plato's writings, with the exception of the Meno, the

Phaedrus, the Phaedo, and in portions of the Republic. The stereotyped form

which Aristotle has given to them is not found in Plato (compare Essay on

the Platonic Ideas in the Introduction to the Meno.)


  The full discussion of this subject involves a comprehensive survey of the

philosophy  of  Plato,  which  would  be  out  of  place  here.  But,  without

digressing further from the immediate subject of the Parmenides, we may

remark that Plato is quite serious in his objections to his own doctrines: nor

does Socrates attempt to offer any answer to them. The perplexities which

surround the one and many in the sphere of the Ideas are also alluded to in

the  Philebus,  and  no  answer  is  given  to  them.  Nor  have  they  ever  been

answered,  nor  can  they  be  answered  by  any  one  else  who  separates  the

phenomenal from the real. To suppose that Plato, at a later period of his life,

reached  a  point  of  view  from  which  he  was  able  to  answer  them,  is  a

groundless assumption. The real progress of Plato's own mind has been partly

concealed from us by the dogmatic statements of Aristotle, and also by the

degeneracy of his own followers, with whom a doctrine of numbers quickly

superseded Ideas.


  As a preparation for answering some of the difficulties which have been

suggested, we may begin by sketching the first portion of the dialogue:--  Cephalus, of Clazomenae in Ionia, the birthplace of Anaxagoras, a citizen

of  no  mean  city  in  the  history  of  philosophy,  who  is  the  narrator  of  the

dialogue, describes himself as meeting Adeimantus and Glaucon in the Agora

at  Athens.  'Welcome,  Cephalus:  can  we  do  anything  for  you  in  Athens?'

'Why, yes: I came to ask a favour of you. First, tell me your half- brother's

name, which I have forgotten--he was a mere child when I was last here;--I

know his father's, which is Pyrilampes.' 'Yes, and the name of our brother is

Antiphon. But why do you ask?' 'Let me introduce to you some countrymen

of  mine,  who  are  lovers  of  philosophy;  they  have  heard  that  Antiphon

remembers a conversation of Socrates with Parmenides and Zeno, of which

the report came to him from Pythodorus, Zeno's friend.' 'That is quite true.'

'And can they hear the dialogue?' 'Nothing easier; in the days of his youth he

made  a  careful  study  of  the  piece;  at  present,  his  thoughts  have  another

direction: he takes after his grandfather, and has given up philosophy for

horses.'


  'We went to look for him, and found him giving instructions to a worker

in brass about a bridle. When he had done with him, and had learned from his

brothers the purpose of our visit, he saluted me as an old acquaintance, and

we asked him to repeat the dialogue. At first, he complained of the trouble,

but he soon consented. He told us that Pythodorus had described to him the

appearance of Parmenides and Zeno; they had come to Athens at the great

Panathenaea, the former being at the time about sixty-five years old, aged but

well-favoured--Zeno, who was said to have been beloved of Parmenides in

the days of his youth, about forty, and very good-looking:-- that they lodged

with Pythodorus at the Ceramicus outside the wall, whither Socrates, then a

very young man, came to see them: Zeno was reading one of his theses,

which he had nearly finished, when Pythodorus entered with Parmenides and

Aristoteles, who was afterwards one of the Thirty. When the recitation was

completed, Socrates requested that the first thesis of the treatise might be read

again.'


  'You mean, Zeno,' said Socrates, 'to argue that being, if it is many, must

be both like and unlike, which is a contradiction; and each division of your

argument is intended to elicit a similar absurdity, which may be supposed to

follow from the assumption that being is many.' 'Such is my meaning.' 'I see,'

said Socrates, turning to Parmenides, 'that Zeno is your second self in hiswritings too; you prove admirably that the all is one: he gives proofs no less

convincing that the many are nought. To deceive the world by saying the

same thing in entirely different forms, is a strain of art beyond most of us.'

'Yes, Socrates,' said Zeno; 'but though you are as keen as a Spartan hound,

you do not quite catch the motive of the piece, which was only intended to

protect Parmenides against ridicule by showing that the hypothesis of the

existence of the many involved greater absurdities than the hypothesis of the

one. The book was a youthful composition of mine, which was stolen from

me, and therefore I had no choice about the publication.' 'I quite believe you,'

said Socrates; 'but will you answer me a question? I should like to know,

whether you would assume an idea of likeness in the abstract, which is the

contradictory of unlikeness in the abstract, by participation in either or both

of which things are like or unlike or partly both. For the same things may

very well partake of like and unlike in the concrete, though like and unlike in

the  abstract  are  irreconcilable.  Nor  does  there  appear  to  me  to  be  any

absurdity in maintaining that the same things may partake of the one and

many, though I should be indeed surprised to hear that the absolute one is

also many. For example, I, being many, that is to say, having many parts or

members, am yet also one, and partake of the one, being one of seven who

are here present (compare Philebus). This is not an absurdity, but a truism.

But I should be amazed if there were a similar entanglement in the nature of

the ideas themselves, nor can I believe that one and many, like and unlike,

rest  and  motion,  in  the  abstract,  are  capable  either  of  admixture  or  of

separation.'


    Pythodorus said that in his opinion Parmenides and Zeno were not very

well pleased at the questions which were raised; nevertheless, they looked at

one another and smiled in seeming delight and admiration of Socrates. 'Tell

me,' said Parmenides, 'do you think that the abstract ideas of likeness, unity,

and the rest, exist apart from individuals which partake of them? and is this

your own distinction?' 'I think that there are such ideas.' 'And would you

make abstract ideas of the just, the beautiful, the good?' 'Yes,' he said. 'And of

human beings like ourselves, of water, fire, and the like?' 'I am not certain.'

'And would you be undecided also about ideas of which the mention will,

perhaps, appear laughable: of hair, mud, filth, and other things which are base

and vile?' 'No, Parmenides; visible things like these are, as I believe, only

what they appear to be: though I am sometimes disposed to imagine that thereis nothing without an idea; but I repress any such notion, from a fear of

falling into an abyss of nonsense.' 'You are young, Socrates, and therefore

naturally regard the opinions of men; the time will come when philosophy

will have a firmer hold of you, and you will not despise even the meanest

things. But tell me, is your meaning that things become like by partaking of

likeness, great by partaking of greatness, just and beautiful by partaking of

justice and beauty, and so of other ideas?' 'Yes, that is my meaning.' 'And do

you suppose the individual to partake of the whole, or of the part?' 'Why not

of the whole?' said Socrates. 'Because,' said Parmenides, 'in that case the

whole, which is one, will become many.' 'Nay,' said Socrates, 'the whole may

be like the day, which is one and in many places: in this way the ideas may

be one and also many.' 'In the same sort of way,' said Parmenides, 'as a sail,

which is one, may be a cover to many--that is your meaning?' 'Yes.' 'And

would you say that each man is covered by the whole sail, or by a part only?'

'By a part.' 'Then the ideas have parts, and the objects partake of a part of

them only?' 'That seems to follow.' 'And would you like to say that the ideas

are really divisible and yet remain one?' 'Certainly not.' 'Would you venture

to affirm that great objects have a portion only of greatness transferred to

them; or that small or equal objects are small or equal because they are only

portions  of  smallness  or  equality?'  'Impossible.'  'But  how  can  individuals

participate in ideas, except in the ways which I have mentioned?' 'That is not

an easy question to answer.' 'I should imagine the conception of ideas to arise

as follows: you see great objects pervaded by a common form or idea of

greatness,  which  you  abstract.'  'That  is  quite  true.'  'And  supposing  you

embrace in one view the idea of greatness thus gained and the individuals

which  it  comprises,  a  further  idea  of  greatness  arises,  which  makes  both

great; and this may go on to infinity.' Socrates replies that the ideas may be

thoughts in the mind only; in this case, the consequence would no longer

follow. 'But must not the thought be of something which is the same in all

and is the idea? And if the world partakes in the ideas, and the ideas are

thoughts, must not all things think? Or can thought be without thought?' 'I

acknowledge the unmeaningness of this,' says Socrates, 'and would rather

have recourse to the explanation that the ideas are types in nature, and that

other things partake of them by becoming like them.' 'But to become like

them is to be comprehended in the same idea; and the likeness of the idea and

the individuals implies another idea of likeness, and another without end.'

'Quite true.' 'The theory, then, of participation by likeness has to be given up.You have hardly yet, Socrates, found out the real difficulty of maintaining

abstract  ideas.'  'What  difficulty?'  'The  greatest  of  all  perhaps  is  this:  an

opponent  will  argue  that  the  ideas  are  not  within  the  range  of  human

knowledge;  and  you  cannot  disprove  the  assertion  without  a  long  and

laborious demonstration, which he may be unable or unwilling to follow. In

the  first  place,  neither  you  nor  any  one  who  maintains  the  existence  of

absolute  ideas  will  affirm  that  they  are  subjective.'  'That  would  be  a

contradiction.' 'True; and therefore any relation in these ideas is a relation

which concerns themselves only; and the objects which are named after them,

are  relative  to  one  another  only,  and  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  ideas

themselves.' 'How do you mean?' said Socrates. 'I may illustrate my meaning

in this way: one of us has a slave; and the idea of a slave in the abstract is

relative to the idea of a master in the abstract; this correspondence of ideas,

however, has nothing to do with the particular relation of our slave to us.--Do

you see my meaning?' 'Perfectly.' 'And absolute knowledge in the same way

corresponds  to  absolute  truth  and  being,  and  particular  knowledge  to

particular  truth  and  being.'  Clearly.'  'And  there  is  a  subjective  knowledge

which is of subjective truth, having many kinds, general and particular. But

the ideas themselves are not subjective, and therefore are not within our ken.'

'They  are  not.'  'Then  the  beautiful  and  the  good  in  their  own  nature  are

unknown to us?' 'It would seem so.' 'There is a worse consequence yet.' 'What

is that?' 'I think we must admit that absolute knowledge is the most exact

knowledge, which we must therefore attribute to God. But then see what

follows: God, having this exact knowledge, can have no knowledge of human

things, as we have divided the two spheres, and forbidden any passing from

one to the other:--the gods have knowledge and authority in their world only,

as we have in ours.' 'Yet, surely, to deprive God of knowledge is monstrous.'-

-'These are some of the difficulties which are involved in the assumption of

absolute ideas; the learner will find them nearly impossible to understand,

and the teacher who has to impart them will require superhuman ability; there

will always be a suspicion, either that they have no existence, or are beyond

human  knowledge.'  'There  I  agree  with  you,'  said  Socrates.  'Yet  if  these

difficulties induce you to give up universal ideas, what becomes of the mind?

and where are the reasoning and reflecting powers? philosophy is at an end.'

'I certainly do not see my way.' 'I think,' said Parmenides, 'that this arises out

of your attempting to define abstractions, such as the good and the beautiful

and the just, before you have had sufficient previous training; I noticed yourdeficiency when you were talking with Aristoteles, the day before yesterday.

Your enthusiasm is a wonderful gift; but I fear that unless you discipline

yourself by dialectic while you are young, truth will elude your grasp.' 'And

what  kind  of  discipline  would  you  recommend?'  'The  training  which  you

heard Zeno practising; at the same time, I admire your saying to him that you

did not care to consider the difficulty in reference to visible objects, but only

in relation to ideas.' 'Yes; because I think that in visible objects you may

easily show any number of inconsistent consequences.' 'Yes; and you should

consider, not only the consequences which follow from a given hypothesis,

but the consequences also which follow from the denial of the hypothesis.

For example, what follows from the assumption of the existence of the many,

and the counter-argument of what follows from the denial of the existence of

the many: and similarly of likeness and unlikeness, motion, rest, generation,

corruption,  being  and  not  being.  And  the  consequences  must  include

consequences to the things supposed and to other things, in themselves and in

relation to one another, to individuals whom you select, to the many, and to

the all; these must be drawn out both on the affirmative and on the negative

hypothesis,--that is, if you are to train yourself perfectly to the intelligence of

the truth.' 'What you are suggesting seems to be a tremendous process, and

one of which I do not quite understand the nature,' said Socrates; 'will you

give me an example?' 'You must not impose such a task on a man of my

years,' said Parmenides. 'Then will you, Zeno?' 'Let us rather,' said Zeno, with

a smile, 'ask Parmenides, for the undertaking is a serious one, as he truly

says; nor could I urge him to make the attempt, except in a select audience of

persons who will understand him.' The whole party joined in the request.


  Here we have, first of all, an unmistakable attack made by the youthful

Socrates on the paradoxes of Zeno. He perfectly understands their drift, and

Zeno himself is supposed to admit this. But they appear to him, as he says in

the Philebus also, to be rather truisms than paradoxes. For every one must

acknowledge the obvious fact, that the body being one has many members,

and that, in a thousand ways, the like partakes of the unlike, the many of the

one.  The  real  difficulty  begins  with  the  relations  of  ideas  in  themselves,

whether of the one and many, or of any other ideas, to one another and to the

mind.  But  this  was  a  problem  which  the  Eleatic  philosophers  had  never

considered; their thoughts had not gone beyond the contradictions of matter,

motion, space, and the like.  It  was  no  wonder  that  Parmenides  and  Zeno  should  hear  the  novel

speculations of Socrates with mixed feelings of admiration and displeasure.

He was going out of the received circle of disputation into a region in which

they could hardly follow him. From the crude idea of Being in the abstract,

he  was  about  to  proceed  to  universals  or  general  notions.  There  is  no

contradiction  in  material  things  partaking  of  the  ideas  of  one  and  many;

neither is there any contradiction in the ideas of one and many, like and

unlike,  in  themselves.  But  the  contradiction  arises  when  we  attempt  to

conceive ideas in their connexion, or to ascertain their relation to phenomena.

Still he affirms the existence of such ideas; and this is the position which is

now in turn submitted to the criticisms of Parmenides.


  To appreciate truly the character of these criticisms, we must remember

the place held by Parmenides in the history of Greek philosophy. He is the

founder  of  idealism,  and  also  of  dialectic,  or,  in  modern  phraseology,  of

metaphysics  and  logic  (Theaet.,  Soph.).  Like  Plato,  he  is  struggling  after

something wider and deeper than satisfied the contemporary Pythagoreans.

And Plato with a true instinct recognizes him as his spiritual father, whom he

'revered and honoured more than all other philosophers together.' He may be

supposed to have thought more than he said, or was able to express. And,

although he could not, as a matter of fact, have criticized the ideas of Plato

without an anachronism, the criticism is appropriately placed in the mouth of

the founder of the ideal philosophy.


  There was probably a time in the life of Plato when the ethical teaching of

Socrates  came  into  conflict  with  the  metaphysical  theories  of  the  earlier

philosophers, and he sought to supplement the one by the other. The older

philosophers  were  great  and  awful;  and  they  had  the  charm  of  antiquity.

Something which found a response in his own mind seemed to have been lost

as  well  as  gained  in  the  Socratic  dialectic.  He  felt  no  incongruity  in  the

veteran  Parmenides  correcting  the  youthful  Socrates.  Two  points  in  his

criticism are especially deserving of notice. First of all, Parmenides tries him

by the test of consistency. Socrates is willing to assume ideas or principles of

the  just,  the  beautiful,  the  good,  and  to  extend  them  to  man  (compare

Phaedo); but he is reluctant to admit that there are general ideas of hair, mud,

filth, etc. There is an ethical universal or idea, but is there also a universal of

physics?--of  the  meanest  things  in  the  world  as  well  as  of  the  greatest?Parmenides rebukes this want of consistency in Socrates, which he attributes

to his youth. As he grows older, philosophy will take a firmer hold of him,

and then he will despise neither great things nor small, and he will think less

of the opinions of mankind (compare Soph.). Here is lightly touched one of

the  most  familiar  principles  of  modern  philosophy,  that  in  the  meanest

operations of nature, as well as in the noblest, in mud and filth, as well as in

the sun and stars, great truths are contained. At the same time, we may note

also the transition in the mind of Plato, to which Aristotle alludes (Met.),

when, as he says, he transferred the Socratic universal of ethics to the whole

of nature.


  The other criticism of Parmenides on Socrates attributes to him a want of

practice in dialectic. He has observed this deficiency in him when talking to

Aristoteles  on  a  previous  occasion.  Plato  seems  to  imply  that  there  was

something more in the dialectic of Zeno than in the mere interrogation of

Socrates. Here, again, he may perhaps be describing the process which his

own mind went through when he first became more intimately acquainted,

whether at Megara or elsewhere, with the Eleatic and Megarian philosophers.

Still, Parmenides does not deny to Socrates the credit of having gone beyond

them in seeking to apply the paradoxes of Zeno to ideas; and this is the

application which he himself makes of them in the latter part of the dialogue.

He then proceeds to explain to him the sort of mental gymnastic which he

should practise. He should consider not only what would follow from a given

hypothesis, but what would follow from the denial of it, to that which is the

subject of the hypothesis, and to all other things. There is no trace in the

Memorabilia of Xenophon of any such method being attributed to Socrates;

nor is the dialectic here spoken of that 'favourite method' of proceeding by

regular divisions, which is described in the Phaedrus and Philebus, and of

which examples are given in the Politicus and in the Sophist. It is expressly

spoken of as the method which Socrates had heard Zeno practise in the days

of his youth (compare Soph.).


  The  discussion  of  Socrates  with  Parmenides  is  one  of  the  most

remarkable passages in Plato. Few writers have ever been able to anticipate

'the criticism of the morrow' on their favourite notions. But Plato may here be

said to anticipate the judgment not only of the morrow, but of all after- ages

on the Platonic Ideas. For in some points he touches questions which havenot yet received their solution in modern philosophy.


  The first difficulty which Parmenides raises respecting the Platonic ideas

relates to the manner in which individuals are connected with them. Do they

participate in the ideas, or do they merely resemble them? Parmenides shows

that objections may be urged against either of these modes of conceiving the

connection. Things are little by partaking of littleness, great by partaking of

greatness, and the like. But they cannot partake of a part of greatness, for that

will not make them great, etc.; nor can each object monopolise the whole.

The  only  answer  to  this  is,  that  'partaking'  is  a  figure  of  speech,  really

corresponding to the processes which a later logic designates by the terms

'abstraction'  and  'generalization.'  When  we  have  described  accurately  the

methods or forms which the mind employs, we cannot further criticize them;

at  least  we  can  only  criticize  them  with  reference  to  their  fitness  as

instruments of thought to express facts.


  Socrates attempts to support his view of the ideas by the parallel of the

day,  which  is  one  and  in  many  places;  but  he  is  easily  driven  from  his

position by a counter illustration of Parmenides, who compares the idea of

greatness  to  a  sail.  He  truly  explains  to  Socrates  that  he  has  attained  the

conception  of  ideas  by  a  process  of  generalization.  At  the  same  time,  he

points out a difficulty, which appears to be involved--viz. that the process of

generalization will go on to infinity. Socrates meets the supposed difficulty

by a flash of light, which is indeed the true answer 'that the ideas are in our

minds only.' Neither realism is the truth, nor nominalism is the truth, but

conceptualism;  and  conceptualism  or  any  other  psychological  theory  falls

very far short of the infinite subtlety of language and thought.


  But the realism of ancient philosophy will not admit of this answer, which

is repelled by Parmenides with another truth or half-truth of later philosophy,

'Every subject or subjective must have an object.' Here is the great though

unconscious truth (shall we say?) or error, which underlay the early Greek

philosophy. 'Ideas must have a real existence;' they are not mere forms or

opinions,  which  may  be  changed  arbitrarily  by  individuals.  But  the  early

Greek philosopher never clearly saw that true ideas were only universal facts,

and that there might be error in universals as well as in particulars.  Socrates  makes  one  more  attempt  to  defend  the  Platonic  Ideas  by

representing them as paradigms; this is again answered by the 'argumentum

ad infinitum.' We may remark, in passing, that the process which is thus

described has no real existence. The mind, after having obtained a general

idea, does not really go on to form another which includes that, and all the

individuals  contained  under  it,  and  another  and  another  without  end.  The

difficulty belongs in fact to the Megarian age of philosophy, and is due to

their illogical logic, and to the general ignorance of the ancients respecting

the part played by language in the process of thought. No such perplexity

could ever trouble a modern metaphysician, any more than the fallacy of

'calvus'  or  'acervus,'  or  of  'Achilles  and  the  tortoise.'  These  'surds'  of

metaphysics  ought  to  occasion  no  more  difficulty  in  speculation  than  a

perpetually recurring fraction in arithmetic.


  It is otherwise with the objection which follows: How are we to bridge

the chasm between human truth and absolute truth, between gods and men?

This is the difficulty of philosophy in all ages: How can we get beyond the

circle of our own ideas, or how, remaining within them, can we have any

criterion of a truth beyond and independent of them? Parmenides draws out

this difficulty with great clearness. According to him, there are not only one

but two chasms: the first, between individuals and the ideas which have a

common name; the second, between the ideas in us and the ideas absolute.

The first of these two difficulties mankind, as we may say, a little parodying

the language of the Philebus, have long agreed to treat as obsolete; the second

remains a difficulty for us as well as for the Greeks of the fourth century

before  Christ,  and  is  the  stumblingblock  of  Kant's  Kritik,  and  of  the

Hamiltonian adaptation of Kant, as well as of the Platonic ideas. It has been

said that 'you cannot criticize Revelation.' 'Then how do you know what is

Revelation, or that there is one at all,' is the immediate rejoinder--'You know

nothing of things in themselves.' 'Then how do you know that there are things

in themselves?' In some respects, the difficulty pressed harder upon the Greek

than  upon  ourselves.  For  conceiving  of  God  more  under  the  attribute  of

knowledge than we do, he was more under the necessity of separating the

divine from the human, as two spheres which had no communication with

one another.


  It is remarkable that Plato, speaking by the mouth of Parmenides, doesnot treat even this second class of difficulties as hopeless or insoluble. He

says  only  that  they  cannot  be  explained  without  a  long  and  laborious

demonstration: 'The teacher will require superhuman ability, and the learner

will  be  hard  of  understanding.'  But  an  attempt  must  be  made  to  find  an

answer to them; for, as Socrates and Parmenides both admit, the denial of

abstract  ideas  is  the  destruction  of  the  mind.  We  can  easily  imagine  that

among the Greek schools of philosophy in the fourth century before Christ a

panic might arise from the denial of universals, similar to that which arose in

the last century from Hume's denial of our ideas of cause and effect. Men do

not at first recognize that thought, like digestion, will go on much the same,

notwithstanding any theories which may be entertained respecting the nature

of  the  process.  Parmenides  attributes  the  difficulties  in  which  Socrates  is

involved to a want of comprehensiveness in his mode of reasoning; he should

consider every question on the negative as well as the positive hypothesis,

with reference to the consequences which flow from the denial as well as

from the assertion of a given statement.


  The argument which follows is the most singular in Plato. It appears to be

an imitation, or parody, of the Zenonian dialectic, just as the speeches in the

Phaedrus are an imitation of the style of Lysias, or as the derivations in the

Cratylus  or  the  fallacies  of  the  Euthydemus  are  a  parody  of  some

contemporary Sophist. The interlocutor is not supposed, as in most of the

other Platonic dialogues, to take a living part in the argument; he is only

required to say 'Yes' and 'No' in the right places. A hint has been already

given that the paradoxes of Zeno admitted of a higher application. This hint is

the thread by which Plato connects the two parts of the dialogue.


  The paradoxes of Parmenides seem trivial to us, because the words to

which they relate have become trivial; their true nature as abstract terms is

perfectly understood by us, and we are inclined to regard the treatment of

them in Plato as a mere straw-splitting, or legerdemain of words. Yet there

was  a  power  in  them  which  fascinated  the  Neoplatonists  for  centuries

afterwards. Something that they found in them, or brought to them--some

echo or anticipation of a great truth or error, exercised a wonderful influence

over their minds. To do the Parmenides justice, we should imagine similar

aporiai raised on themes as sacred to us, as the notions of One or Being were

to an ancient Eleatic. 'If God is, what follows? If God is not, what follows?'Or again: If God is or is not the world; or if God is or is not many, or has or

has not parts, or is or is not in the world, or in time; or is or is not finite or

infinite. Or if the world is or is not; or has or has not a beginning or end; or is

or is not infinite, or infinitely divisible. Or again: if God is or is not identical

with his laws; or if man is or is not identical with the laws of nature. We can

easily see that here are many subjects for thought, and that from these and

similar  hypotheses  questions  of  great  interest  might  arise.  And  we  also

remark,  that  the  conclusions  derived  from  either  of  the  two  alternative

propositions might be equally impossible and contradictory.


  When we ask what is the object of these paradoxes, some have answered

that  they  are  a  mere  logical  puzzle,  while  others  have  seen  in  them  an

Hegelian  propaedeutic  of  the  doctrine  of  Ideas.  The  first  of  these  views

derives support from the manner in which Parmenides speaks of a similar

method being applied to all Ideas. Yet it is hard to suppose that Plato would

have furnished so elaborate an example, not of his own but of the Eleatic

dialectic, had he intended only to give an illustration of method. The second

view has been often overstated by those who, like Hegel himself, have tended

to confuse ancient with modern philosophy. We need not deny that Plato,

trained  in  the  school  of  Cratylus  and  Heracleitus,  may  have  seen  that  a

contradiction in terms is sometimes the best expression of a truth higher than

either (compare Soph.). But his ideal theory is not based on antinomies. The

correlation of Ideas was the metaphysical difficulty of the age in which he

lived; and the Megarian and Cynic philosophy was a 'reductio ad absurdum'

of their isolation. To restore them to their natural connexion and to detect the

negative element in them is the aim of Plato in the Sophist. But his view of

their connexion falls very far short of the Hegelian identity of Being and Not-

being. The Being and Not-being of Plato never merge in each other, though

he is aware that 'determination is only negation.'


  After criticizing the hypotheses of others, it may appear presumptuous to

add another guess to the many which have been already offered. May we say,

in Platonic language, that we still seem to see vestiges of a track which has

not yet been taken? It is quite possible that the obscurity of the Parmenides

would not have existed to a contemporary student of philosophy, and, like the

similar difficulty in the Philebus, is really due to our ignorance of the mind of

the  age.  There  is  an  obscure  Megarian  influence  on  Plato  which  cannotwholly be cleared up, and is not much illustrated by the doubtful tradition of

his retirement to Megara after the death of Socrates. For Megara was within a

walk  of  Athens  (Phaedr.),  and  Plato  might  have  learned  the  Megarian

doctrines without settling there.


  We may begin by remarking that the theses of Parmenides are expressly

said to follow the method of Zeno, and that the complex dilemma, though

declared to be capable of universal application, is applied in this instance to

Zeno's  familiar  question  of  the  'one  and  many.'  Here,  then,  is  a  double

indication of the connexion of the Parmenides with the Eristic school. The

old Eleatics had asserted the existence of Being, which they at first regarded

as finite, then as infinite, then as neither finite nor infinite, to which some of

them had given what Aristotle calls 'a form,' others had ascribed a material

nature  only.  The  tendency  of  their  philosophy  was  to  deny  to  Being  all

predicates. The Megarians, who succeeded them, like the Cynics, affirmed

that no predicate could be asserted of any subject; they also converted the

idea  of  Being  into  an  abstraction  of  Good,  perhaps  with  the  view  of

preserving a sort of neutrality or indifference between the mind and things.

As if they had said, in the language of modern philosophy: 'Being is not only

neither finite nor infinite, neither at rest nor in motion, but neither subjective

nor objective.'


  This is the track along which Plato is leading us. Zeno had attempted to

prove the existence of the one by disproving the existence of the many, and

Parmenides seems to aim at proving the existence of the subject by showing

the contradictions which follow from the assertion of any predicates. Take the

simplest of all notions, 'unity'; you cannot even assert being or time of this

without  involving  a  contradiction.  But  is  the  contradiction  also  the  final

conclusion?  Probably  no  more  than  of  Zeno's  denial  of  the  many,  or  of

Parmenides' assault upon the Ideas; no more than of the earlier dialogues 'of

search.' To us there seems to be no residuum of this long piece of dialectics.

But to the mind of Parmenides and Plato, 'Gott- betrunkene Menschen,' there

still remained the idea of 'being' or 'good,' which could not be conceived,

defined, uttered, but could not be got rid of. Neither of them would have

imagined  that  their  disputation  ever  touched  the  Divine  Being  (compare

Phil.). The same difficulties about Unity and Being are raised in the Sophist;

but there only as preliminary to their final solution.  If this view is correct, the real aim of the hypotheses of Parmenides is to

criticize the earlier Eleatic philosophy from the point of view of Zeno or the

Megarians. It is the same kind of criticism which Plato has extended to his

own  doctrine  of  Ideas.  Nor  is  there  any  want  of  poetical  consistency  in

attributing to the 'father Parmenides' the last review of the Eleatic doctrines.

The latest phases of all philosophies were fathered upon the founder of the

school.


  Other critics have regarded the final conclusion of the Parmenides either

as sceptical or as Heracleitean. In the first case, they assume that Plato means

to show the impossibility of any truth. But this is not the spirit of Plato, and

could not with propriety be put into the mouth of Parmenides, who, in this

very dialogue, is urging Socrates, not to doubt everything, but to discipline

his  mind  with  a  view  to  the  more  precise  attainment  of  truth.  The  same

remark applies to the second of the two theories. Plato everywhere ridicules

(perhaps unfairly) his Heracleitean contemporaries: and if he had intended to

support an Heracleitean thesis, would hardly have chosen Parmenides, the

condemner of the 'undiscerning tribe who say that things both are and are

not,' to be the speaker. Nor, thirdly, can we easily persuade ourselves with

Zeller that by the 'one' he means the Idea; and that he is seeking to prove

indirectly the unity of the Idea in the multiplicity of phenomena.


  We  may  now  endeavour  to  thread  the  mazes  of  the  labyrinth  which

Parmenides knew so well, and trembled at the thought of them.


  The argument has two divisions: There is the hypothesis that


  1.  One  is.  2.  One  is  not.  If  one  is,  it  is  nothing.  If  one  is  not,  it  is

everything.


  But is and is not may be taken in two senses: Either one is one, Or, one

has being,


  from which opposite consequences are deduced, 1.a. If one is one, it is

nothing. 1.b. If one has being, it is all things.


  To which are appended two subordinate consequences: 1.aa. If one hasbeing, all other things are. 1.bb. If one is one, all other things are not.


  The same distinction is then applied to the negative hypothesis: 2.a. If one

is not one, it is all things. 2.b. If one has not being, it is nothing.


    Involving two parallel consequences respecting the other or remainder:

2.aa. If one is not one, other things are all. 2.bb. If one has not being, other

things are not.


  ...


  'I cannot refuse,' said Parmenides, 'since, as Zeno remarks, we are alone,

though I may say with Ibycus, who in his old age fell in love, I, like the old

racehorse, tremble at the prospect of the course which I am to run, and which

I know so well. But as I must attempt this laborious game, what shall be the

subject? Suppose I take my own hypothesis of the one.' 'By all means,' said

Zeno. 'And who will answer me? Shall I propose the youngest? he will be the

most  likely  to  say  what  he  thinks,  and  his  answers  will  give  me  time  to

breathe.' 'I am the youngest,' said Aristoteles, 'and at your service; proceed

with your questions.'--The result may be summed up as follows:--


  1.a. One is not many, and therefore has no parts, and therefore is not a

whole, which is a sum of parts, and therefore has neither beginning, middle,

nor  end,  and  is  therefore  unlimited,  and  therefore  formless,  being  neither

round  nor  straight,  for  neither  round  nor  straight  can  be  defined  without

assuming  that  they  have  parts;  and  therefore  is  not  in  place,  whether  in

another which would encircle and touch the one at many points; or in itself,

because that which is self-containing is also contained, and therefore not one

but two. This being premised, let us consider whether one is capable either of

motion or rest. For motion is either change of substance, or motion on an

axis, or from one place to another. But the one is incapable of change of

substance, which implies that it ceases to be itself, or of motion on an axis,

because there would be parts around the axis; and any other motion involves

change  of  place.  But  existence  in  place  has  been  already  shown  to  be

impossible; and yet more impossible is coming into being in place, which

implies partial existence in two places at once, or entire existence neither

within nor without the same; and how can this be? And more impossible stillis the coming into being either as a whole or parts of that which is neither a

whole nor parts. The one, then, is incapable of motion. But neither can the

one be in anything, and therefore not in the same, whether itself or some

other, and is therefore incapable of rest. Neither is one the same with itself or

any other, or other than itself or any other. For if other than itself, then other

than one, and therefore not one; and, if the same with other, it would be other,

and other than one. Neither can one while remaining one be other than other;

for other, and not one, is the other than other. But if not other by virtue of

being one, not by virtue of itself; and if not by virtue of itself, not itself other,

and if not itself other, not other than anything. Neither will one be the same

with itself. For the nature of the same is not that of the one, but a thing which

becomes the same with anything does not become one; for example, that

which becomes the same with the many becomes many and not one. And

therefore if the one is the same with itself, the one is not one with itself; and

therefore one and not one. And therefore one is neither other than other, nor

the same with itself. Neither will the one be like or unlike itself or other; for

likeness is sameness of affections, and the one and the same are different.

And one having any affection which is other than being one would be more

than one. The one, then, cannot have the same affection with and therefore

cannot be like itself or other; nor can the one have any other affection than its

own, that is, be unlike itself or any other, for this would imply that it was

more than one. The one, then, is neither like nor unlike itself or other. This

being the case, neither can the one be equal or unequal to itself or other. For

equality implies sameness of measure, as inequality implies a greater or less

number  of  measures.  But  the  one,  not  having  sameness,  cannot  have

sameness  of  measure;  nor  a  greater  or  less  number  of  measures,  for  that

would imply parts and multitude. Once more, can one be older or younger

than itself or other? or of the same age with itself or other? That would imply

likeness and unlikeness, equality and inequality. Therefore one cannot be in

time, because that which is in time is ever becoming older and younger than

itself, (for older and younger are relative terms, and he who becomes older

becomes younger,) and is also of the same age with itself. None of which, or

any  other  expressions  of  time,  whether  past,  future,  or  present,  can  be

affirmed of one. One neither is, has been, nor will be, nor becomes, nor has,

nor will become. And, as these are the only modes of being, one is not, and is

not one. But to that which is not, there is no attribute or relative, neither name

nor word nor idea nor science nor perception nor opinion appertaining. One,then, is neither named, nor uttered, nor known, nor perceived, nor imagined.

But can all this be true? 'I think not.'


  1.b. Let us, however, commence the inquiry again. We have to work out

all the consequences which follow on the assumption that the one is. If one is,

one partakes of being, which is not the same with one; the words 'being' and

'one' have different meanings. Observe the consequence: In the one of being

or the being of one are two parts, being and one, which form one whole. And

each of the two parts is also a whole, and involves the other, and may be

further subdivided into one and being, and is therefore not one but two; and

thus one is never one, and in this way the one, if it is, becomes many and

infinite. Again, let us conceive of a one which by an effort of abstraction we

separate from being: will this abstract one be one or many? You say one

only; let us see. In the first place, the being of one is other than one; and one

and being, if different, are so because they both partake of the nature of other,

which is therefore neither one nor being; and whether we take being and

other, or being and one, or one and other, in any case we have two things

which separately are called either, and together both. And both are two and

either of two is severally one, and if one be added to any of the pairs, the sum

is three; and two is an even number, three an odd; and two units exist twice,

and therefore there are twice two; and three units exist thrice, and therefore

there are thrice three, and taken together they give twice three and thrice two:

we have even numbers multiplied into even, and odd into even, and even into

odd numbers. But if one is, and both odd and even numbers are implied in

one,  must  not  every  number  exist?  And  number  is  infinite,  and  therefore

existence  must  be  infinite,  for  all  and  every  number  partakes  of  being;

therefore being has the greatest number of parts, and every part, however

great or however small, is equally one. But can one be in many places and yet

be a whole? If not a whole it must be divided into parts and represented by a

number corresponding to the number of the parts. And if so, we were wrong

in saying that being has the greatest number of parts; for being is coequal and

coextensive with one, and has no more parts than one; and so the abstract one

broken up into parts by being is many and infinite. But the parts are parts of a

whole, and the whole is their containing limit, and the one is therefore limited

as  well  as  infinite  in  number;  and  that  which  is  a  whole  has  beginning,

middle, and end, and a middle is equidistant from the extremes; and one is

therefore of a certain figure, round or straight, or a combination of the two,and being a whole includes all the parts which are the whole, and is therefore

self- contained. But then, again, the whole is not in the parts, whether all or

some. Not in all, because, if in all, also in one; for, if wanting in any one, how

in all?--not in some, because the greater would then be contained in the less.

But if not in all, nor in any, nor in some, either nowhere or in other. And if

nowhere, nothing; therefore in other. The one as a whole, then, is in another,

but regarded as a sum of parts is in itself; and is, therefore, both in itself and

in another. This being the case, the one is at once both at rest and in motion:

at rest, because resting in itself; in motion, because it is ever in other. And if

there is truth in what has preceded, one is the same and not the same with

itself and other. For everything in relation to every other thing is either the

same with it or other; or if neither the same nor other, then in the relation of

part to a whole or whole to a part. But one cannot be a part or whole in

relation to one, nor other than one; and is therefore the same with one. Yet

this sameness is again contradicted by one being in another place from itself

which  is  in  the  same  place;  this  follows  from  one  being  in  itself  and  in

another;  one,  therefore,  is  other  than  itself.  But  if  anything  is  other  than

anything, will it not be other than other? And the not one is other than the

one, and the one than the not one; therefore one is other than all others. But

the same and the other exclude one another, and therefore the other can never

be in the same; nor can the other be in anything for ever so short a time, as

for that time the other will be in the same. And the other, if never in the same,

cannot be either in the one or in the not one. And one is not other than not

one, either by reason of other or of itself; and therefore they are not other than

one another at all. Neither can the not one partake or be part of one, for in

that  case  it  would  be  one;  nor  can  the  not  one  be  number,  for  that  also

involves one. And therefore, not being other than the one or related to the one

as a whole to parts or parts to a whole, not one is the same as one. Wherefore

the one is the same and also not the same with the others and also with itself;

and is therefore like and unlike itself and the others, and just as different from

the others as they are from the one, neither more nor less. But if neither more

nor less, equally different; and therefore the one and the others have the same

relations. This may be illustrated by the case of names: when you repeat the

same name twice over, you mean the same thing; and when you say that the

other is other than the one, or the one other than the other, this very word

other (eteron), which is attributed to both, implies sameness. One, then, as

being other than others, and other as being other than one, are alike in thatthey have the relation of otherness; and likeness is similarity of relations. And

everything as being other of everything is also like everything. Again, same

and other, like and unlike, are opposites: and since in virtue of being other

than the others the one is like them, in virtue of being the same it must be

unlike. Again, one, as having the same relations, has no difference of relation,

and  is  therefore  not  unlike,  and  therefore  like;  or,  as  having  different

relations, is different and unlike. Thus, one, as being the same and not the

same with itself and others--for both these reasons and for either of them--is

also like and unlike itself and the others. Again, how far can one touch itself

and the others? As existing in others, it touches the others; and as existing in

itself, touches only itself. But from another point of view, that which touches

another must be next in order of place; one, therefore, must be next in order

of place to itself, and would therefore be two, and in two places. But one

cannot be two, and therefore cannot be in contact with itself. Nor again can

one touch the other. Two objects are required to make one contact; three

objects make two contacts; and all the objects in the world, if placed in a

series, would have as many contacts as there are objects, less one. But if one

only exists, and not two, there is no contact. And the others, being other than

one, have no part in one, and therefore none in number, and therefore two has

no existence, and therefore there is no contact. For all which reasons, one has

and has not contact with itself and the others.


  Once more, Is one equal and unequal to itself and the others? Suppose

one  and  the  others  to  be  greater  or  less  than  each  other  or  equal  to  one

another,  they  will  be  greater  or  less  or  equal  by  reason  of  equality  or

greatness  or  smallness  inhering  in  them  in  addition  to  their  own  proper

nature. Let us begin by assuming smallness to be inherent in one: in this case

the inherence is either in the whole or in a part. If the first, smallness is either

coextensive with the whole one, or contains the whole, and, if coextensive

with the one, is equal to the one, or if containing the one will be greater than

the one. But smallness thus performs the function of equality or of greatness,

which  is  impossible.  Again,  if  the  inherence  be  in  a  part,  the  same

contradiction follows: smallness will be equal to the part or greater than the

part; therefore smallness will not inhere in anything, and except the idea of

smallness there will be nothing small. Neither will greatness; for greatness

will have a greater;--and there will be no small in relation to which it is great.

And there will be no great or small in objects, but greatness and smallnesswill be relative only to each other; therefore the others cannot be greater or

less than the one; also the one can neither exceed nor be exceeded by the

others, and they are therefore equal to one another. And this will be true also

of the one in relation to itself: one will be equal to itself as well as to the

others (talla). Yet one, being in itself, must also be about itself, containing

and contained, and is therefore greater and less than itself. Further, there is

nothing beside the one and the others; and as these must be in something,

they must therefore be in one another; and as that in which a thing is is

greater than the thing, the inference is that they are both greater and less than

one another, because containing and contained in one another. Therefore the

one is equal to and greater and less than itself or other, having also measures

or parts or numbers equal to or greater or less than itself or other.


  But does one partake of time? This must be acknowledged, if the one

partakes of being. For 'to be' is the participation of being in present time, 'to

have been' in past, 'to be about to be' in future time. And as time is ever

moving forward, the one becomes older than itself; and therefore younger

than itself; and is older and also younger when in the process of becoming it

arrives at the present; and it is always older and younger, for at any moment

the one is, and therefore it becomes and is not older and younger than itself

but during an equal time with itself, and is therefore contemporary with itself.


  And what are the relations of the one to the others? Is it or does it become

older or younger than they? At any rate the others are more than one, and

one, being the least of all numbers, must be prior in time to greater numbers.

But on the other hand, one must come into being in a manner accordant with

its own nature. Now one has parts or others, and has therefore a beginning,

middle, and end, of which the beginning is first and the end last. And the

parts come into existence first; last of all the whole, contemporaneously with

the end, being therefore younger, while the parts or others are older than the

one. But, again, the one comes into being in each of the parts as much as in

the whole, and must be of the same age with them. Therefore one is at once

older and younger than the parts or others, and also contemporaneous with

them, for no part can be a part which is not one. Is this true of becoming as

well as being? Thus much may be affirmed, that the same things which are

older or younger cannot become older or younger in a greater degree than

they were at first by the addition of equal times. But, on the other hand, theone, if older than others, has come into being a longer time than they have.

And when equal time is added to a longer and shorter, the relative difference

between  them  is  diminished.  In  this  way  that  which  was  older  becomes

younger, and that which was younger becomes older, that is to say, younger

and older than at first; and they ever become and never have become, for then

they would be. Thus the one and others always are and are becoming and not

becoming younger and also older than one another. And one, partaking of

time and also partaking of becoming older and younger, admits of all time,

present, past, and future--was, is, shall be--was becoming, is becoming, will

become.  And  there  is  science  of  the  one,  and  opinion  and  name  and

expression, as is already implied in the fact of our inquiry.


  Yet once more, if one be one and many, and neither one nor many, and

also participant of time, must there not be a time at which one as being one

partakes of being, and a time when one as not being one is deprived of being?

But these two contradictory states cannot be experienced by the one both

together: there must be a time of transition. And the transition is a process of

generation and destruction, into and from being and not-being, the one and

the others. For the generation of the one is the destruction of the others, and

the  generation  of  the  others  is  the  destruction  of  the  one.  There  is  also

separation  and  aggregation,  assimilation  and  dissimilation,  increase,

diminution,  equalization,  a  passage  from  motion  to  rest,  and  from  rest  to

motion in the one and many. But when do all these changes take place? When

does motion become rest, or rest motion? The answer to this question will

throw a light upon all the others. Nothing can be in motion and at rest at the

same time; and therefore the change takes place 'in a moment'--which is a

strange expression, and seems to mean change in no time. Which is true also

of all the other changes, which likewise take place in no time.


  1.aa. But if one is, what happens to the others, which in the first place are

not one, yet may partake of one in a certain way? The others are other than

the one because they have parts, for if they had no parts they would be simply

one,  and  parts  imply  a  whole  to  which  they  belong;  otherwise  each  part

would be a part of many, and being itself one of them, of itself, and if a part

of all, of each one of the other parts, which is absurd. For a part, if not a part

of one, must be a part of all but this one, and if so not a part of each one; and

if not a part of each one, not a part of any one of many, and so not of one; andif of none, how of all? Therefore a part is neither a part of many nor of all,

but of an absolute and perfect whole or one. And if the others have parts, they

must partake of the whole, and must be the whole of which they are the parts.

And each part, as the word 'each' implies, is also an absolute one. And both

the whole and the parts partake of one, for the whole of which the parts are

parts is one, and each part is one part of the whole; and whole and parts as

participating in one are other than one, and as being other than one are many

and infinite; and however small a fraction you separate from them is many

and not one. Yet the fact of their being parts furnishes the others with a limit

towards other parts and towards the whole; they are finite and also infinite:

finite through participation in the one, infinite in their own nature. And as

being finite, they are alike; and as being infinite, they are alike; but as being

both finite and also infinite, they are in the highest degree unlike. And all

other opposites might without difficulty be shown to unite in them.


  1.bb. Once more, leaving all this: Is there not also an opposite series of

consequences which is equally true of the others, and may be deduced from

the existence of one? There is. One is distinct from the others, and the others

from one; for one and the others are all things, and there is no third existence

besides them. And the whole of one cannot be in others nor parts of it, for it

is separated from others and has no parts, and therefore the others have no

unity, nor plurality, nor duality, nor any other number, nor any opposition or

distinction, such as likeness and unlikeness, some and other, generation and

corruption, odd and even. For if they had these they would partake either of

one opposite, and this would be a participation in one; or of two opposites,

and this would be a participation in two. Thus if one exists, one is all things,

and likewise nothing, in relation to one and to the others.


  2.a. But, again, assume the opposite hypothesis, that the one is not, and

what is the consequence? In the first place, the proposition, that one is not, is

clearly opposed to the proposition, that not one is not. The subject of any

negative proposition implies at once knowledge and difference. Thus 'one' in

the proposition--'The one is not,' must be something known, or the words

would  be  unintelligible;  and  again  this  'one  which  is  not'  is  something

different from other things. Moreover, this and that, some and other, may be

all  attributed  or  related  to  the  one  which  is  not,  and  which  though  non-

existent may and must have plurality, if the one only is non-existent andnothing else; but if all is not-being there is nothing which can be spoken of.

Also the one which is not differs, and is different in kind from the others, and

therefore unlike them; and they being other than the one, are unlike the one,

which is therefore unlike them. But one, being unlike other, must be like

itself; for the unlikeness of one to itself is the destruction of the hypothesis;

and one cannot be equal to the others; for that would suppose being in the

one,  and  the  others  would  be  equal  to  one  and  like  one;  both  which  are

impossible, if one does not exist. The one which is not, then, if not equal is

unequal to the others, and in equality implies great and small, and equality

lies between great and small, and therefore the one which is not partakes of

equality. Further, the one which is not has being; for that which is true is, and

it is true that the one is not. And so the one which is not, if remitting aught of

the being of non-existence, would become existent. For not being implies the

being of not-being, and being the not-being of not- being; or more truly being

partakes of the being of being and not of the being of not-being, and not-

being of the being of not-being and not of the not-being of not-being. And

therefore the one which is not has being and also not-being. And the union of

being  and  not-being  involves  change  or  motion.  But  how  can  not-being,

which is nowhere, move or change, either from one place to another or in the

same  place?  And  whether  it  is  or  is  not,  it  would  cease  to  be  one  if

experiencing a change of substance. The one which is not, then, is both in

motion and at rest, is altered and unaltered, and becomes and is destroyed,

and does not become and is not destroyed.


  2.b. Once more, let us ask the question, If one is not, what happens in

regard to one? The expression 'is not' implies negation of being:--do we mean

by this to say that a thing, which is not, in a certain sense is? or do we mean

absolutely to deny being of it? The latter. Then the one which is not can

neither  be  nor  become  nor  perish  nor  experience  change  of  substance  or

place. Neither can rest, or motion, or greatness, or smallness, or equality, or

unlikeness, or likeness either to itself or other, or attribute or relation, or now

or hereafter or formerly, or knowledge or opinion or perception or name or

anything else be asserted of that which is not.


  2.aa. Once more, if one is not, what becomes of the others? If we speak of

them they must be, and their very name implies difference, and difference

implies relation, not to the one, which is not, but to one another. And they areothers of each other not as units but as infinities, the least of which is also

infinity, and capable of infinitesimal division. And they will have no unity or

number, but only a semblance of unity and number; and the least of them will

appear large and manifold in comparison with the infinitesimal fractions into

which it may be divided. Further, each particle will have the appearance of

being equal with the fractions. For in passing from the greater to the less it

must reach an intermediate point, which is equality. Moreover, each particle

although having a limit in relation to itself and to other particles, yet it has

neither beginning, middle, nor end; for there is always a beginning before the

beginning,  and  a  middle  within  the  middle,  and  an  end  beyond  the  end,

because the infinitesimal division is never arrested by the one. Thus all being

is one at a distance, and broken up when near, and like at a distance and

unlike when near; and also the particles which compose being seem to be like

and unlike, in rest and motion, in generation and corruption, in contact and

separation, if one is not.


  2.bb. Once more, let us inquire, If the one is not, and the others of the one

are, what follows? In the first place, the others will not be the one, nor the

many, for in that case the one would be contained in them; neither will they

appear to be one or many; because they have no communion or participation

in that which is not, nor semblance of that which is not. If one is not, the

others neither are, nor appear to be one or many, like or unlike, in contact or

separation. In short, if one is not, nothing is.


  The result of all which is, that whether one is or is not, one and the others,

in relation to themselves and to one another, are and are not, and appear to be

and appear not to be, in all manner of ways.


  I. On the first hypothesis we may remark: first, That one is one is an

identical  proposition,  from  which  we  might  expect  that  no  further

consequences could be deduced. The train of consequences which follows, is

inferred by altering the predicate into 'not many.' Yet, perhaps, if a strict

Eristic had been present, oios aner ei kai nun paren, he might have affirmed

that the not many presented a different aspect of the conception from the one,

and was therefore not identical with it. Such a subtlety would be very much

in character with the Zenonian dialectic. Secondly, We may note, that the

conclusion is really involved in the premises. For one is conceived as one, ina sense which excludes all predicates. When the meaning of one has been

reduced to a point, there is no use in saying that it has neither parts nor

magnitude. Thirdly, The conception of the same is, first of all, identified with

the one; and then by a further analysis distinguished from, and even opposed

to it. Fourthly, We may detect notions, which have reappeared in modern

philosophy, e.g. the bare abstraction of undefined unity, answering to the

Hegelian 'Seyn,' or the identity of contradictions 'that which is older is also

younger,' etc., or the Kantian conception of an a priori synthetical proposition

'one is.'


  II. In the first series of propositions the word 'is' is really the copula; in

the  second,  the  verb  of  existence.  As  in  the  first  series,  the  negative

consequence followed from one being affirmed to be equivalent to the not

many;  so  here  the  affirmative  consequence  is  deduced  from  one  being

equivalent to the many.


  In  the  former  case,  nothing  could  be  predicated  of  the  one,  but  now

everything--multitude, relation, place, time, transition. One is regarded in all

the aspects of one, and with a reference to all the consequences which flow,

either  from  the  combination  or  the  separation  of  them.  The  notion  of

transition  involves  the  singular  extra-temporal  conception  of  'suddenness.'

This idea of 'suddenness' is based upon the contradiction which is involved in

supposing that anything can be in two places at once. It is a mere fiction; and

we may observe that similar antinomies have led modern philosophers to

deny the reality of time and space. It is not the infinitesimal of time, but the

negative of time. By the help of this invention the conception of change,

which sorely exercised the minds of early thinkers, seems to be, but is not

really  at  all  explained.  The  difficulty  arises  out  of  the  imperfection  of

language, and should therefore be no longer regarded as a difficulty at all.

The only way of meeting it, if it exists, is to acknowledge that this rather

puzzling double conception is necessary to the expression of the phenomena

of motion or change, and that this and similar double notions, instead of

being  anomalies,  are  among  the  higher  and  more  potent  instruments  of

human thought.


  The processes by which Parmenides obtains his remarkable results may

be summed up as follows: (1) Compound or correlative ideas which involveeach  other,  such  as,  being  and  not-being,  one  and  many,  are  conceived

sometimes  in  a  state  of  composition,  and  sometimes  of  division:  (2)  The

division  or  distinction  is  sometimes  heightened  into  total  opposition,  e.g.

between  one  and  same,  one  and  other:  or  (3)  The  idea,  which  has  been

already  divided,  is  regarded,  like  a  number,  as  capable  of  further  infinite

subdivision:  (4)  The  argument  often  proceeds  'a  dicto  secundum  quid  ad

dictum simpliciter' and conversely: (5) The analogy of opposites is misused

by him; he argues indiscriminately sometimes from what is like, sometimes

from what is unlike in them: (6) The idea of being or not-being is identified

with  existence  or  non-existence  in  place  or  time:  (7)  The  same  ideas  are

regarded sometimes as in process of transition, sometimes as alternatives or

opposites:  (8)  There  are  no  degrees  or  kinds  of  sameness,  likeness,

difference, nor any adequate conception of motion or change: (9) One, being,

time, like space in Zeno's puzzle of Achilles and the tortoise, are regarded

sometimes as continuous and sometimes as discrete: (10) In some parts of the

argument the abstraction is so rarefied as to become not only fallacious, but

almost unintelligible, e.g. in the contradiction which is elicited out of the

relative terms older and younger: (11) The relation between two terms is

regarded under contradictory aspects, as for example when the existence of

the one and the non-existence of the one are equally assumed to involve the

existence of the many: (12) Words are used through long chains of argument,

sometimes  loosely,  sometimes  with  the  precision  of  numbers  or  of

geometrical figures.


  The argument is a very curious piece of work, unique in literature. It

seems to be an exposition or rather a 'reductio ad absurdum' of the Megarian

philosophy, but we are too imperfectly acquainted with this last to speak with

confidence about it. It would be safer to say that it is an indication of the

sceptical, hyperlogical fancies which prevailed among the contemporaries of

Socrates. It throws an indistinct light upon Aristotle, and makes us aware of

the  debt  which  the  world  owes  to  him  or  his  school.  It  also  bears  a

resemblance to some modern speculations, in which an attempt is made to

narrow language in such a manner that number and figure may be made a

calculus of thought. It exaggerates one side of logic and forgets the rest. It

has the appearance of a mathematical process; the inventor of it delights, as

mathematicians do, in eliciting or discovering an unexpected result. It also

helps to guard us against some fallacies by showing the consequences whichflow from them.


  In  the  Parmenides  we  seem  to  breathe  the  spirit  of  the  Megarian

philosophy, though we cannot compare the two in detail. But Plato also goes

beyond his Megarian contemporaries; he has split their straws over again, and

admitted more than they would have desired. He is indulging the analytical

tendencies of his age, which can divide but not combine. And he does not

stop to inquire whether the distinctions which he makes are shadowy and

fallacious, but 'whither the argument blows' he follows.


  III. The negative series of propositions contains the first conception of the

negation of a negation. Two minus signs in arithmetic or algebra make a plus.

Two negatives destroy each other. This abstruse notion is the foundation of

the  Hegelian  logic.  The  mind  must  not  only  admit  that  determination  is

negation,  but  must  get  through  negation  into  affirmation.  Whether  this

process is real, or in any way an assistance to thought, or, like some other

logical  forms,  a  mere  figure  of  speech  transferred  from  the  sphere  of

mathematics, may be doubted. That Plato and the most subtle philosopher of

the nineteenth century should have lighted upon the same notion, is a singular

coincidence of ancient and modern thought.


  IV.  The  one  and  the  many  or  others  are  reduced  to  their  strictest

arithmetical meaning. That one is three or three one, is a proposition which

has, perhaps, given rise to more controversy in the world than any other. But

no one has ever meant to say that three and one are to be taken in the same

sense. Whereas the one and many of the Parmenides have precisely the same

meaning; there is no notion of one personality or substance having many

attributes or qualities. The truth seems to be rather the opposite of that which

Socrates implies: There is no contradiction in the concrete, but in the abstract;

and the more abstract the idea, the more palpable will be the contradiction.

For just as nothing can persuade us that the number one is the number three,

so neither can we be persuaded that any abstract idea is identical with its

opposite, although they may both inhere together in some external object, or

some more comprehensive conception. Ideas, persons, things may be one in

one sense and many in another, and may have various degrees of unity and

plurality. But in whatever sense and in whatever degree they are one they

cease to be many; and in whatever degree or sense they are many they ceaseto be one.


  Two points remain to be considered: 1st, the connexion between the first

and second parts of the dialogue; 2ndly, the relation of the Parmenides to the

other dialogues.


  I. In both divisions of the dialogue the principal speaker is the same, and

the method pursued by him is also the same, being a criticism on received

opinions:  first,  on  the  doctrine  of  Ideas;  secondly,  of  Being.  From  the

Platonic Ideas we naturally proceed to the Eleatic One or Being which is the

foundation of them. They are the same philosophy in two forms, and the

simpler  form  is  the  truer  and  deeper.  For  the  Platonic  Ideas  are  mere

numerical differences, and the moment we attempt to distinguish between

them, their transcendental character is lost; ideas of justice, temperance, and

good, are really distinguishable only with reference to their application in the

world. If we once ask how they are related to individuals or to the ideas of the

divine mind, they are again merged in the aboriginal notion of Being. No one

can answer the questions which Parmenides asks of Socrates. And yet these

questions are asked with the express acknowledgment that the denial of ideas

will be the destruction of the human mind. The true answer to the difficulty

here thrown out is the establishment of a rational psychology; and this is a

work which is commenced in the Sophist. Plato, in urging the difficulty of his

own doctrine of Ideas, is far from denying that some doctrine of Ideas is

necessary, and for this he is paving the way.


  In a similar spirit he criticizes the Eleatic doctrine of Being, not intending

to deny Ontology, but showing that the old Eleatic notion, and the very name

'Being,' is unable to maintain itself against the subtleties of the Megarians. He

did not mean to say that Being or Substance had no existence, but he is

preparing for the development of his later view, that ideas were capable of

relation. The fact that contradictory consequences follow from the existence

or non-existence of one or many, does not prove that they have or have not

existence, but rather that some different mode of conceiving them is required.

Parmenides may still have thought that 'Being was,' just as Kant would have

asserted  the  existence  of  'things  in  themselves,'  while  denying  the

transcendental use of the Categories.  Several  lesser  links  also  connect  the  first  and  second  parts  of  the

dialogue: (1) The thesis is the same as that which Zeno has been already

discussing: (2) Parmenides has intimated in the first part, that the method of

Zeno should, as Socrates desired, be extended to Ideas: (3) The difficulty of

participating in greatness, smallness, equality is urged against the Ideas as

well as against the One.


  II. The Parmenides is not only a criticism of the Eleatic notion of Being,

but also of the methods of reasoning then in existence, and in this point of

view,  as  well  as  in  the  other,  may  be  regarded  as  an  introduction  to  the

Sophist. Long ago, in the Euthydemus, the vulgar application of the 'both and

neither' Eristic had been subjected to a similar criticism, which there takes the

form of banter and irony, here of illustration.


  The attack upon the Ideas is resumed in the Philebus, and is followed by a

return to a more rational philosophy. The perplexity of the One and Many is

there  confined  to  the  region  of  Ideas,  and  replaced  by  a  theory  of

classification; the Good arranged in classes is also contrasted with the barren

abstraction of the Megarians. The war is carried on against the Eristics in all

the later dialogues, sometimes with a playful irony, at other times with a sort

of contempt. But there is no lengthened refutation of them. The Parmenides

belongs to that stage of the dialogues of Plato in which he is partially under

their influence, using them as a sort of 'critics or diviners' of the truth of his

own, and of the Eleatic theories. In the Theaetetus a similar negative dialectic

is employed in the attempt to define science, which after every effort remains

undefined still. The same question is revived from the objective side in the

Sophist: Being and Not-being are no longer exhibited in opposition, but are

now reconciled; and the true nature of Not-being is discovered and made the

basis  of  the  correlation  of  ideas.  Some  links  are  probably  missing  which

might  have  been  supplied  if  we  had  trustworthy  accounts  of  Plato's  oral

teaching.


  To sum up: the Parmenides of Plato is a critique, first, of the Platonic

Ideas, and secondly, of the Eleatic doctrine of Being. Neither are absolutely

denied.  But  certain  difficulties  and  consequences  are  shown  in  the

assumption of either, which prove that the Platonic as well as the Eleatic

doctrine  must  be  remodelled.  The  negation  and  contradiction  which  areinvolved in the conception of the One and Many are preliminary to their final

adjustment.  The  Platonic  Ideas  are  tested  by  the  interrogative  method  of

Socrates;  the  Eleatic  One  or  Being  is  tried  by  the  severer  and  perhaps

impossible method of hypothetical consequences, negative and affirmative.

In  the  latter  we  have  an  example  of  the  Zenonian  or  Megarian  dialectic,

which proceeded, not 'by assailing premises, but conclusions'; this is worked

out and improved by Plato. When primary abstractions are used in every

conceivable sense, any or every conclusion may be deduced from them. The

words 'one,' 'other,' 'being,' 'like,' 'same,' 'whole,' and their opposites, have

slightly  different  meanings,  as  they  are  applied  to  objects  of  thought  or

objects  of  sense--to  number,  time,  place,  and  to  the  higher  ideas  of  the

reason;--and out of their different meanings this 'feast' of contradictions 'has

been provided.'


  ...


  The  Parmenides  of  Plato  belongs  to  a  stage  of  philosophy  which  has

passed  away.  At  first  we  read  it  with  a  purely  antiquarian  or  historical

interest; and with difficulty throw ourselves back into a state of the human

mind in which Unity and Being occupied the attention of philosophers. We

admire the precision of the language, in which, as in some curious puzzle,

each word is exactly fitted into every other, and long trains of argument are

carried  out  with  a  sort  of  geometrical  accuracy.  We  doubt  whether  any

abstract notion could stand the searching cross-examination of Parmenides;

and may at last perhaps arrive at the conclusion that Plato has been using an

imaginary method to work out an unmeaning conclusion. But the truth is, that

he is carrying on a process which is not either useless or unnecessary in any

age of philosophy. We fail to understand him, because we do not realize that

the questions which he is discussing could have had any value or importance.

We  suppose  them  to  be  like  the  speculations  of  some  of  the  Schoolmen,

which  end  in  nothing.  But  in  truth  he  is  trying  to  get  rid  of  the

stumblingblocks of thought which beset his contemporaries. Seeing that the

Megarians and Cynics were making knowledge impossible, he takes their

'catch-words' and analyzes them from every conceivable point of view. He is

criticizing the simplest and most general of our ideas, in which, as they are

the most comprehensive, the danger of error is the most serious; for, if they

remain unexamined, as in a mathematical demonstration, all that flows fromthem  is  affected,  and  the  error  pervades  knowledge  far  and  wide.  In  the

beginning  of  philosophy  this  correction  of  human  ideas  was  even  more

necessary than in our own times, because they were more bound up with

words; and words when once presented to the mind exercised a greater power

over thought. There is a natural realism which says, 'Can there be a word

devoid of meaning, or an idea which is an idea of nothing?' In modern times

mankind  have  often  given  too  great  importance  to  a  word  or  idea.  The

philosophy of the ancients was still more in slavery to them, because they had

not the experience of error, which would have placed them above the illusion.


  The method of the Parmenides may be compared with the process of

purgation, which Bacon sought to introduce into philosophy. Plato is warning

us  against  two  sorts  of  'Idols  of  the  Den':  first,  his  own  Ideas,  which  he

himself having created is unable to connect in any way with the external

world; secondly, against two idols in particular, 'Unity' and 'Being,' which

had grown up in the pre-Socratic philosophy, and were still standing in the

way of all progress and development of thought. He does not say with Bacon,

'Let us make truth by experiment,' or 'From these vague and inexact notions

let  us  turn  to  facts.'  The  time  has  not  yet  arrived  for  a  purely  inductive

philosophy. The instruments of thought must first be forged, that they may be

used  hereafter  by  modern  inquirers.  How,  while  mankind  were  disputing

about universals, could they classify phenomena? How could they investigate

causes, when they had not as yet learned to distinguish between a cause and

an  end?  How  could  they  make  any  progress  in  the  sciences  without  first

arranging them? These are the deficiencies which Plato is seeking to supply

in  an  age  when  knowledge  was  a  shadow  of  a  name  only.  In  the  earlier

dialogues the Socratic conception of universals is illustrated by his genius; in

the Phaedrus the nature of division is explained; in the Republic the law of

contradiction and the unity of knowledge are asserted; in the later dialogues

he is constantly engaged both with the theory and practice of classification.

These were the 'new weapons,' as he terms them in the Philebus, which he

was preparing for the use of some who, in after ages, would be found ready

enough to disown their obligations to the great master, or rather, perhaps,

would be incapable of understanding them.


    Numberless  fallacies,  as  we  are  often  truly  told,  have  originated  in  a

confusion  of  the  'copula,'  and  the  'verb  of  existence.'  Would  not  thedistinction which Plato by the mouth of Parmenides makes between 'One is

one'  and  'One  has  being'  have  saved  us  from  this  and  many  similar

confusions? We see again that a long period in the history of philosophy was

a barren tract, not uncultivated, but unfruitful, because there was no inquiry

into the relation of language and thought, and the metaphysical imagination

was incapable of supplying the missing link between words and things. The

famous  dispute  between  Nominalists  and  Realists  would  never  have  been

heard  of,  if,  instead  of  transferring  the  Platonic  Ideas  into  a  crude  Latin

phraseology, the spirit of Plato had been truly understood and appreciated.

Upon  the  term  substance  at  least  two  celebrated  theological  controversies

appear to hinge, which would not have existed, or at least not in their present

form, if we had 'interrogated' the word substance, as Plato has the notions of

Unity and Being. These weeds of philosophy have struck their roots deep into

the  soil,  and  are  always  tending  to  reappear,  sometimes  in  new-fangled

forms; while similar words, such as development, evolution, law, and the

like, are constantly put in the place of facts, even by writers who profess to

base truth entirely upon fact. In an unmetaphysical age there is probably more

metaphysics in the common sense (i.e. more a priori assumption) than in any

other, because there is more complete unconsciousness that we are resting on

our own ideas, while we please ourselves with the conviction that we are

resting on facts. We do not consider how much metaphysics are required to

place us above metaphysics, or how difficult it is to prevent the forms of

expression  which  are  ready  made  for  our  use  from  outrunning  actual

observation and experiment.


  In the last century the educated world were astonished to find that the

whole  fabric  of  their  ideas  was  falling  to  pieces,  because  Hume  amused

himself by analyzing the word 'cause' into uniform sequence. Then arose a

philosophy which, equally regardless of the history of the mind, sought to

save  mankind  from  scepticism  by  assigning  to  our  notions  of  'cause  and

effect,' 'substance and accident,' 'whole and part,' a necessary place in human

thought. Without them we could have no experience, and therefore they were

supposed to be prior to experience--to be incrusted on the 'I'; although in the

phraseology of Kant there could be no transcendental use of them, or, in other

words, they were only applicable within the range of our knowledge. But into

the  origin  of  these  ideas,  which  he  obtains  partly  by  an  analysis  of  the

proposition, partly by development of the 'ego,' he never inquires--they seemto him to have a necessary existence; nor does he attempt to analyse the

various senses in which the word 'cause' or 'substance' may be employed.


  The philosophy of Berkeley could never have had any meaning, even to

himself, if he had first analyzed from every point of view the conception of

'matter.' This poor forgotten word (which was 'a very good word' to describe

the  simplest  generalization  of  external  objects)  is  now  superseded  in  the

vocabulary of physical philosophers by 'force,' which seems to be accepted

without any rigid examination of its meaning, as if the general idea of 'force'

in our minds furnished an explanation of the infinite variety of forces which

exist in the universe. A similar ambiguity occurs in the use of the favourite

word  'law,'  which  is  sometimes  regarded  as  a  mere  abstraction,  and  then

elevated  into  a  real  power  or  entity,  almost  taking  the  place  of  God.

Theology, again, is full of undefined terms which have distracted the human

mind for ages. Mankind have reasoned from them, but not to them; they have

drawn out the conclusions without proving the premises; they have asserted

the premises without examining the terms. The passions of religious parties

have been roused to the utmost about words of which they could have given

no explanation, and which had really no distinct meaning. One sort of them,

faith, grace, justification, have been the symbols of one class of disputes; as

the words substance, nature, person, of another, revelation, inspiration, and

the like, of a third. All of them have been the subject of endless reasonings

and  inferences;  but  a  spell  has  hung  over  the  minds  of  theologians  or

philosophers  which  has  prevented  them  from  examining  the  words

themselves. Either the effort to rise above and beyond their own first ideas

was  too  great  for  them,  or  there  might,  perhaps,  have  seemed  to  be  an

irreverence in doing so. About the Divine Being Himself, in whom all true

theological ideas live and move, men have spoken and reasoned much, and

have fancied that they instinctively know Him. But they hardly suspect that

under  the  name  of  God  even  Christians  have  included  two  characters  or

natures as much opposed as the good and evil principle of the Persians.


  To have the true use of words we must compare them with things; in

using them we acknowledge that they seldom give a perfect representation of

our meaning. In like manner when we interrogate our ideas we find that we

are not using them always in the sense which we supposed. And Plato, while

he criticizes the inconsistency of his own doctrine of universals and drawsout the endless consequences which flow from the assertion either that 'Being

is'  or  that  'Being  is  not,'  by  no  means  intends  to  deny  the  existence  of

universals or the unity under which they are comprehended. There is nothing

further from his thoughts than scepticism. But before proceeding he must

examine  the  foundations  which  he  and  others  have  been  laying;  there  is

nothing true which is not from some point of view untrue, nothing absolute

which is not also relative (compare Republic).


  And so, in modern times, because we are called upon to analyze our ideas

and to come to a distinct understanding about the meaning of words; because

we know that the powers of language are very unequal to the subtlety of

nature or of mind, we do not therefore renounce the use of them; but we

replace them in their old connexion, having first tested their meaning and

quality, and having corrected the error which is involved in them; or rather

always remembering to make allowance for the adulteration or alloy which

they contain. We cannot call a new metaphysical world into existence any

more than we can frame a new universal language; in thought as in speech,

we are dependent on the past. We know that the words 'cause' and 'effect' are

very far from representing to us the continuity or the complexity of nature or

the different modes or degrees in which phenomena are connected. Yet we

accept them as the best expression which we have of the correlation of forces

or objects. We see that the term 'law' is a mere abstraction, under which laws

of matter and of mind, the law of nature and the law of the land are included,

and some of these uses of the word are confusing, because they introduce into

one sphere of thought associations which belong to another; for example,

order or sequence is apt to be confounded with external compulsion and the

internal workings of the mind with their material antecedents. Yet none of

them can be dispensed with; we can only be on our guard against the error or

confusion which arises out of them. Thus in the use of the word 'substance'

we are far from supposing that there is any mysterious substratum apart from

the objects which we see, and we acknowledge that the negative notion is

very likely to become a positive one. Still we retain the word as a convenient

generalization, though not without a double sense, substance, and essence,

derived from the two-fold translation of the Greek ousia.


  So the human mind makes the reflection that God is not a person like

ourselves--is  not  a  cause  like  the  material  causes  in  nature,  nor  even  anintelligent cause like a human agent--nor an individual, for He is universal;

and that every possible conception which we can form of Him is limited by

the human faculties. We cannot by any effort of thought or exertion of faith

be in and out of our own minds at the same instant. How can we conceive

Him under the forms of time and space, who is out of time and space? How

get rid of such forms and see Him as He is? How can we imagine His relation

to the world or to ourselves? Innumerable contradictions follow from either

of the two alternatives, that God is or that He is not. Yet we are far from

saying that we know nothing of Him, because all that we know is subject to

the conditions of human thought. To the old belief in Him we return, but with

corrections. He is a person, but not like ourselves; a mind, but not a human

mind; a cause, but not a material cause, nor yet a maker or artificer. The

words which we use are imperfect expressions of His true nature; but we do

not therefore lose faith in what is best and highest in ourselves and in the

world.


  'A little philosophy takes us away from God; a great deal brings us back

to Him.' When we begin to reflect, our first thoughts respecting Him and

ourselves are apt to be sceptical. For we can analyze our religious as well as

our other ideas; we can trace their history; we can criticize their perversion;

we see that they are relative to the human mind and to one another. But when

we  have  carried  our  criticism  to  the  furthest  point,  they  still  remain,  a

necessity of our moral nature, better known and understood by us, and less

liable  to  be  shaken,  because  we  are  more  aware  of  their  necessary

imperfection. They come to us with 'better opinion, better confirmation,' not

merely as the inspirations either of ourselves or of another, but deeply rooted

in history and in the human mind.Parmenides


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettPERSONS  OF  THE  DIALOGUE: Cephalus,  Adeimantus,  Glaucon,

Antiphon, Pythodorus, Socrates, Zeno, Parmenides, Aristoteles.


Cephalus rehearses a dialogue which is supposed to have been narrated in his

presence  by  Antiphon,  the  half-brother  of  Adeimantus  and  Glaucon,  to

certain Clazomenians.


We had come from our home at Clazomenae to Athens, and met Adeimantus

and Glaucon in the Agora. Welcome, Cephalus, said Adeimantus, taking me

by the hand; is there anything which we can do for you in Athens?


Yes; that is why I am here; I wish to ask a favour of you.


What may that be? he said.


I want you to tell me the name of your half brother, which I have forgotten;

he was a mere child when I last came hither from Clazomenae, but that was a

long time ago; his father's name, if I remember rightly, was Pyrilampes?


Yes, he said, and the name of our brother, Antiphon; but why do you ask?


Let  me  introduce  some  countrymen  of  mine,  I  said;  they  are  lovers  of

philosophy,  and  have  heard  that  Antiphon  was  intimate  with  a  certain

Pythodorus,  a  friend  of  Zeno,  and  remembers  a  conversation  which  took

place between Socrates, Zeno, and Parmenides many years ago, Pythodorus

having often recited it to him.


Quite true.


And could we hear it? I asked.


Nothing easier, he replied; when he was a youth he made a careful study of

the piece; at present his thoughts run in another direction; like his grandfather

Antiphon he is devoted to horses. But, if that is what you want, let us go and

look for him; he dwells at Melita, which is quite near, and he has only just

left us to go home.Accordingly we went to look for him; he was at home, and in the act of

giving a bridle to a smith to be fitted. When he had done with the smith, his

brothers  told  him  the  purpose  of  our  visit;  and  he  saluted  me  as  an

acquaintance whom he remembered from my former visit, and we asked him

to repeat the dialogue. At first he was not very willing, and complained of the

trouble, but at length he consented. He told us that Pythodorus had described

to him the appearance of Parmenides and Zeno; they came to Athens, as he

said, at the great Panathenaea; the former was, at the time of his visit, about

65 years old, very white with age, but well favoured. Zeno was nearly 40

years of age, tall and fair to look upon; in the days of his youth he was

reported to have been beloved by Parmenides. He said that they lodged with

Pythodorus in the Ceramicus, outside the wall, whither Socrates, then a very

young man, came to see them, and many others with him; they wanted to

hear the writings of Zeno, which had been brought to Athens for the first time

on the occasion of their visit. These Zeno himself read to them in the absence

of Parmenides, and had very nearly finished when Pythodorus entered, and

with him Parmenides and Aristoteles who was afterwards one of the Thirty,

and heard the little that remained of the dialogue. Pythodorus had heard Zeno

repeat them before.


When the recitation was completed, Socrates requested that the first thesis of

the first argument might be read over again, and this having been done, he

said: What is your meaning, Zeno? Do you maintain that if being is many, it

must be both like and unlike, and that this is impossible, for neither can the

like be unlike, nor the unlike like--is that your position?


Just so, said Zeno.


And if the unlike cannot be like, or the like unlike, then according to you,

being could not be many; for this would involve an impossibility. In all that

you  say  have  you  any  other  purpose  except  to  disprove  the  being  of  the

many? and is not each division of your treatise intended to furnish a separate

proof of this, there being in all as many proofs of the not-being of the many

as  you  have  composed  arguments?  Is  that  your  meaning,  or  have  I

misunderstood you?


No, said Zeno; you have correctly understood my general purpose.I see, Parmenides, said Socrates, that Zeno would like to be not only one with

you in friendship but your second self in his writings too; he puts what you

say  in  another  way,  and  would  fain  make  believe  that  he  is  telling  us

something which is new. For you, in your poems, say The All is one, and of

this you adduce excellent proofs; and he on the other hand says There is no

many; and on behalf of this he offers overwhelming evidence. You affirm

unity, he denies plurality. And so you deceive the world into believing that

you are saying different things when really you are saying much the same.

This is a strain of art beyond the reach of most of us.


Yes, Socrates, said Zeno. But although you are as keen as a Spartan hound in

pursuing  the  track,  you  do  not  fully  apprehend  the  true  motive  of  the

composition, which is not really such an artificial work as you imagine; for

what you speak of was an accident; there was no pretence of a great purpose;

nor  any  serious  intention  of  deceiving  the  world.  The  truth  is,  that  these

writings of mine were meant to protect the arguments of Parmenides against

those  who  make  fun  of  him  and  seek  to  show  the  many  ridiculous  and

contradictory results which they suppose to follow from the affirmation of the

one. My answer is addressed to the partisans of the many, whose attack I

return with interest by retorting upon them that their hypothesis of the being

of many, if carried out, appears to be still more ridiculous than the hypothesis

of the being of one. Zeal for my master led me to write the book in the days

of my youth, but some one stole the copy; and therefore I had no choice

whether it should be published or not; the motive, however, of writing, was

not the ambition of an elder man, but the pugnacity of a young one. This you

do not seem to see, Socrates; though in other respects, as I was saying, your

notion is a very just one.


I understand, said Socrates, and quite accept your account. But tell me, Zeno,

do you not further think that there is an idea of likeness in itself, and another

idea of unlikeness, which is the opposite of likeness, and that in these two,

you and I and all other things to which we apply the term many, participate--

things which participate in likeness become in that degree and manner like;

and so far as they participate in unlikeness become in that degree unlike, or

both like and unlike in the degree in which they participate in both? And may

not  all  things  partake  of  both  opposites,  and  be  both  like  and  unlike,  by

reason of this participation?--Where is the wonder? Now if a person couldprove the absolute like to become unlike, or the absolute unlike to become

like, that, in my opinion, would indeed be a wonder; but there is nothing

extraordinary,  Zeno,  in  showing  that  the  things  which  only  partake  of

likeness and unlikeness experience both. Nor, again, if a person were to show

that all is one by partaking of one, and at the same time many by partaking of

many, would that be very astonishing. But if he were to show me that the

absolute one was many, or the absolute many one, I should be truly amazed.

And so of all the rest: I should be surprised to hear that the natures or ideas

themselves had these opposite qualities; but not if a person wanted to prove

of me that I was many and also one. When he wanted to show that I was

many he would say that I have a right and a left side, and a front and a back,

and an upper and a lower half, for I cannot deny that I partake of multitude;

when, on the other hand, he wants to prove that I am one, he will say, that we

who are here assembled are seven, and that I am one and partake of the one.

In both instances he proves his case. So again, if a person shows that such

things as wood, stones, and the like, being many are also one, we admit that

he shows the coexistence of the one and many, but he does not show that the

many are one or the one many; he is uttering not a paradox but a truism. If

however, as I just now suggested, some one were to abstract simple notions

of like, unlike, one, many, rest, motion, and similar ideas, and then to show

that these admit of admixture and separation in themselves, I should be very

much astonished. This part of the argument appears to be treated by you,

Zeno, in a very spirited manner; but, as I was saying, I should be far more

amazed if any one found in the ideas themselves which are apprehended by

reason, the same puzzle and entanglement which you have shown to exist in

visible objects.


While Socrates was speaking, Pythodorus thought that Parmenides and Zeno

were not altogether pleased at the successive steps of the argument; but still

they gave the closest attention, and often looked at one another, and smiled as

if in admiration of him. When he had finished, Parmenides expressed their

feelings in the following words:--


Socrates, he said, I admire the bent of your mind towards philosophy; tell me

now,  was  this  your  own  distinction  between  ideas  in  themselves  and  the

things  which  partake  of  them?  and  do  you  think  that  there  is  an  idea  of

likeness apart from the likeness which we possess, and of the one and many,and of the other things which Zeno mentioned?


I think that there are such ideas, said Socrates.


Parmenides proceeded: And would you also make absolute ideas of the just

and the beautiful and the good, and of all that class?


Yes, he said, I should.


And would you make an idea of man apart from us and from all other human

creatures, or of fire and water?


I am often undecided, Parmenides, as to whether I ought to include them or

not.


And would you feel equally undecided, Socrates, about things of which the

mention may provoke a smile?--I mean such things as hair, mud, dirt, or

anything else which is vile and paltry; would you suppose that each of these

has an idea distinct from the actual objects with which we come into contact,

or not?


Certainly not, said Socrates; visible things like these are such as they appear

to us, and I am afraid that there would be an absurdity in assuming any idea

of them, although I sometimes get disturbed, and begin to think that there is

nothing without an idea; but then again, when I have taken up this position, I

run  away,  because  I  am  afraid  that  I  may  fall  into  a  bottomless  pit  of

nonsense, and perish; and so I return to the ideas of which I was just now

speaking, and occupy myself with them.


Yes, Socrates, said Parmenides; that is because you are still young; the time

will come, if I am not mistaken, when philosophy will have a firmer grasp of

you, and then you will not despise even the meanest things; at your age, you

are too much disposed to regard the opinions of men. But I should like to

know whether you mean that there are certain ideas of which all other things

partake, and from which they derive their names; that similars, for example,

become similar, because they partake of similarity; and great things become

great, because they partake of greatness; and that just and beautiful thingsbecome just and beautiful, because they partake of justice and beauty?


Yes, certainly, said Socrates that is my meaning.


Then each individual partakes either of the whole of the idea or else of a part

of the idea? Can there be any other mode of participation?


There cannot be, he said.


Then do you think that the whole idea is one, and yet, being one, is in each

one of the many?


Why not, Parmenides? said Socrates.


Because one and the same thing will exist as a whole at the same time in

many separate individuals, and will therefore be in a state of separation from

itself.


Nay, but the idea may be like the day which is one and the same in many

places at once, and yet continuous with itself; in this way each idea may be

one and the same in all at the same time.


I like your way, Socrates, of making one in many places at once. You mean

to say, that if I were to spread out a sail and cover a number of men, there

would be one whole including many--is not that your meaning?


I think so.


And would you say that the whole sail includes each man, or a part of it only,

and different parts different men?


The latter.


Then,  Socrates,  the  ideas  themselves  will  be  divisible,  and  things  which

participate in them will have a part of them only and not the whole idea

existing in each of them?


That seems to follow.Then would you like to say, Socrates, that the one idea is really divisible and

yet remains one?


Certainly not, he said.


Suppose that you divide absolute greatness, and that of the many great things,

each  one  is  great  in  virtue  of  a  portion  of  greatness  less  than  absolute

greatness--is that conceivable?


No.


Or will each equal thing, if possessing some small portion of equality less

than absolute equality, be equal to some other thing by virtue of that portion

only?


Impossible.


Or suppose one of us to have a portion of smallness; this is but a part of the

small, and therefore the absolutely small is greater; if the absolutely small be

greater, that to which the part of the small is added will be smaller and not

greater than before.


How absurd!


Then in what way, Socrates, will all things participate in the ideas, if they are

unable to participate in them either as parts or wholes?


Indeed, he said, you have asked a question which is not easily answered.


Well, said Parmenides, and what do you say of another question?


What question?


I imagine that the way in which you are led to assume one idea of each kind

is as follows:--You see a number of great objects, and when you look at them

there seems to you to be one and the same idea (or nature) in them all; hence

you conceive of greatness as one.Very true, said Socrates.


And if you go on and allow your mind in like manner to embrace in one view

the  idea  of  greatness  and  of  great  things  which  are  not  the  idea,  and  to

compare them, will not another greatness arise, which will appear to be the

source of all these?


It would seem so.


Then another idea of greatness now comes into view over and above absolute

greatness, and the individuals which partake of it; and then another, over and

above all these, by virtue of which they will all be great, and so each idea

instead of being one will be infinitely multiplied.


But may not the ideas, asked Socrates, be thoughts only, and have no proper

existence except in our minds, Parmenides? For in that case each idea may

still be one, and not experience this infinite multiplication.


And can there be individual thoughts which are thoughts of nothing?


Impossible, he said.


The thought must be of something?


Yes.


Of something which is or which is not?


Of something which is.


Must  it  not  be  of  a  single  something,  which  the  thought  recognizes  as

attaching to all, being a single form or nature?


Yes.


And will not the something which is apprehended as one and the same in all,

be an idea?From that, again, there is no escape.


Then, said Parmenides, if you say that everything else participates in the

ideas, must you not say either that everything is made up of thoughts, and

that all things think; or that they are thoughts but have no thought?


The latter view, Parmenides, is no more rational than the previous one. In my

opinion, the ideas are, as it were, patterns fixed in nature, and other things are

like them, and resemblances of them--what is meant by the participation of

other things in the ideas, is really assimilation to them.


But if, said he, the individual is like the idea, must not the idea also be like

the individual, in so far as the individual is a resemblance of the idea? That

which is like, cannot be conceived of as other than the like of like.


Impossible.


And when two things are alike, must they not partake of the same idea?


They must.


And will not that of which the two partake, and which makes them alike, be

the idea itself?


Certainly.


Then the idea cannot be like the individual, or the individual like the idea; for

if they are alike, some further idea of likeness will always be coming to light,

and  if  that  be  like  anything  else,  another;  and  new  ideas  will  be  always

arising, if the idea resembles that which partakes of it?


Quite true.


The theory, then, that other things participate in the ideas by resemblance, has

to be given up, and some other mode of participation devised?


It would seem so.Do you see then, Socrates, how great is the difficulty of affirming the ideas to

be absolute?


Yes, indeed.


And, further, let me say that as yet you only understand a small part of the

difficulty which is involved if you make of each thing a single idea, parting it

off from other things.


What difficulty? he said.


There are many, but the greatest of all is this:--If an opponent argues that

these ideas, being such as we say they ought to be, must remain unknown, no

one can prove to him that he is wrong, unless he who denies their existence

be a man of great ability and knowledge, and is willing to follow a long and

laborious demonstration; he will remain unconvinced, and still insist that they

cannot be known.


What do you mean, Parmenides? said Socrates.


In the first place, I think, Socrates, that you, or any one who maintains the

existence of absolute essences, will admit that they cannot exist in us.


No, said Socrates; for then they would be no longer absolute.


True, he said; and therefore when ideas are what they are in relation to one

another, their essence is determined by a relation among themselves, and has

nothing  to  do  with  the  resemblances,  or  whatever  they  are  to  be  termed,

which are in our sphere, and from which we receive this or that name when

we partake of them. And the things which are within our sphere and have the

same names with them, are likewise only relative to one another, and not to

the ideas which have the same names with them, but belong to themselves

and not to them.


What do you mean? said Socrates.


I may illustrate my meaning in this way, said Parmenides:--A master has a

slave; now there is nothing absolute in the relation between them, which issimply  a  relation  of  one  man  to  another.  But  there  is  also  an  idea  of

mastership  in  the  abstract,  which  is  relative  to  the  idea  of  slavery  in  the

abstract. These natures have nothing to do with us, nor we with them; they

are concerned with themselves only, and we with ourselves. Do you see my

meaning?


Yes, said Socrates, I quite see your meaning.


And  will  not  knowledge--I  mean  absolute  knowledge--answer  to  absolute

truth?


Certainly.


And each kind of absolute knowledge will answer to each kind of absolute

being?


Yes.


But the knowledge which we have, will answer to the truth which we have;

and again, each kind of knowledge which we have, will be a knowledge of

each kind of being which we have?


Certainly.


But the ideas themselves, as you admit, we have not, and cannot have?


No, we cannot.


And the absolute natures or kinds are known severally by the absolute idea of

knowledge?


Yes.


And we have not got the idea of knowledge?


No.


Then none of the ideas are known to us, because we have no share in absoluteknowledge?


I suppose not.


Then the nature of the beautiful in itself, and of the good in itself, and all

other ideas which we suppose to exist absolutely, are unknown to us?


It would seem so.


I think that there is a stranger consequence still.


What is it?


Would you, or would you not say, that absolute knowledge, if there is such a

thing, must be a far more exact knowledge than our knowledge; and the same

of beauty and of the rest?


Yes.


And if there be such a thing as participation in absolute knowledge, no one is

more likely than God to have this most exact knowledge?


Certainly.


But then, will God, having absolute knowledge, have a knowledge of human

things?


Why not?


Because, Socrates, said Parmenides, we have admitted that the ideas are not

valid in relation to human things; nor human things in relation to them; the

relations of either are limited to their respective spheres.


Yes, that has been admitted.


And if God has this perfect authority, and perfect knowledge, his authority

cannot rule us, nor his knowledge know us, or any human thing; just as our

authority does not extend to the gods, nor our knowledge know anythingwhich is divine, so by parity of reason they, being gods, are not our masters,

neither do they know the things of men.


Yet, surely, said Socrates, to deprive God of knowledge is monstrous.


These, Socrates, said Parmenides, are a few, and only a few of the difficulties

in which we are involved if ideas really are and we determine each one of

them to be an absolute unity. He who hears what may be said against them

will deny the very existence of them--and even if they do exist, he will say

that they must of necessity be unknown to man; and he will seem to have

reason on his side, and as we were remarking just now, will be very difficult

to convince; a man must be gifted with very considerable ability before he

can learn that everything has a class and an absolute essence; and still more

remarkable will he be who discovers all these things for himself, and having

thoroughly investigated them is able to teach them to others.


I agree with you, Parmenides, said Socrates; and what you say is very much

to my mind.


And yet, Socrates, said Parmenides, if a man, fixing his attention on these and

the like difficulties, does away with ideas of things and will not admit that

every individual thing has its own determinate idea which is always one and

the same, he will have nothing on which his mind can rest; and so he will

utterly destroy the power of reasoning, as you seem to me to have particularly

noted.


Very true, he said.


But, then, what is to become of philosophy? Whither shall we turn, if the

ideas are unknown?


I certainly do not see my way at present.


Yes,  said  Parmenides;  and  I  think  that  this  arises,  Socrates,  out  of  your

attempting to define the beautiful, the just, the good, and the ideas generally,

without sufficient previous training. I noticed your deficiency, when I heard

you talking here with your friend Aristoteles, the day before yesterday. Theimpulse that carries you towards philosophy is assuredly noble and divine;

but there is an art which is called by the vulgar idle talking, and which is

often imagined to be useless; in that you must train and exercise yourself,

now that you are young, or truth will elude your grasp.


And  what  is  the  nature  of  this  exercise,  Parmenides,  which  you  would

recommend?


That which you heard Zeno practising; at the same time, I give you credit for

saying to him that you did not care to examine the perplexity in reference to

visible things, or to consider the question that way; but only in reference to

objects of thought, and to what may be called ideas.


Why, yes, he said, there appears to me to be no difficulty in showing by this

method that visible things are like and unlike and may experience anything.


Quite true, said Parmenides; but I think that you should go a step further, and

consider not only the consequences which flow from a given hypothesis, but

also the consequences which flow from denying the hypothesis; and that will

be still better training for you.


What do you mean? he said.


I mean, for example, that in the case of this very hypothesis of Zeno's about

the many, you should inquire not only what will be the consequences to the

many in relation to themselves and to the one, and to the one in relation to

itself and the many, on the hypothesis of the being of the many, but also what

will  be  the  consequences  to  the  one  and  the  many  in  their  relation  to

themselves  and  to  each  other,  on  the  opposite  hypothesis.  Or,  again,  if

likeness is or is not, what will be the consequences in either of these cases to

the  subjects  of  the  hypothesis,  and  to  other  things,  in  relation  both  to

themselves and to one another, and so of unlikeness; and the same holds good

of motion and rest, of generation and destruction, and even of being and not-

being. In a word, when you suppose anything to be or not to be, or to be in

any way affected, you must look at the consequences in relation to the thing

itself, and to any other things which you choose,--to each of them singly, to

more than one, and to all; and so of other things, you must look at them inrelation to themselves and to anything else which you suppose either to be or

not to be, if you would train yourself perfectly and see the real truth.


That, Parmenides, is a tremendous business of which you speak, and I do not

quite  understand  you;  will  you  take  some  hypothesis  and  go  through  the

steps?--then I shall apprehend you better.


That, Socrates, is a serious task to impose on a man of my years.


Then will you, Zeno? said Socrates.


Zeno  answered  with  a  smile:--Let  us  make  our  petition  to  Parmenides

himself, who is quite right in saying that you are hardly aware of the extent of

the task which you are imposing on him; and if there were more of us I

should not ask him, for these are not subjects which any one, especially at his

age, can well speak of before a large audience; most people are not aware that

this roundabout progress through all things is the only way in which the mind

can attain truth and wisdom. And therefore, Parmenides, I join in the request

of Socrates, that I may hear the process again which I have not heard for a

long time.


When Zeno had thus spoken, Pythodorus, according to Antiphon's report of

him, said, that he himself and Aristoteles and the whole company entreated

Parmenides  to  give  an  example  of  the  process.  I  cannot  refuse,  said

Parmenides;  and  yet  I  feel  rather  like  Ibycus,  who,  when  in  his  old  age,

against his will, he fell in love, compared himself to an old racehorse, who

was about to run in a chariot race, shaking with fear at the course he knew so

well--this was his simile of himself. And I also experience a trembling when I

remember through what an ocean of words I have to wade at my time of life.

But I must indulge you, as Zeno says that I ought, and we are alone. Where

shall I begin? And what shall be our first hypothesis, if I am to attempt this

laborious pastime? Shall I begin with myself, and take my own hypothesis

the  one?  and  consider  the  consequences  which  follow  on  the  supposition

either of the being or of the not-being of one?


By all means, said Zeno.And who will answer me? he said. Shall I propose the youngest? He will not

make difficulties and will be the most likely to say what he thinks; and his

answers will give me time to breathe.


I am the one whom you mean, Parmenides, said Aristoteles; for I am the

youngest and at your service. Ask, and I will answer.


Parmenides proceeded: 1.a. If one is, he said, the one cannot be many?


Impossible.


Then the one cannot have parts, and cannot be a whole?


Why not?


Because every part is part of a whole; is it not?


Yes.


And what is a whole? would not that of which no part is wanting be a whole?


Certainly.


Then, in either case, the one would be made up of parts; both as being a

whole, and also as having parts?


To be sure.


And in either case, the one would be many, and not one?


True.


But, surely, it ought to be one and not many?


It ought.


Then, if the one is to remain one, it will not be a whole, and will not have

parts?No.


But if it has no parts, it will have neither beginning, middle, nor end; for

these would of course be parts of it.


Right.


But then, again, a beginning and an end are the limits of everything?


Certainly.


Then the one, having neither beginning nor end, is unlimited?


Yes, unlimited.


And therefore formless; for it cannot partake either of round or straight.


But why?


Why, because the round is that of which all the extreme points are equidistant

from the centre?


Yes.


And  the  straight  is  that  of  which  the  centre  intercepts  the  view  of  the

extremes?


True.


Then the one would have parts and would be many, if it partook either of a

straight or of a circular form?


Assuredly.


But having no parts, it will be neither straight nor round?


Right.And, being of such a nature, it cannot be in any place, for it cannot be either

in another or in itself.


How so?


Because if it were in another, it would be encircled by that in which it was,

and would touch it at many places and with many parts; but that which is one

and indivisible, and does not partake of a circular nature, cannot be touched

all round in many places.


Certainly not.


But if, on the other hand, one were in itself, it would also be contained by

nothing else but itself; that is to say, if it were really in itself; for nothing can

be in anything which does not contain it.


Impossible.


But then, that which contains must be other than that which is contained? for

the same whole cannot do and suffer both at once; and if so, one will be no

longer one, but two?


True.


Then one cannot be anywhere, either in itself or in another?


No.


Further consider, whether that which is of such a nature can have either rest

or motion.


Why not?


Why, because the one, if it were moved, would be either moved in place or

changed in nature; for these are the only kinds of motion.


Yes.And the one, when it changes and ceases to be itself, cannot be any longer

one.


It cannot.


It cannot therefore experience the sort of motion which is change of nature?


Clearly not.


Then can the motion of the one be in place?


Perhaps.


But if the one moved in place, must it not either move round and round in the

same place, or from one place to another?


It must.


And that which moves in a circle must rest upon a centre; and that which

goes round upon a centre must have parts which are different from the centre;

but that which has no centre and no parts cannot possibly be carried round

upon a centre?


Impossible.


But perhaps the motion of the one consists in change of place?


Perhaps so, if it moves at all.


And have we not already shown that it cannot be in anything?


Yes.


Then its coming into being in anything is still more impossible; is it not?


I do not see why.


Why, because anything which comes into being in anything, can neither asyet be in that other thing while still coming into being, nor be altogether out

of it, if already coming into being in it.


Certainly not.


And therefore whatever comes into being in another must have parts, and

then one part may be in, and another part out of that other; but that which has

no parts can never be at one and the same time neither wholly within nor

wholly without anything.


True.


And is there not a still greater impossibility in that which has no parts, and is

not a whole, coming into being anywhere, since it cannot come into being

either as a part or as a whole?


Clearly.


Then it does not change place by revolving in the same spot, nor by going

somewhere and coming into being in something; nor again, by change in

itself?


Very true.


Then in respect of any kind of motion the one is immoveable?


Immoveable.


But neither can the one be in anything, as we affirm?


Yes, we said so.


Then it is never in the same?


Why not?


Because if it were in the same it would be in something.Certainly.


And we said that it could not be in itself, and could not be in other?


True.


Then one is never in the same place?


It would seem not.


But that which is never in the same place is never quiet or at rest?


Never.


One then, as would seem, is neither at rest nor in motion?


It certainly appears so.


Neither will it be the same with itself or other; nor again, other than itself or

other.


How is that?


If other than itself it would be other than one, and would not be one.


True.


And if the same with other, it would be that other, and not itself; so that upon

this supposition too, it would not have the nature of one, but would be other

than one?


It would.


Then it will not be the same with other, or other than itself?


It will not.


Neither will it be other than other, while it remains one; for not one, but onlyother, can be other than other, and nothing else.


True.


Then not by virtue of being one will it be other?


Certainly not.


But if not by virtue of being one, not by virtue of itself; and if not by virtue of

itself,  not  itself,  and  itself  not  being  other  at  all,  will  not  be  other  than

anything?


Right.


Neither will one be the same with itself.


How not?


Surely the nature of the one is not the nature of the same.


Why not?


It is not when anything becomes the same with anything that it becomes one.


What of that?


Anything which becomes the same with the many, necessarily becomes many

and not one.


True.


But, if there were no difference between the one and the same, when a thing

became the same, it would always become one; and when it became one, the

same?


Certainly.


And, therefore, if one be the same with itself, it is not one with itself, and willtherefore be one and also not one.


Surely that is impossible.


And therefore the one can neither be other than other, nor the same with

itself.


Impossible.


And thus the one can neither be the same, nor other, either in relation to itself

or other?


No.


Neither will the one be like anything or unlike itself or other.


Why not?


Because likeness is sameness of affections.


Yes.


And sameness has been shown to be of a nature distinct from oneness?


That has been shown.


But if the one had any other affection than that of being one, it would be

affected in such a way as to be more than one; which is impossible.


True.


Then the one can never be so affected as to be the same either with another or

with itself?


Clearly not.


Then it cannot be like another, or like itself?No.


Nor can it be affected so as to be other, for then it would be affected in such a

way as to be more than one.


It would.


That which is affected otherwise than itself or another, will be unlike itself or

another, for sameness of affections is likeness.


True.


But the one, as appears, never being affected otherwise, is never unlike itself

or other?


Never.


Then the one will never be either like or unlike itself or other?


Plainly not.


Again, being of this nature, it can neither be equal nor unequal either to itself

or to other.


How is that?


Why, because the one if equal must be of the same measures as that to which

it is equal.


True.


And if greater or less than things which are commensurable with it, the one

will have more measures than that which is less, and fewer than that which is

greater?


Yes.


And so of things which are not commensurate with it, the one will havegreater  measures  than  that  which  is  less  and  smaller  than  that  which  is

greater.


Certainly.


But how can that which does not partake of sameness, have either the same

measures or have anything else the same?


Impossible.


And not having the same measures, the one cannot be equal either with itself

or with another?


It appears so.


But again, whether it have fewer or more measures, it will have as many parts

as it has measures; and thus again the one will be no longer one but will have

as many parts as measures.


Right.


And if it were of one measure, it would be equal to that measure; yet it has

been shown to be incapable of equality.


It has.


Then it will neither partake of one measure, nor of many, nor of few, nor of

the same at all, nor be equal to itself or another; nor be greater or less than

itself, or other?


Certainly.


Well, and do we suppose that one can be older, or younger than anything, or

of the same age with it?


Why not?


Why, because that which is of the same age with itself or other, must partakeof equality or likeness of time; and we said that the one did not partake either

of equality or of likeness?


We did say so.


And we also said, that it did not partake of inequality or unlikeness.


Very true.


How  then  can  one,  being  of  this  nature,  be  either  older  or  younger  than

anything, or have the same age with it?


In no way.


Then one cannot be older or younger, or of the same age, either with itself or

with another?


Clearly not.


Then the one, being of this nature, cannot be in time at all; for must not that

which is in time, be always growing older than itself?


Certainly.


And  that  which  is  older,  must  always  be  older  than  something  which  is

younger?


True.


Then, that which becomes older than itself, also becomes at the same time

younger than itself, if it is to have something to become older than.


What do you mean?


I mean this:--A thing does not need to become different from another thing

which is already different; it IS different, and if its different has become, it

has become different; if its different will be, it will be different; but of that

which is becoming different, there cannot have been, or be about to be, or yetbe, a different--the only different possible is one which is becoming.


That is inevitable.


But, surely, the elder is a difference relative to the younger, and to nothing

else.


True.


Then  that  which  becomes  older  than  itself  must  also,  at  the  same  time,

become younger than itself?


Yes.


But again, it is true that it cannot become for a longer or for a shorter time

than itself, but it must become, and be, and have become, and be about to be,

for the same time with itself?


That again is inevitable.


Then things which are in time, and partake of time, must in every case, I

suppose, be of the same age with themselves; and must also become at once

older and younger than themselves?


Yes.


But the one did not partake of those affections?


Not at all.


Then it does not partake of time, and is not in any time?


So the argument shows.


Well, but do not the expressions 'was,' and 'has become,' and 'was becoming,'

signify a participation of past time?


Certainly.And do not 'will be,' 'will become,' 'will have become,' signify a participation

of future time?


Yes.


And 'is,' or 'becomes,' signifies a participation of present time?


Certainly.


And  if  the  one  is  absolutely  without  participation  in  time,  it  never  had

become,  or  was  becoming,  or  was  at  any  time,  or  is  now  become  or  is

becoming, or is, or will become, or will have become, or will be, hereafter.


Most true.


But are there any modes of partaking of being other than these?


There are none.


Then the one cannot possibly partake of being?


That is the inference.


Then the one is not at all?


Clearly not.


Then the one does not exist in such way as to be one; for if it were and

partook of being, it would already be; but if the argument is to be trusted, the

one neither is nor is one?


True.


But that which is not admits of no attribute or relation?


Of course not.


Then  there  is  no  name,  nor  expression,  nor  perception,  nor  opinion,  norknowledge of it?


Clearly not.


Then it is neither named, nor expressed, nor opined, nor known, nor does

anything that is perceive it.


So we must infer.


But can all this be true about the one?


I think not.


1.b. Suppose, now, that we return once more to the original hypothesis; let us

see whether, on a further review, any new aspect of the question appears.


I shall be very happy to do so.


We say that we have to work out together all the consequences, whatever

they may be, which follow, if the one is?


Yes.


Then we will begin at the beginning:--If one is, can one be, and not partake of

being?


Impossible.


Then the one will have being, but its being will not be the same with the one;

for if the same, it would not be the being of the one; nor would the one have

participated  in  being,  for  the  proposition  that  one  is  would  have  been

identical with the proposition that one is one; but our hypothesis is not if one

is one, what will follow, but if one is:--am I not right?


Quite right.


We mean to say, that being has not the same significance as one?Of course.


And when we put them together shortly, and say 'One is,' that is equivalent to

saying, 'partakes of being'?


Quite true.


Once  more  then  let  us  ask,  if  one  is  what  will  follow.  Does  not  this

hypothesis necessarily imply that one is of such a nature as to have parts?


How so?


In this way:--If being is predicated of the one, if the one is, and one of being,

if being is one; and if being and one are not the same; and since the one,

which we have assumed, is, must not the whole, if it is one, itself be, and

have for its parts, one and being?


Certainly.


And is each of these parts--one and being--to be simply called a part, or must

the word 'part' be relative to the word 'whole'?


The latter.


Then that which is one is both a whole and has a part?


Certainly.


Again, of the parts of the one, if it is--I mean being and one--does either fail

to imply the other? is the one wanting to being, or being to the one?


Impossible.


Thus, each of the parts also has in turn both one and being, and is at the least

made up of two parts; and the same principle goes on for ever, and every part

whatever has always these two parts; for being always involves one, and one

being; so that one is always disappearing, and becoming two.Certainly.


And so the one, if it is, must be infinite in multiplicity?


Clearly.


Let us take another direction.


What direction?


We say that the one partakes of being and therefore it is?


Yes.


And in this way, the one, if it has being, has turned out to be many?


True.


But now, let us abstract the one which, as we say, partakes of being, and try

to  imagine  it  apart  from  that  of  which,  as  we  say,  it  partakes--will  this

abstract one be one only or many?


One, I think.


Let us see:--Must not the being of one be other than one? for the one is not

being, but, considered as one, only partook of being?


Certainly.


If being and the one be two different things, it is not because the one is one

that it is other than being; nor because being is being that it is other than the

one; but they differ from one another in virtue of otherness and difference.


Certainly.


So that the other is not the same--either with the one or with being?


Certainly not.And therefore whether we take being and the other, or being and the one, or

the one and the other, in every such case we take two things, which may be

rightly called both.


How so.


In this way--you may speak of being?


Yes.


And also of one?


Yes.


Then now we have spoken of either of them?


Yes.


Well, and when I speak of being and one, I speak of them both?


Certainly.


And if I speak of being and the other, or of the one and the other,--in any

such case do I not speak of both?


Yes.


And must not that which is correctly called both, be also two?


Undoubtedly.


And of two things how can either by any possibility not be one?


It cannot.


Then, if the individuals of the pair are together two, they must be severally

one?Clearly.


And if each of them is one, then by the addition of any one to any pair, the

whole becomes three?


Yes.


And three are odd, and two are even?


Of course.


And if there are two there must also be twice, and if there are three there must

be thrice; that is, if twice one makes two, and thrice one three?


Certainly.


There are two, and twice, and therefore there must be twice two; and there are

three, and there is thrice, and therefore there must be thrice three?


Of course.


If there are three and twice, there is twice three; and if there are two and

thrice, there is thrice two?


Undoubtedly.


Here, then, we have even taken even times, and odd taken odd times, and

even taken odd times, and odd taken even times.


True.


And if this is so, does any number remain which has no necessity to be?


None whatever.


Then if one is, number must also be?


It must.But if there is number, there must also be many, and infinite multiplicity of

being; for number is infinite in multiplicity, and partakes also of being: am I

not right?


Certainly.


And  if  all  number  participates  in  being,  every  part  of  number  will  also

participate?


Yes.


Then being is distributed over the whole multitude of things, and nothing that

is, however small or however great, is devoid of it? And, indeed, the very

supposition of this is absurd, for how can that which is, be devoid of being?


In no way.


And it is divided into the greatest and into the smallest, and into being of all

sizes, and is broken up more than all things; the divisions of it have no limit.


True.


Then it has the greatest number of parts?


Yes, the greatest number.


Is there any of these which is a part of being, and yet no part?


Impossible.


But if it is at all and so long as it is, it must be one, and cannot be none?


Certainly.


Then the one attaches to every single part of being, and does not fail in any

part, whether great or small, or whatever may be the size of it?


True.But reflect:--Can one, in its entirety, be in many places at the same time?


No; I see the impossibility of that.


And if not in its entirety, then it is divided; for it cannot be present with all

the parts of being, unless divided.


True.


And that which has parts will be as many as the parts are?


Certainly.


Then we were wrong in saying just now, that being was distributed into the

greatest number of parts. For it is not distributed into parts more than the one,

into parts equal to the one; the one is never wanting to being, or being to the

one, but being two they are co-equal and co-extensive.


Certainly that is true.


The one itself, then, having been broken up into parts by being, is many and

infinite?


True.


Then not only the one which has being is many, but the one itself distributed

by being, must also be many?


Certainly.


Further, inasmuch as the parts are parts of a whole, the one, as a whole, will

be limited; for are not the parts contained by the whole?


Certainly.


And that which contains, is a limit?


Of course.Then the one if it has being is one and many, whole and parts, having limits

and yet unlimited in number?


Clearly.


And because having limits, also having extremes?


Certainly.


And if a whole, having beginning and middle and end. For can anything be a

whole without these three? And if any one of them is wanting to anything,

will that any longer be a whole?


No.


Then the one, as appears, will have beginning, middle, and end.


It will.


But, again, the middle will be equidistant from the extremes; or it would not

be in the middle?


Yes.


Then the one will partake of figure, either rectilinear or round, or a union of

the two?


True.


And if this is the case, it will be both in itself and in another too.


How?


Every part is in the whole, and none is outside the whole.


True.


And all the parts are contained by the whole?Yes.


And the one is all its parts, and neither more nor less than all?


No.


And the one is the whole?


Of course.


But if all the parts are in the whole, and the one is all of them and the whole,

and they are all contained by the whole, the one will be contained by the one;

and thus the one will be in itself.


That is true.


But then, again, the whole is not in the parts--neither in all the parts, nor in

some one of them. For if it is in all, it must be in one; for if there were any

one in which it was not, it could not be in all the parts; for the part in which it

is wanting is one of all, and if the whole is not in this, how can it be in them

all?


It cannot.


Nor can the whole be in some of the parts; for if the whole were in some of

the parts, the greater would be in the less, which is impossible.


Yes, impossible.


But if the whole is neither in one, nor in more than one, nor in all of the parts,

it must be in something else, or cease to be anywhere at all?


Certainly.


If it were nowhere, it would be nothing; but being a whole, and not being in

itself, it must be in another.


Very true.The one then, regarded as a whole, is in another, but regarded as being all its

parts, is in itself; and therefore the one must be itself in itself and also in

another.


Certainly.


The one then, being of this nature, is of necessity both at rest and in motion?


How?


The one is at rest since it is in itself, for being in one, and not passing out of

this, it is in the same, which is itself.


True.


And that which is ever in the same, must be ever at rest?


Certainly.


Well, and must not that, on the contrary, which is ever in other, never be in

the same; and if never in the same, never at rest, and if not at rest, in motion?


True.


Then the one being always itself in itself and other, must always be both at

rest and in motion?


Clearly.


And must be the same with itself, and other than itself; and also the same

with  the  others,  and  other  than  the  others;  this  follows  from  its  previous

affections.


How so?


Everything in relation to every other thing, is either the same or other; or if

neither the same nor other, then in the relation of a part to a whole, or of a

whole to a part.Clearly.


And is the one a part of itself?


Certainly not.


Since it is not a part in relation to itself it cannot be related to itself as whole

to part?


It cannot.


But is the one other than one?


No.


And therefore not other than itself?


Certainly not.


If then it be neither other, nor a whole, nor a part in relation to itself, must it

not be the same with itself?


Certainly.


But then, again, a thing which is in another place from 'itself,' if this 'itself'

remains in the same place with itself, must be other than 'itself,' for it will be

in another place?


True.


Then the one has been shown to be at once in itself and in another?


Yes.


Thus, then, as appears, the one will be other than itself?


True.Well, then, if anything be other than anything, will it not be other than that

which is other?


Certainly.


And will not all things that are not one, be other than the one, and the one

other than the not-one?


Of course.


Then the one will be other than the others?


True.


But, consider:--Are not the absolute same, and the absolute other, opposites

to one another?


Of course.


Then will the same ever be in the other, or the other in the same?


They will not.


If then the other is never in the same, there is nothing in which the other is

during any space of time; for during that space of time, however small, the

other would be in the same. Is not that true?


Yes.


And since the other is never in the same, it can never be in anything that is.


True.


Then the other will never be either in the not-one, or in the one?


Certainly not.


Then not by reason of otherness is the one other than the not-one, or the not-one other than the one.


No.


Nor  by  reason  of  themselves  will  they  be  other  than  one  another,  if  not

partaking of the other.


How can they be?


But if they are not other, either by reason of themselves or of the other, will

they not altogether escape being other than one another?


They will.


Again, the not-one cannot partake of the one; otherwise it would not have

been not-one, but would have been in some way one.


True.


Nor can the not-one be number; for having number, it would not have been

not-one at all.


It would not.


Again, is the not-one part of the one; or rather, would it not in that case

partake of the one?


It would.


If then, in every point of view, the one and the not-one are distinct, then

neither is the one part or whole of the not-one, nor is the not-one part or

whole of the one?


No.


But we said that things which are neither parts nor wholes of one another, nor

other than one another, will be the same with one another:--so we said?Yes.


Then shall we say that the one, being in this relation to the not-one, is the

same with it?


Let us say so.


Then it is the same with itself and the others, and also other than itself and the

others.


That appears to be the inference.


And it will also be like and unlike itself and the others?


Perhaps.


Since the one was shown to be other than the others, the others will also be

other than the one.


Yes.


And the one is other than the others in the same degree that the others are

other than it, and neither more nor less?


True.


And if neither more nor less, then in a like degree?


Yes.


In virtue of the affection by which the one is other than others and others in

like manner other than it, the one will be affected like the others and the

others like the one.


How do you mean?


I may take as an illustration the case of names: You give a name to a thing?Yes.


And you may say the name once or oftener?


Yes.


And when you say it once, you mention that of which it is the name? and

when more than once, is it something else which you mention? or must it

always be the same thing of which you speak, whether you utter the name

once or more than once?


Of course it is the same.


And is not 'other' a name given to a thing?


Certainly.


Whenever, then, you use the word 'other,' whether once or oftener, you name

that of which it is the name, and to no other do you give the name?


True.


Then when we say that the others are other than the one, and the one other

than the others, in repeating the word 'other' we speak of that nature to which

the name is applied, and of no other?


Quite true.


Then the one which is other than others, and the other which is other than the

one, in that the word 'other' is applied to both, will be in the same condition;

and that which is in the same condition is like?


Yes.


Then in virtue of the affection by which the one is other than the others,

every thing will be like every thing, for every thing is other than every thing.


True.Again, the like is opposed to the unlike?


Yes.


And the other to the same?


True again.


And the one was also shown to be the same with the others?


Yes.


And to be the same with the others is the opposite of being other than the

others?


Certainly.


And in that it was other it was shown to be like?


Yes.


But in that it was the same it will be unlike by virtue of the opposite affection

to that which made it like; and this was the affection of otherness.


Yes.


The same then will make it unlike; otherwise it will not be the opposite of the

other.


True.


Then the one will be both like and unlike the others; like in so far as it is

other, and unlike in so far as it is the same.


Yes, that argument may be used.


And there is another argument.What?


In so far as it is affected in the same way it is not affected otherwise, and not

being affected otherwise is not unlike, and not being unlike, is like; but in so

far as it is affected by other it is otherwise, and being otherwise affected is

unlike.


True.


Then because the one is the same with the others and other than the others, on

either of these two grounds, or on both of them, it will be both like and unlike

the others?


Certainly.


And in the same way as being other than itself and the same with itself, on

either of these two grounds and on both of them, it will be like and unlike

itself?


Of course.


Again, how far can the one touch or not touch itself and others?--consider.


I am considering.


The one was shown to be in itself which was a whole?


True.


And also in other things?


Yes.


In so far as it is in other things it would touch other things, but in so far as it

is in itself it would be debarred from touching them, and would touch itself

only.


Clearly.Then the inference is that it would touch both?


It would.


But what do you say to a new point of view? Must not that which is to touch

another be next to that which it is to touch, and occupy the place nearest to

that in which what it touches is situated?


True.


Then the one, if it is to touch itself, ought to be situated next to itself, and

occupy the place next to that in which itself is?


It ought.


And that would require that the one should be two, and be in two places at

once, and this, while it is one, will never happen.


No.


Then the one cannot touch itself any more than it can be two?


It cannot.


Neither can it touch others.


Why not?


The reason is, that whatever is to touch another must be in separation from,

and next to, that which it is to touch, and no third thing can be between them.


True.


Two things, then, at the least are necessary to make contact possible?


They are.


And if to the two a third be added in due order, the number of terms will bethree, and the contacts two?


Yes.


And every additional term makes one additional contact, whence it follows

that the contacts are one less in number than the terms; the first two terms

exceeded the number of contacts by one, and the whole number of terms

exceeds the whole number of contacts by one in like manner; and for every

one which is afterwards added to the number of terms, one contact is added to

the contacts.


True.


Whatever is the whole number of things, the contacts will be always one less.


True.


But if there be only one, and not two, there will be no contact?


How can there be?


And do we not say that the others being other than the one are not one and

have no part in the one?


True.


Then they have no number, if they have no one in them?


Of course not.


Then the others are neither one nor two, nor are they called by the name of

any number?


No.


One, then, alone is one, and two do not exist?


Clearly not.And if there are not two, there is no contact?


There is not.


Then neither does the one touch the others, nor the others the one, if there is

no contact?


Certainly not.


For  all  which  reasons  the  one  touches  and  does  not  touch  itself  and  the

others?


True.


Further--is the one equal and unequal to itself and others?


How do you mean?


If the one were greater or less than the others, or the others greater or less

than the one, they would not be greater or less than each other in virtue of

their being the one and the others; but, if in addition to their being what they

are they had equality, they would be equal to one another, or if the one had

smallness and the others greatness, or the one had greatness and the others

smallness--whichever kind had greatness would be greater, and whichever

had smallness would be smaller?


Certainly.


Then there are two such ideas as greatness and smallness; for if they were not

they could not be opposed to each other and be present in that which is.


How could they?


If, then, smallness is present in the one it will be present either in the whole

or in a part of the whole?


Certainly.Suppose the first; it will be either co-equal and co-extensive with the whole

one, or will contain the one?


Clearly.


If  it  be  co-extensive  with  the  one  it  will  be  co-equal  with  the  one,  or  if

containing the one it will be greater than the one?


Of course.


But can smallness be equal to anything or greater than anything, and have the

functions of greatness and equality and not its own functions?


Impossible.


Then smallness cannot be in the whole of one, but, if at all, in a part only?


Yes.


And surely not in all of a part, for then the difficulty of the whole will recur;

it will be equal to or greater than any part in which it is.


Certainly.


Then smallness will not be in anything, whether in a whole or in a part; nor

will there be anything small but actual smallness.


True.


Neither will greatness be in the one, for if greatness be in anything there will

be something greater other and besides greatness itself, namely, that in which

greatness is; and this too when the small itself is not there, which the one, if it

is great, must exceed; this, however, is impossible, seeing that smallness is

wholly absent.


True.


But absolute greatness is only greater than absolute smallness, and smallnessis only smaller than absolute greatness.


Very true.


Then  other  things  not  greater  or  less  than  the  one,  if  they  have  neither

greatness  nor  smallness;  nor  have  greatness  or  smallness  any  power  of

exceeding or being exceeded in relation to the one, but only in relation to one

another; nor will the one be greater or less than them or others, if it has

neither greatness nor smallness.


Clearly not.


Then if the one is neither greater nor less than the others, it cannot either

exceed or be exceeded by them?


Certainly not.


And that which neither exceeds nor is exceeded, must be on an equality; and

being on an equality, must be equal.


Of course.


And this will be true also of the relation of the one to itself; having neither

greatness nor smallness in itself, it will neither exceed nor be exceeded by

itself, but will be on an equality with and equal to itself.


Certainly.


Then the one will be equal both to itself and the others?


Clearly so.


And yet the one, being itself in itself, will also surround and be without itself;

and, as containing itself, will be greater than itself; and, as contained in itself,

will be less; and will thus be greater and less than itself.


It will.Now there cannot possibly be anything which is not included in the one and

the others?


Of course not.


But, surely, that which is must always be somewhere?


Yes.


But that which is in anything will be less, and that in which it is will be

greater; in no other way can one thing be in another.


True.


And since there is nothing other or besides the one and the others, and they

must be in something, must they not be in one another, the one in the others

and the others in the one, if they are to be anywhere?


That is clear.


But inasmuch as the one is in the others, the others will be greater than the

one, because they contain the one, which will be less than the others, because

it is contained in them; and inasmuch as the others are in the one, the one on

the same principle will be greater than the others, and the others less than the

one.


True.


The one, then, will be equal to and greater and less than itself and the others?


Clearly.


And if it be greater and less and equal, it will be of equal and more and less

measures or divisions than itself and the others, and if of measures, also of

parts?


Of course.And if of equal and more and less measures or divisions, it will be in number

more or less than itself and the others, and likewise equal in number to itself

and to the others?


How is that?


It will be of more measures than those things which it exceeds, and of as

many parts as measures; and so with that to which it is equal, and that than

which it is less.


True.


And being greater and less than itself, and equal to itself, it will be of equal

measures with itself and of more and fewer measures than itself; and if of

measures then also of parts?


It will.


And being of equal parts with itself, it will be numerically equal to itself; and

being of more parts, more, and being of less, less than itself?


Certainly.


And the same will hold of its relation to other things; inasmuch as it is greater

than them, it will be more in number than them; and inasmuch as it is smaller,

it will be less in number; and inasmuch as it is equal in size to other things, it

will be equal to them in number.


Certainly.


Once more, then, as would appear, the one will be in number both equal to

and more and less than both itself and all other things.


It will.


Does the one also partake of time? And is it and does it become older and

younger than itself and others, and again, neither younger nor older than itself

and others, by virtue of participation in time?How do you mean?


If one is, being must be predicated of it?


Yes.


But to be (einai) is only participation of being in present time, and to have

been is the participation of being at a past time, and to be about to be is the

participation of being at a future time?


Very true.


Then the one, since it partakes of being, partakes of time?


Certainly.


And is not time always moving forward?


Yes.


Then the one is always becoming older than itself, since it moves forward in

time?


Certainly.


And do you remember that the older becomes older than that which becomes

younger?


I remember.


Then since the one becomes older than itself, it becomes younger at the same

time?


Certainly.


Thus, then, the one becomes older as well as younger than itself?


Yes.And it is older (is it not?) when in becoming, it gets to the point of time

between 'was' and 'will be,' which is 'now': for surely in going from the past

to the future, it cannot skip the present?


No.


And  when  it  arrives  at  the  present  it  stops  from  becoming  older,  and  no

longer becomes, but is older, for if it went on it would never be reached by

the  present,  for  it  is  the  nature  of  that  which  goes  on,  to  touch  both  the

present and the future, letting go the present and seizing the future, while in

process of becoming between them.


True.


But  that  which  is  becoming  cannot  skip  the  present;  when  it  reaches  the

present  it  ceases  to  become,  and  is  then  whatever  it  may  happen  to  be

becoming.


Clearly.


And so the one, when in becoming older it reaches the present, ceases to

become, and is then older.


Certainly.


And  it  is  older  than  that  than  which  it  was  becoming  older,  and  it  was

becoming older than itself.


Yes.


And that which is older is older than that which is younger?


True.


Then the one is younger than itself, when in becoming older it reaches the

present?


Certainly.But  the  present  is  always  present  with  the  one  during  all  its  being;  for

whenever it is it is always now.


Certainly.


Then the one always both is and becomes older and younger than itself?


Truly.


And is it or does it become a longer time than itself or an equal time with

itself?


An equal time.


But if it becomes or is for an equal time with itself, it is of the same age with

itself?


Of course.


And that which is of the same age, is neither older nor younger?


No.


The one, then, becoming and being the same time with itself, neither is nor

becomes older or younger than itself?


I should say not.


And what are its relations to other things? Is it or does it become older or

younger than they?


I cannot tell you.


You can at least tell me that others than the one are more than the one-- other

would have been one, but the others have multitude, and are more than one?


They will have multitude.And a multitude implies a number larger than one?


Of course.


And shall we say that the lesser or the greater is the first to come or to have

come into existence?


The lesser.


Then the least is the first? And that is the one?


Yes.


Then the one of all things that have number is the first to come into being;

but all other things have also number, being plural and not singular.


They have.


And since it came into being first it must be supposed to have come into

being prior to the others, and the others later; and the things which came into

being later, are younger than that which preceded them? And so the other

things will be younger than the one, and the one older than other things?


True.


What would you say of another question? Can the one have come into being

contrary to its own nature, or is that impossible?


Impossible.


And  yet,  surely,  the  one  was  shown  to  have  parts;  and  if  parts,  then  a

beginning, middle and end?


Yes.


And a beginning, both of the one itself and of all other things, comes into

being first of all; and after the beginning, the others follow, until you reach

the end?Certainly.


And all these others we shall affirm to be parts of the whole and of the one,

which, as soon as the end is reached, has become whole and one?


Yes; that is what we shall say.


But the end comes last, and the one is of such a nature as to come into being

with the last; and, since the one cannot come into being except in accordance

with its own nature, its nature will require that it should come into being after

the others, simultaneously with the end.


Clearly.


Then the one is younger than the others and the others older than the one.


That also is clear in my judgment.


Well, and must not a beginning or any other part of the one or of anything, if

it be a part and not parts, being a part, be also of necessity one?


Certainly.


And will not the one come into being together with each part--together with

the first part when that comes into being, and together with the second part

and with all the rest, and will not be wanting to any part, which is added to

any other part until it has reached the last and become one whole; it will be

wanting neither to the middle, nor to the first, nor to the last, nor to any of

them, while the process of becoming is going on?


True.


Then the one is of the same age with all the others, so that if the one itself

does not contradict its own nature, it will be neither prior nor posterior to the

others,  but  simultaneous;  and  according  to  this  argument  the  one  will  be

neither older nor younger than the others, nor the others than the one, but

according to the previous argument the one will be older and younger than

the others and the others than the one.Certainly.


After this manner then the one is and has become. But as to its becoming

older and younger than the others, and the others than the one, and neither

older nor younger, what shall we say? Shall we say as of being so also of

becoming, or otherwise?


I cannot answer.


But I can venture to say, that even if one thing were older or younger than

another, it could not become older or younger in a greater degree than it was

at  first;  for  equals  added  to  unequals,  whether  to  periods  of  time  or  to

anything else, leave the difference between them the same as at first.


Of course.


Then that which is, cannot become older or younger than that which is, since

the difference of age is always the same; the one is and has become older and

the other younger; but they are no longer becoming so.


True.


And the one which is does not therefore become either older or younger than

the others which are.


No.


But consider whether they may not become older and younger in another

way.


In what way?


Just as the one was proven to be older than the others and the others than the

one.


And what of that?


If the one is older than the others, has come into being a longer time than theothers.


Yes.


But consider again; if we add equal time to a greater and a less time, will the

greater differ from the less time by an equal or by a smaller portion than

before?


By a smaller portion.


Then the difference between the age of the one and the age of the others will

not be afterwards so great as at first, but if an equal time be added to both of

them they will differ less and less in age?


Yes.


And that which differs in age from some other less than formerly, from being

older will become younger in relation to that other than which it was older?


Yes, younger.


And if the one becomes younger the others aforesaid will become older than

they were before, in relation to the one.


Certainly.


Then that which had become younger becomes older relatively to that which

previously had become and was older; it never really is older, but is always

becoming, for the one is always growing on the side of youth and the other

on the side of age. And in like manner the older is always in process of

becoming younger than the younger; for as they are always going in opposite

directions  they  become  in  ways  the  opposite  to  one  another,  the  younger

older than the older, and the older younger than the younger. They cannot,

however, have become; for if they had already become they would be and not

merely become. But that is impossible; for they are always becoming both

older and younger than one another: the one becomes younger than the others

because it was seen to be older and prior, and the others become older than

the one because they came into being later; and in the same way the othersare in the same relation to the one, because they were seen to be older, and

prior to the one.


That is clear.


Inasmuch then, one thing does not become older or younger than another, in

that they always differ from each other by an equal number, the one cannot

become older or younger than the others, nor the others than the one; but

inasmuch as that which came into being earlier and that which came into

being later must continually differ from each other by a different portion --in

this point of view the others must become older and younger than the one,

and the one than the others.


Certainly.


For all these reasons, then, the one is and becomes older and younger than

itself and the others, and neither is nor becomes older or younger than itself

or the others.


Certainly.


But  since  the  one  partakes  of  time,  and  partakes  of  becoming  older  and

younger, must it not also partake of the past, the present, and the future?


Of course it must.


Then the one was and is and will be, and was becoming and is becoming and

will become?


Certainly.


And there is and was and will be something which is in relation to it and

belongs to it?


True.


And since we have at this moment opinion and knowledge and perception of

the one, there is opinion and knowledge and perception of it?Quite right.


Then there is name and expression for it, and it is named and expressed, and

everything of this kind which appertains to other things appertains to the one.


Certainly, that is true.


Yet once more and for the third time, let us consider: If the one is both one

and  many,  as  we  have  described,  and  is  neither  one  nor  many,  and

participates in time, must it not, in as far as it is one, at times partake of

being, and in as far as it is not one, at times not partake of being?


Certainly.


But can it partake of being when not partaking of being, or not partake of

being when partaking of being?


Impossible.


Then the one partakes and does not partake of being at different times, for

that is the only way in which it can partake and not partake of the same.


True.


And is there not also a time at which it assumes being and relinquishes being-

-for how can it have and not have the same thing unless it receives and also

gives it up at some time?


Impossible.


And the assuming of being is what you would call becoming?


I should.


And the relinquishing of being you would call destruction?


I should.The  one  then,  as  would  appear,  becomes  and  is  destroyed  by  taking  and

giving up being.


Certainly.


And being one and many and in process of becoming and being destroyed,

when it becomes one it ceases to be many, and when many, it ceases to be

one?


Certainly.


And as it becomes one and many, must it not inevitably experience separation

and aggregation?


Inevitably.


And  whenever  it  becomes  like  and  unlike  it  must  be  assimilated  and

dissimilated?


Yes.


And when it becomes greater or less or equal it must grow or diminish or be

equalized?


True.


And when being in motion it rests, and when being at rest it changes to

motion, it can surely be in no time at all?


How can it?


But that a thing which is previously at rest should be afterwards in motion, or

previously in motion and afterwards at rest, without experiencing change, is

impossible.


Impossible.


And surely there cannot be a time in which a thing can be at once neither inmotion nor at rest?


There cannot.


But neither can it change without changing.


True.


When then does it change; for it cannot change either when at rest, or when

in motion, or when in time?


It cannot.


And does this strange thing in which it is at the time of changing really exist?


What thing?


The  moment.  For  the  moment  seems  to  imply  a  something  out  of  which

change takes place into either of two states; for the change is not from the

state of rest as such, nor from the state of motion as such; but there is this

curious nature which we call the moment lying between rest and motion, not

being in any time; and into this and out of this what is in motion changes into

rest, and what is at rest into motion.


So it appears.


And the one then, since it is at rest and also in motion, will change to either,

for  only  in  this  way  can  it  be  in  both.  And  in  changing  it  changes  in  a

moment, and when it is changing it will be in no time, and will not then be

either in motion or at rest.


It will not.


And it will be in the same case in relation to the other changes, when it passes

from being into cessation of being, or from not-being into becoming --then it

passes between certain states of motion and rest, and neither is nor is not, nor

becomes nor is destroyed.Very true.


And on the same principle, in the passage from one to many and from many

to one, the one is neither one nor many, neither separated nor aggregated; and

in the passage from like to unlike, and from unlike to like, it is neither like

nor unlike, neither in a state of assimilation nor of dissimilation; and in the

passage from small to great and equal and back again, it will be neither small

nor great, nor equal, nor in a state of increase, or diminution, or equalization.


True.


All these, then, are the affections of the one, if the one has being.


Of course.


1.aa. But if one is, what will happen to the others--is not that also to be

considered?


Yes.


Let us show then, if one is, what will be the affections of the others than the

one.


Let us do so.


Inasmuch as there are things other than the one, the others are not the one; for

if they were they could not be other than the one.


Very true.


Nor  are  the  others  altogether  without  the  one,  but  in  a  certain  way  they

participate in the one.


In what way?


Because the others are other than the one inasmuch as they have parts; for if

they had no parts they would be simply one.Right.


And parts, as we affirm, have relation to a whole?


So we say.


And a whole must necessarily be one made up of many; and the parts will be

parts of the one, for each of the parts is not a part of many, but of a whole.


How do you mean?


If anything were a part of many, being itself one of them, it will surely be a

part of itself, which is impossible, and it will be a part of each one of the

other parts, if of all; for if not a part of some one, it will be a part of all the

others but this one, and thus will not be a part of each one; and if not a part of

each, one it will not be a part of any one of the many; and not being a part of

any one, it cannot be a part or anything else of all those things of none of

which it is anything.


Clearly not.


Then the part is not a part of the many, nor of all, but is of a certain single

form, which we call a whole, being one perfect unity framed out of all--of

this the part will be a part.


Certainly.


If, then, the others have parts, they will participate in the whole and in the

one.


True.


Then the others than the one must be one perfect whole, having parts.


Certainly.


And the same argument holds of each part, for the part must participate in the

one; for if each of the parts is a part, this means, I suppose, that it is oneseparate from the rest and self-related; otherwise it is not each.


True.


But when we speak of the part participating in the one, it must clearly be

other than one; for if not, it would not merely have participated, but would

have been one; whereas only the itself can be one.


Very true.


Both the whole and the part must participate in the one; for the whole will be

one whole, of which the parts will be parts; and each part will be one part of

the whole which is the whole of the part.


True.


And will not the things which participate in the one, be other than it?


Of course.


And the things which are other than the one will be many; for if the things

which are other than the one were neither one nor more than one, they would

be nothing.


True.


But, seeing that the things which participate in the one as a part, and in the

one  as  a  whole,  are  more  than  one,  must  not  those  very  things  which

participate in the one be infinite in number?


How so?


Let us look at the matter thus:--Is it not a fact that in partaking of the one they

are not one, and do not partake of the one at the very time when they are

partaking of it?


Clearly.They do so then as multitudes in which the one is not present?


Very true.


And if we were to abstract from them in idea the very smallest fraction, must

not that least fraction, if it does not partake of the one, be a multitude and not

one?


It must.


And if we continue to look at the other side of their nature, regarded simply,

and in itself, will not they, as far as we see them, be unlimited in number?


Certainly.


And yet, when each several part becomes a part, then the parts have a limit in

relation to the whole and to each other, and the whole in relation to the parts.


Just so.


The result to the others than the one is that the union of themselves and the

one appears to create a new element in them which gives to them limitation in

relation to one another; whereas in their own nature they have no limit.


That is clear.


Then the others than the one, both as whole and parts, are infinite, and also

partake of limit.


Certainly.


Then they are both like and unlike one another and themselves.


How is that?


Inasmuch as they are unlimited in their own nature, they are all affected in

the same way.True.


And inasmuch as they all partake of limit, they are all affected in the same

way.


Of course.


But inasmuch as their state is both limited and unlimited, they are affected in

opposite ways.


Yes.


And opposites are the most unlike of things.


Certainly.


Considered, then, in regard to either one of their affections, they will be like

themselves and one another; considered in reference to both of them together,

most opposed and most unlike.


That appears to be true.


Then the others are both like and unlike themselves and one another?


True.


And they are the same and also different from one another, and in motion and

at rest, and experience every sort of opposite affection, as may be proved

without difficulty of them, since they have been shown to have experienced

the affections aforesaid?


True.


1.bb. Suppose, now, that we leave the further discussion of these matters as

evident,  and  consider  again  upon  the  hypothesis  that  the  one  is,  whether

opposite of all this is or is not equally true of the others.


By all means.Then let us begin again, and ask, If one is, what must be the affections of the

others?


Let us ask that question.


Must not the one be distinct from the others, and the others from the one?


Why so?


Why, because there is nothing else beside them which is distinct from both of

them; for the expression 'one and the others' includes all things.


Yes, all things.


Then we cannot suppose that there is anything different from them in which

both the one and the others might exist?


There is nothing.


Then the one and the others are never in the same?


True.


Then they are separated from each other?


Yes.


And we surely cannot say that what is truly one has parts?


Impossible.


Then  the  one  will  not  be  in  the  others  as  a  whole,  nor  as  part,  if  it  be

separated from the others, and has no parts?


Impossible.


Then there is no way in which the others can partake of the one, if they do

not partake either in whole or in part?It would seem not.


Then there is no way in which the others are one, or have in themselves any

unity?


There is not.


Nor are the others many; for if they were many, each part of them would be a

part of the whole; but now the others, not partaking in any way of the one, are

neither one nor many, nor whole, nor part.


True.


Then the others neither are nor contain two or three, if entirely deprived of

the one?


True.


Then  the  others  are  neither  like  nor  unlike  the  one,  nor  is  likeness  and

unlikeness in them; for if they were like and unlike, or had in them likeness

and unlikeness, they would have two natures in them opposite to one another.


That is clear.


But for that which partakes of nothing to partake of two things was held by us

to be impossible?


Impossible.


Then the others are neither like nor unlike nor both, for if they were like or

unlike they would partake of one of those two natures, which would be one

thing, and if they were both they would partake of opposites which would be

two things, and this has been shown to be impossible.


True.


Therefore they are neither the same, nor other, nor in motion, nor at rest, nor

in a state of becoming, nor of being destroyed, nor greater, nor less, norequal, nor have they experienced anything else of the sort; for, if they are

capable of experiencing any such affection, they will participate in one and

two and three, and odd and even, and in these, as has been proved, they do

not participate, seeing that they are altogether and in every way devoid of the

one.


Very true.


Therefore if one is, the one is all things, and also nothing, both in relation to

itself and to other things.


Certainly.


2.a. Well, and ought we not to consider next what will be the consequence if

the one is not?


Yes; we ought.


What  is  the  meaning  of  the  hypothesis--If  the  one  is  not;  is  there  any

difference between this and the hypothesis--If the not one is not?


There is a difference, certainly.


Is there a difference only, or rather are not the two expressions--if the one is

not, and if the not one is not, entirely opposed?


They are entirely opposed.


And  suppose  a  person  to  say:--If  greatness  is  not,  if  smallness  is  not,  or

anything of that sort, does he not mean, whenever he uses such an expression,

that 'what is not' is other than other things?


To be sure.


And so when he says 'If one is not' he clearly means, that what 'is not' is other

than all others; we know what he means--do we not?


Yes, we do.When  he  says  'one,'  he  says  something  which  is  known;  and  secondly

something  which  is  other  than  all  other  things;  it  makes  no  difference

whether he predicate of one being or not-being, for that which is said 'not to

be' is known to be something all the same, and is distinguished from other

things.


Certainly.


Then I will begin again, and ask: If one is not, what are the consequences? In

the  first  place,  as  would  appear,  there  is  a  knowledge  of  it,  or  the  very

meaning of the words, 'if one is not,' would not be known.


True.


Secondly, the others differ from it, or it could not be described as different

from the others?


Certainly.


Difference, then, belongs to it as well as knowledge; for in speaking of the

one as different from the others, we do not speak of a difference in the others,

but in the one.


Clearly so.


Moreover, the one that is not is something and partakes of relation to 'that,'

and 'this,' and 'these,' and the like, and is an attribute of 'this'; for the one, or

the  others  than  the  one,  could  not  have  been  spoken  of,  nor  could  any

attribute or relative of the one that is not have been or been spoken of, nor

could it have been said to be anything, if it did not partake of 'some,' or of the

other relations just now mentioned.


True.


Being, then, cannot be ascribed to the one, since it is not; but the one that is

not may or rather must participate in many things, if it and nothing else is

not; if, however, neither the one nor the one that is not is supposed not to be,

and we are speaking of something of a different nature, we can predicatenothing of it. But supposing that the one that is not and nothing else is not,

then it must participate in the predicate 'that,' and in many others.


Certainly.


And it will have unlikeness in relation to the others, for the others being

different from the one will be of a different kind.


Certainly.


And are not things of a different kind also other in kind?


Of course.


And are not things other in kind unlike?


They are unlike.


And if they are unlike the one, that which they are unlike will clearly be

unlike them?


Clearly so.


Then the one will have unlikeness in respect of which the others are unlike it?


That would seem to be true.


And if unlikeness to other things is attributed to it, it must have likeness to

itself.


How so?


If the one have unlikeness to one, something else must be meant; nor will the

hypothesis relate to one; but it will relate to something other than one?


Quite so.


But that cannot be.No.


Then the one must have likeness to itself?


It must.


Again, it is not equal to the others; for if it were equal, then it would at once

be and be like them in virtue of the equality; but if one has no being, then it

can neither be nor be like?


It cannot.


But since it is not equal to the others, neither can the others be equal to it?


Certainly not.


And things that are not equal are unequal?


True.


And they are unequal to an unequal?


Of course.


Then the one partakes of inequality, and in respect of this the others are

unequal to it?


Very true.


And inequality implies greatness and smallness?


Yes.


Then the one, if of such a nature, has greatness and smallness?


That appears to be true.


And greatness and smallness always stand apart?True.


Then there is always something between them?


There is.


And  can  you  think  of  anything  else  which  is  between  them  other  than

equality?


No, it is equality which lies between them.


Then that which has greatness and smallness also has equality, which lies

between them?


That is clear.


Then  the  one,  which  is  not,  partakes,  as  would  appear,  of  greatness  and

smallness and equality?


Clearly.


Further, it must surely in a sort partake of being?


How so?


It must be so, for if not, then we should not speak the truth in saying that the

one is not. But if we speak the truth, clearly we must say what is. Am I not

right?


Yes.


And since we affirm that we speak truly, we must also affirm that we say

what is?


Certainly.


Then, as would appear, the one, when it is not, is; for if it were not to be

when it is not, but (Or, 'to remit something of existence in relation to not-being.') were to relinquish something of being, so as to become not- being, it

would at once be.


Quite true.


Then the one which is not, if it is to maintain itself, must have the being of

not-being as the bond of not-being, just as being must have as a bond the not-

being of not-being in order to perfect its own being; for the truest assertion of

the being of being and of the not-being of not-being is when being partakes

of  the  being  of  being,  and  not  of  the  being  of  not-  being--that  is,  the

perfection of being; and when not-being does not partake of the not-being of

not-being but of the being of not-being--that is the perfection of not-being.


Most true.


Since then what is partakes of not-being, and what is not of being, must not

the one also partake of being in order not to be?


Certainly.


Then the one, if it is not, clearly has being?


Clearly.


And has not-being also, if it is not?


Of course.


But  can  anything  which  is  in  a  certain  state  not  be  in  that  state  without

changing?


Impossible.


Then everything which is and is not in a certain state, implies change?


Certainly.


And change is motion--we may say that?Yes, motion.


And the one has been proved both to be and not to be?


Yes.


And therefore is and is not in the same state?


Yes.


Thus the one that is not has been shown to have motion also, because it

changes from being to not-being?


That appears to be true.


But surely if it is nowhere among what is, as is the fact, since it is not, it

cannot change from one place to another?


Impossible.


Then it cannot move by changing place?


No.


Nor can it turn on the same spot, for it nowhere touches the same, for the

same is, and that which is not cannot be reckoned among things that are?


It cannot.


Then the one, if it is not, cannot turn in that in which it is not?


No.


Neither can the one, whether it is or is not, be altered into other than itself, for

if  it  altered  and  became  different  from  itself,  then  we  could  not  be  still

speaking of the one, but of something else?


True.But if the one neither suffers alteration, nor turns round in the same place, nor

changes place, can it still be capable of motion?


Impossible.


Now that which is unmoved must surely be at rest, and that which is at rest

must stand still?


Certainly.


Then the one that is not, stands still, and is also in motion?


That seems to be true.


But if it be in motion it must necessarily undergo alteration, for anything

which is moved, in so far as it is moved, is no longer in the same state, but in

another?


Yes.


Then the one, being moved, is altered?


Yes.


And, further, if not moved in any way, it will not be altered in any way?


No.


Then, in so far as the one that is not is moved, it is altered, but in so far as it

is not moved, it is not altered?


Right.


Then the one that is not is altered and is not altered?


That is clear.


And must not that which is altered become other than it previously was, andlose its former state and be destroyed; but that which is not altered can neither

come into being nor be destroyed?


Very true.


And the one that is not, being altered, becomes and is destroyed; and not

being altered, neither becomes nor is destroyed; and so the one that is not

becomes and is destroyed, and neither becomes nor is destroyed?


True.


2.b. And now, let us go back once more to the beginning, and see whether

these or some other consequences will follow.


Let us do as you say.


If one is not, we ask what will happen in respect of one? That is the question.


Yes.


Do not the words 'is not' signify absence of being in that to which we apply

them?


Just so.


And when we say that a thing is not, do we mean that it is not in one way but

is in another? or do we mean, absolutely, that what is not has in no sort or

way or kind participation of being?


Quite absolutely.


Then, that which is not cannot be, or in any way participate in being?


It cannot.


And did we not mean by becoming, and being destroyed, the assumption of

being and the loss of being?Nothing else.


And  can  that  which  has  no  participation  in  being,  either  assume  or  lose

being?


Impossible.


The one then, since it in no way is, cannot have or lose or assume being in

any way?


True.


Then the one that is not, since it in no way partakes of being, neither perishes

nor becomes?


No.


Then it is not altered at all; for if it were it would become and be destroyed?


True.


But if it be not altered it cannot be moved?


Certainly not.


Nor can we say that it stands, if it is nowhere; for that which stands must

always be in one and the same spot?


Of course.


Then we must say that the one which is not never stands still and never

moves?


Neither.


Nor is there any existing thing which can be attributed to it; for if there had

been, it would partake of being?That is clear.


And therefore neither smallness, nor greatness, nor equality, can be attributed

to it?


No.


Nor yet likeness nor difference, either in relation to itself or to others?


Clearly not.


Well, and if nothing should be attributed to it, can other things be attributed

to it?


Certainly not.


And therefore other things can neither be like or unlike, the same, or different

in relation to it?


They cannot.


Nor can what is not, be anything, or be this thing, or be related to or the

attribute  of  this  or  that  or  other,  or  be  past,  present,  or  future.  Nor  can

knowledge, or opinion, or perception, or expression, or name, or any other

thing that is, have any concern with it?


No.


Then the one that is not has no condition of any kind?


Such appears to be the conclusion.


2.aa.  Yet  once  more;  if  one  is  not,  what  becomes  of  the  others?  Let  us

determine that.


Yes; let us determine that.


The others must surely be; for if they, like the one, were not, we could not benow speaking of them.


True.


But to speak of the others implies difference--the terms 'other' and 'different'

are synonymous?


True.


Other means other than other, and different, different from the different?


Yes.


Then, if there are to be others, there is something than which they will be

other?


Certainly.


And what can that be?--for if the one is not, they will not be other than the

one.


They will not.


Then they will be other than each other; for the only remaining alternative is

that they are other than nothing.


True.


And they are each other than one another, as being plural and not singular;

for if one is not, they cannot be singular, but every particle of them is infinite

in number; and even if a person takes that which appears to be the smallest

fraction, this, which seemed one, in a moment evanesces into many, as in a

dream, and from being the smallest becomes very great, in comparison with

the fractions into which it is split up?


Very true.


And in such particles the others will be other than one another, if others are,and the one is not?


Exactly.


And will there not be many particles, each appearing to be one, but not being

one, if one is not?


True.


And it would seem that number can be predicated of them if each of them

appears to be one, though it is really many?


It can.


And there will seem to be odd and even among them, which will also have no

reality, if one is not?


Yes.


And there will appear to be a least among them; and even this will seem large

and  manifold  in  comparison  with  the  many  small  fractions  which  are

contained in it?


Certainly.


And each particle will be imagined to be equal to the many and little; for it

could not have appeared to pass from the greater to the less without having

appeared to arrive at the middle; and thus would arise the appearance of

equality.


Yes.


And having neither beginning, middle, nor end, each separate particle yet

appears to have a limit in relation to itself and other.


How so?


Because, when a person conceives of any one of these as such, prior to thebeginning another beginning appears, and there is another end, remaining

after the end, and in the middle truer middles within but smaller, because no

unity can be conceived of any of them, since the one is not.


Very true.


And so all being, whatever we think of, must be broken up into fractions, for

a particle will have to be conceived of without unity?


Certainly.


And such being when seen indistinctly and at a distance, appears to be one;

but when seen near and with keen intellect, every single thing appears to be

infinite, since it is deprived of the one, which is not?


Nothing more certain.


Then each of the others must appear to be infinite and finite, and one and

many, if others than the one exist and not the one.


They must.


Then will they not appear to be like and unlike?


In what way?


Just as in a picture things appear to be all one to a person standing at a

distance, and to be in the same state and alike?


True.


But when you approach them, they appear to be many and different; and

because  of  the  appearance  of  the  difference,  different  in  kind  from,  and

unlike, themselves?


True.


And so must the particles appear to be like and unlike themselves and eachother.


Certainly.


And must they not be the same and yet different from one another, and in

contact with themselves, although they are separated, and having every sort

of motion, and every sort of rest, and becoming and being destroyed, and in

neither state, and the like, all which things may be easily enumerated, if the

one is not and the many are?


Most true.


2.bb. Once more, let us go back to the beginning, and ask if the one is not,

and the others of the one are, what will follow.


Let us ask that question.


In the first place, the others will not be one?


Impossible.


Nor will they be many; for if they were many one would be contained in

them. But if no one of them is one, all of them are nought, and therefore they

will not be many.


True.


If there be no one in the others, the others are neither many nor one.


They are not.


Nor do they appear either as one or many.


Why not?


Because the others have no sort or manner or way of communion with any

sort of not-being, nor can anything which is not, be connected with any of the

others; for that which is not has no parts.True.


Nor is there an opinion or any appearance of not-being in connexion with the

others, nor is not-being ever in any way attributed to the others.


No.


Then if one is not, there is no conception of any of the others either as one or

many; for you cannot conceive the many without the one.


You cannot.


Then if one is not, the others neither are, nor can be conceived to be either

one or many?


It would seem not.


Nor as like or unlike?


No.


Nor as the same or different, nor in contact or separation, nor in any of those

states which we enumerated as appearing to be;--the others neither are nor

appear to be any of these, if one is not?


True.


Then may we not sum up the argument in a word and say truly: If one is not,

then nothing is?


Certainly.


Let thus much be said; and further let us affirm what seems to be the truth,

that, whether one is or is not, one and the others in relation to themselves and

one another, all of them, in every way, are and are not, and appear to be and

appear not to be.


Most true.THE END                          Phaedo Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    Beginning of PhaedoIntroduction to Plato's Phaedo.


  After  an  interval  of  some  months  or  years,  and  at  Phlius,  a  town  of

Peloponnesus, the tale of the last hours of Socrates is narrated to Echecrates

and  other  Phliasians  by  Phaedo  the  'beloved  disciple.'  The  Dialogue

necessarily takes the form of a narrative, because Socrates has to be described

acting  as  well  as  speaking.  The  minutest  particulars  of  the  event  are

interesting to distant friends, and the narrator has an equal interest in them.


  During  the  voyage  of  the  sacred  ship  to  and  from  Delos,  which  has

occupied thirty days, the execution of Socrates has been deferred. (Compare

Xen. Mem.) The time has been passed by him in conversation with a select

company of disciples. But now the holy season is over, and the disciples meet

earlier than usual in order that they may converse with Socrates for the last

time. Those who were present, and those who might have been expected to be

present, are mentioned by name. There are Simmias and Cebes (Crito), two

disciples of Philolaus whom Socrates 'by his enchantments has attracted from

Thebes' (Mem.), Crito the aged friend, the attendant of the prison, who is as

good as a friend--these take part in the conversation. There are present also,

Hermogenes, from whom Xenophon derived his information about the trial of

Socrates (Mem.), the 'madman' Apollodorus (Symp.), Euclid and Terpsion

from  Megara  (compare  Theaet.),  Ctesippus,  Antisthenes,  Menexenus,  and

some other less-known members of the Socratic circle, all of whom are silent

auditors. Aristippus, Cleombrotus, and Plato are noted as absent. Almost as

soon as the friends of Socrates enter the prison Xanthippe and her children

are sent home in the care of one of Crito's servants. Socrates himself has just

been released from chains, and is led by this circumstance to make the natural

remark that 'pleasure follows pain.' (Observe that Plato is preparing the way

for  his  doctrine  of  the  alternation  of  opposites.)  'Aesop  would  have

represented  them  in  a  fable  as  a  two-headed  creature  of  the  gods.'  The

mention of Aesop reminds Cebes of a question which had been asked by

Evenus the poet (compare Apol.): 'Why Socrates, who was not a poet, while

in prison had been putting Aesop into verse?'--'Because several times in his

life he had been warned in dreams that he should practise music; and as he

was about to die and was not certain of what was meant, he wished to fulfilthe admonition in the letter as well as in the spirit, by writing verses as well

as by cultivating philosophy. Tell this to Evenus; and say that I would have

him follow me in death.' 'He is not at all the sort of man to comply with your

request, Socrates.' 'Why, is he not a philosopher?' 'Yes.' 'Then he will be

willing to die, although he will not take his own life, for that is held to be

unlawful.'


  Cebes  asks  why  suicide  is  thought  not  to  be  right,  if  death  is  to  be

accounted a good? Well, (1) according to one explanation, because man is a

prisoner, who must not open the door of his prison and run away--this is the

truth in a 'mystery.' Or (2) rather, because he is not his own property, but a

possession of the gods, and has no right to make away with that which does

not belong to him. But why, asks Cebes, if he is a possession of the gods,

should he wish to die and leave them? For he is under their protection; and

surely he cannot take better care of himself than they take of him. Simmias

explains  that  Cebes  is  really  referring  to  Socrates,  whom  they  think  too

unmoved at the prospect of leaving the gods and his friends. Socrates answers

that he is going to other gods who are wise and good, and perhaps to better

friends; and he professes that he is ready to defend himself against the charge

of Cebes. The company shall be his judges, and he hopes that he will be more

successful in convincing them than he had been in convincing the court.


  The philosopher desires death--which the wicked world will insinuate that

he also deserves: and perhaps he does, but not in any sense which they are

capable of understanding. Enough of them: the real question is, What is the

nature of that death which he desires? Death is the separation of soul and

body--and the philosopher desires such a separation. He would like to be

freed from the dominion of bodily pleasures and of the senses, which are

always perturbing his mental vision. He wants to get rid of eyes and ears, and

with the light of the mind only to behold the light of truth. All the evils and

impurities and necessities of men come from the body. And death separates

him from these corruptions, which in life he cannot wholly lay aside. Why

then should he repine when the hour of separation arrives? Why, if he is dead

while he lives, should he fear that other death, through which alone he can

behold wisdom in her purity?


    Besides, the philosopher has notions of good and evil unlike those ofother  men.  For  they  are  courageous  because  they  are  afraid  of  greater

dangers, and temperate because they desire greater pleasures. But he disdains

this balancing of pleasures and pains, which is the exchange of commerce

and not of virtue. All the virtues, including wisdom, are regarded by him only

as purifications of the soul. And this was the meaning of the founders of the

mysteries  when  they  said,  'Many  are  the  wand-bearers  but  few  are  the

mystics.' (Compare Matt. xxii.: 'Many are called but few are chosen.') And in

the hope that he is one of these mystics, Socrates is now departing. This is his

answer  to  any  one  who  charges  him  with  indifference  at  the  prospect  of

leaving the gods and his friends.


  Still, a fear is expressed that the soul upon leaving the body may vanish

away like smoke or air. Socrates in answer appeals first of all to the old

Orphic tradition that the souls of the dead are in the world below, and that the

living  come  from  them.  This  he  attempts  to  found  on  a  philosophical

assumption that all opposites--e.g. less, greater; weaker, stronger; sleeping,

waking; life, death--are generated out of each other. Nor can the process of

generation be only a passage from living to dying, for then all would end in

death. The perpetual sleeper (Endymion) would be no longer distinguished

from the rest of mankind. The circle of nature is not complete unless the

living come from the dead as well as pass to them.


  The Platonic doctrine of reminiscence is then adduced as a confirmation

of the pre-existence of the soul. Some proofs of this doctrine are demanded.

One proof given is the same as that of the Meno, and is derived from the

latent knowledge of mathematics, which may be elicited from an unlearned

person  when  a  diagram  is  presented  to  him.  Again,  there  is  a  power  of

association,  which  from  seeing  Simmias  may  remember  Cebes,  or  from

seeing a picture of Simmias may remember Simmias. The lyre may recall the

player of the lyre, and equal pieces of wood or stone may be associated with

the  higher  notion  of  absolute  equality.  But  here  observe  that  material

equalities fall short of the conception of absolute equality with which they are

compared, and which is the measure of them. And the measure or standard

must be prior to that which is measured, the idea of equality prior to the

visible equals. And if prior to them, then prior also to the perceptions of the

senses which recall them, and therefore either given before birth or at birth.

But all men have not this knowledge, nor have any without a process ofreminiscence; which is a proof that it is not innate or given at birth, unless

indeed it was given and taken away at the same instant. But if not given to

men in birth, it must have been given before birth--this is the only alternative

which remains. And if we had ideas in a former state, then our souls must

have  existed  and  must  have  had  intelligence  in  a  former  state.  The  pre-

existence of the soul stands or falls with the doctrine of ideas.


  It is objected by Simmias and Cebes that these arguments only prove a

former  and  not  a  future  existence.  Socrates  answers  this  objection  by

recalling the previous argument, in which he had shown that the living come

from the dead. But the fear that the soul at departing may vanish into air

(especially if there is a wind blowing at the time) has not yet been charmed

away. He proceeds: When we fear that the soul will vanish away, let us ask

ourselves what is that which we suppose to be liable to dissolution? Is it the

simple or the compound, the unchanging or the changing, the invisible idea

or  the  visible  object  of  sense?  Clearly  the  latter  and  not  the  former;  and

therefore not the soul, which in her own pure thought is unchangeable, and

only when using the senses descends into the region of change. Again, the

soul commands, the body serves: in this respect too the soul is akin to the

divine, and the body to the mortal. And in every point of view the soul is the

image of divinity and immortality, and the body of the human and mortal.

And whereas the body is liable to speedy dissolution, the soul is almost if not

quite indissoluble. (Compare Tim.) Yet even the body may be preserved for

ages by the embalmer's art: how unlikely, then, that the soul will perish and

be dissipated into air while on her way to the good and wise God! She has

been gathered into herself, holding aloof from the body, and practising death

all her life long, and she is now finally released from the errors and follies

and passions of men, and for ever dwells in the company of the gods.


  But the soul which is polluted and engrossed by the corporeal, and has no

eye except that of the senses, and is weighed down by the bodily appetites,

cannot attain to this abstraction. In her fear of the world below she lingers

about  the  sepulchre,  loath  to  leave  the  body  which  she  loved,  a  ghostly

apparition, saturated with sense, and therefore visible. At length entering into

some animal of a nature congenial to her former life of sensuality or violence,

she takes the form of an ass, a wolf or a kite. And of these earthly souls the

happiest are those who have practised virtue without philosophy; they areallowed  to  pass  into  gentle  and  social  natures,  such  as  bees  and  ants.

(Compare Republic, Meno.) But only the philosopher who departs pure is

permitted to enter the company of the gods. (Compare Phaedrus.) This is the

reason why he abstains from fleshly lusts, and not because he fears loss or

disgrace, which is the motive of other men. He too has been a captive, and

the willing agent of his own captivity. But philosophy has spoken to him, and

he has heard her voice; she has gently entreated him, and brought him out of

the 'miry clay,' and purged away the mists of passion and the illusions of

sense  which  envelope  him;  his  soul  has  escaped  from  the  influence  of

pleasures and pains, which are like nails fastening her to the body. To that

prison-house  she  will  not  return;  and  therefore  she  abstains  from  bodily

pleasures--not from a desire of having more or greater ones, but because she

knows that only when calm and free from the dominion of the body can she

behold the light of truth.


  Simmias  and  Cebes  remain  in  doubt;  but  they  are  unwilling  to  raise

objections  at  such  a  time.  Socrates  wonders  at  their  reluctance.  Let  them

regard him rather as the swan, who, having sung the praises of Apollo all his

life long, sings at his death more lustily than ever. Simmias acknowledges

that there is cowardice in not probing truth to the bottom. 'And if truth divine

and inspired is not to be had, then let a man take the best of human notions,

and upon this frail bark let him sail through life.' He proceeds to state his

difficulty: It has been argued that the soul is invisible and incorporeal, and

therefore immortal, and prior to the body. But is not the soul acknowledged

to  be  a  harmony,  and  has  she  not  the  same  relation  to  the  body,  as  the

harmony--which like her is invisible--has to the lyre? And yet the harmony

does not survive the lyre. Cebes has also an objection, which like Simmias he

expresses in a figure. He is willing to admit that the soul is more lasting than

the  body.  But  the  more  lasting  nature  of  the  soul  does  not  prove  her

immortality; for after having worn out many bodies in a single life, and many

more in successive births and deaths, she may at last perish, or, as Socrates

afterwards restates the objection, the very act of birth may be the beginning

of her death, and her last body may survive her, just as the coat of an old

weaver is left behind him after he is dead, although a man is more lasting

than his coat. And he who would prove the immortality of the soul, must

prove not only that the soul outlives one or many bodies, but that she outlives

them all.  The  audience,  like  the  chorus  in  a  play,  for  a  moment  interpret  the

feelings of the actors; there is a temporary depression, and then the enquiry is

resumed. It is a melancholy reflection that arguments, like men, are apt to be

deceivers; and those who have been often deceived become distrustful both

of arguments and of friends. But this unfortunate experience should not make

us either haters of men or haters of arguments. The want of health and truth is

not  in  the  argument,  but  in  ourselves.  Socrates,  who  is  about  to  die,  is

sensible of his own weakness; he desires to be impartial, but he cannot help

feeling that he has too great an interest in the truth of the argument. And

therefore he would have his friends examine and refute him, if they think that

he is in error.


  At his request Simmias and Cebes repeat their objections. They do not go

to the length of denying the pre-existence of ideas. Simmias is of opinion that

the soul is a harmony of the body. But the admission of the pre- existence of

ideas, and therefore of the soul, is at variance with this. (Compare a parallel

difficulty in Theaet.) For a harmony is an effect, whereas the soul is not an

effect, but a cause; a harmony follows, but the soul leads; a harmony admits

of degrees, and the soul has no degrees. Again, upon the supposition that the

soul is a harmony, why is one soul better than another? Are they more or less

harmonized, or is there one harmony within another? But the soul does not

admit of degrees, and cannot therefore be more or less harmonized. Further,

the soul is often engaged in resisting the affections of the body, as Homer

describes Odysseus 'rebuking his heart.' Could he have written this under the

idea  that  the  soul  is  a  harmony  of  the  body?  Nay  rather,  are  we  not

contradicting Homer and ourselves in affirming anything of the sort?


  The  goddess  Harmonia,  as  Socrates  playfully  terms  the  argument  of

Simmias, has been happily disposed of; and now an answer has to be given to

the Theban Cadmus. Socrates recapitulates the argument of Cebes, which, as

he remarks, involves the whole question of natural growth or causation; about

this he proposes to narrate his own mental experience. When he was young

he had puzzled himself with physics: he had enquired into the growth and

decay of animals, and the origin of thought, until at last he began to doubt the

self-evident fact that growth is the result of eating and drinking; and so he

arrived at the conclusion that he was not meant for such enquiries. Nor was

he less perplexed with notions of comparison and number. At first he hadimagined himself to understand differences of greater and less, and to know

that ten is two more than eight, and the like. But now those very notions

appeared to him to contain a contradiction. For how can one be divided into

two? Or two be compounded into one? These are difficulties which Socrates

cannot answer. Of generation and destruction he knows nothing. But he has a

confused notion of another method in which matters of this sort are to be

investigated. (Compare Republic; Charm.)


  Then he heard some one reading out of a book of Anaxagoras, that mind

is the cause of all things. And he said to himself: If mind is the cause of all

things, surely mind must dispose them all for the best. The new teacher will

show me this 'order of the best' in man and nature. How great had been his

hopes and how great his disappointment! For he found that his new friend

was anything but consistent in his use of mind as a cause, and that he soon

introduced  winds,  waters,  and  other  eccentric  notions.  (Compare  Arist.

Metaph.) It was as if a person had said that Socrates is sitting here because he

is made up of bones and muscles, instead of telling the true reason--that he is

here because the Athenians have thought good to sentence him to death, and

he has thought good to await his sentence. Had his bones and muscles been

left  by  him  to  their  own  ideas  of  right,  they  would  long  ago  have  taken

themselves  off.  But  surely  there  is  a  great  confusion  of  the  cause  and

condition in all this. And this confusion also leads people into all sorts of

erroneous theories about the position and motions of the earth. None of them

know how much stronger than any Atlas is the power of the best. But this

'best' is still undiscovered; and in enquiring after the cause, we can only hope

to attain the second best.


  Now there is a danger in the contemplation of the nature of things, as

there is a danger in looking at the sun during an eclipse, unless the precaution

is taken of looking only at the image reflected in the water, or in a glass.

(Compare Laws; Republic.) 'I was afraid,' says Socrates, 'that I might injure

the eye of the soul. I thought that I had better return to the old and safe

method of ideas. Though I do not mean to say that he who contemplates

existence through the medium of ideas sees only through a glass darkly, any

more than he who contemplates actual effects.'


  If the existence of ideas is granted to him, Socrates is of opinion that hewill then have no difficulty in proving the immortality of the soul. He will

only ask for a further admission:--that beauty is the cause of the beautiful,

greatness the cause of the great, smallness of the small, and so on of other

things. This is a safe and simple answer, which escapes the contradictions of

greater and less (greater by reason of that which is smaller!), of addition and

subtraction, and the other difficulties of relation. These subtleties he is for

leaving  to  wiser  heads  than  his  own;  he  prefers  to  test  ideas  by  the

consistency of their consequences, and, if asked to give an account of them,

goes back to some higher idea or hypothesis which appears to him to be the

best, until at last he arrives at a resting-place. (Republic; Phil.)


  The  doctrine  of  ideas,  which  has  long  ago  received  the  assent  of  the

Socratic circle, is now affirmed by the Phliasian auditor to command the

assent of any man of sense. The narrative is continued; Socrates is desirous of

explaining how opposite ideas may appear to co-exist but do not really co-

exist in the same thing or person. For example, Simmias may be said to have

greatness and also smallness, because he is greater than Socrates and less

than Phaedo. And yet Simmias is not really great and also small, but only

when compared to Phaedo and Socrates. I use the illustration, says Socrates,

because I want to show you not only that ideal opposites exclude one another,

but also the opposites in us. I, for example, having the attribute of smallness

remain small, and cannot become great: the smallness which is in me drives

out greatness.


  One of the company here remarked that this was inconsistent with the old

assertion that opposites generated opposites. But that, replies Socrates, was

affirmed, not of opposite ideas either in us or in nature, but of opposition in

the concrete--not of life and death, but of individuals living and dying. When

this  objection  has  been  removed,  Socrates  proceeds:  This  doctrine  of  the

mutual exclusion of opposites is not only true of the opposites themselves,

but of things which are inseparable from them. For example, cold and heat

are opposed; and fire, which is inseparable from heat, cannot co-exist with

cold, or snow, which is inseparable from cold, with heat. Again, the number

three excludes the number four, because three is an odd number and four is

an even number, and the odd is opposed to the even. Thus we are able to

proceed a step beyond 'the safe and simple answer.' We may say, not only

that the odd excludes the even, but that the number three, which participatesin oddness, excludes the even. And in like manner, not only does life exclude

death, but the soul, of which life is the inseparable attribute, also excludes

death. And that of which life is the inseparable attribute is by the force of the

terms imperishable. If the odd principle were imperishable, then the number

three would not perish but remove, on the approach of the even principle. But

the immortal is imperishable; and therefore the soul on the approach of death

does not perish but removes.


  Thus all objections appear to be finally silenced. And now the application

has to be made: If the soul is immortal, 'what manner of persons ought we to

be?' having regard not only to time but to eternity. For death is not the end of

all, and the wicked is not released from his evil by death; but every one

carries with him into the world below that which he is or has become, and

that only.


  For after death the soul is carried away to judgment, and when she has

received her punishment returns to earth in the course of ages. The wise soul

is conscious of her situation, and follows the attendant angel who guides her

through the windings of the world below; but the impure soul wanders hither

and thither without companion or guide, and is carried at last to her own

place, as the pure soul is also carried away to hers. 'In order that you may

understand this, I must first describe to you the nature and conformation of

the earth.'


  Now the whole earth is a globe placed in the centre of the heavens, and is

maintained there by the perfection of balance. That which we call the earth is

only one of many small hollows, wherein collect the mists and waters and the

thick  lower  air;  but  the  true  earth  is  above,  and  is  in  a  finer  and  subtler

element. And if, like birds, we could fly to the surface of the air, in the same

manner that fishes come to the top of the sea, then we should behold the true

earth  and  the  true  heaven  and  the  true  stars.  Our  earth  is  everywhere

corrupted and corroded; and even the land which is fairer than the sea, for

that is a mere chaos or waste of water and mud and sand, has nothing to show

in comparison of the other world. But the heavenly earth is of divers colours,

sparkling with jewels brighter than gold and whiter than any snow, having

flowers and fruits innumerable. And the inhabitants dwell some on the shore

of the sea of air, others in 'islets of the blest,' and they hold converse with thegods, and behold the sun, moon and stars as they truly are, and their other

blessedness is of a piece with this.


  The hollows on the surface of the globe vary in size and shape from that

which we inhabit: but all are connected by passages and perforations in the

interior of the earth. And there is one huge chasm or opening called Tartarus,

into which streams of fire and water and liquid mud are ever flowing; of

these small portions find their way to the surface and form seas and rivers

and volcanoes. There is a perpetual inhalation and exhalation of the air rising

and falling as the waters pass into the depths of the earth and return again, in

their course forming lakes and rivers, but never descending below the centre

of the earth; for on either side the rivers flowing either way are stopped by a

precipice. These rivers are many and mighty, and there are four principal

ones, Oceanus, Acheron, Pyriphlegethon, and Cocytus. Oceanus is the river

which  encircles  the  earth;  Acheron  takes  an  opposite  direction,  and  after

flowing under the earth through desert places, at last reaches the Acherusian

lake,--this is the river at which the souls of the dead await their return to

earth. Pyriphlegethon is a stream of fire, which coils round the earth and

flows into the depths of Tartarus. The fourth river, Cocytus, is that which is

called by the poets the Stygian river, and passes into and forms the lake Styx,

from the waters of which it gains new and strange powers. This river, too,

falls into Tartarus.


  The dead are first of all judged according to their deeds, and those who

are incurable are thrust into Tartarus, from which they never come out. Those

who have only committed venial sins are first purified of them, and then

rewarded for the good which they have done. Those who have committed

crimes, great indeed, but not unpardonable, are thrust into Tartarus, but are

cast forth at the end of a year by way of Pyriphlegethon or Cocytus, and these

carry them as far as the Acherusian lake, where they call upon their victims to

let them come out of the rivers into the lake. And if they prevail, then they are

let  out  and  their  sufferings  cease:  if  not,  they  are  borne  unceasingly  into

Tartarus and back again, until they at last obtain mercy. The pure souls also

receive their reward, and have their abode in the upper earth, and a select few

in still fairer 'mansions.'


  Socrates  is  not  prepared  to  insist  on  the  literal  accuracy  of  thisdescription, but he is confident that something of the kind is true. He who has

sought after the pleasures of knowledge and rejected the pleasures of the

body, has reason to be of good hope at the approach of death; whose voice is

already speaking to him, and who will one day be heard calling all men.


  The hour has come at which he must drink the poison, and not much

remains to be done. How shall they bury him? That is a question which he

refuses to entertain, for they are burying, not him, but his dead body. His

friends had once been sureties that he would remain, and they shall now be

sureties that he has run away. Yet he would not die without the customary

ceremonies of washing and burial. Shall he make a libation of the poison? In

the spirit he will, but not in the letter. One request he utters in the very act of

death,  which  has  been  a  puzzle  to  after  ages.  With  a  sort  of  irony  he

remembers that a trifling religious duty is still unfulfilled, just as above he

desires before he departs to compose a few verses in order to satisfy a scruple

about a dream--unless, indeed, we suppose him to mean, that he was now

restored to health, and made the customary offering to Asclepius in token of

his recovery.


  ...


  1. The doctrine of the immortality of the soul has sunk deep into the heart

of the human race; and men are apt to rebel against any examination of the

nature or grounds of their belief. They do not like to acknowledge that this, as

well as the other 'eternal ideas; of man, has a history in time, which may be

traced in Greek poetry or philosophy, and also in the Hebrew Scriptures.

They convert feeling into reasoning, and throw a network of dialectics over

that  which  is  really  a  deeply-rooted  instinct.  In  the  same  temper  which

Socrates reproves in himself they are disposed to think that even fallacies will

do no harm, for they will die with them, and while they live they will gain by

the delusion. And when they consider the numberless bad arguments which

have been pressed into the service of theology, they say, like the companions

of Socrates, 'What argument can we ever trust again?' But there is a better and

higher  spirit  to  be  gathered  from  the  Phaedo,  as  well  as  from  the  other

writings of Plato, which says that first principles should be most constantly

reviewed (Phaedo and Crat.), and that the highest subjects demand of us the

greatest  accuracy  (Republic);  also  that  we  must  not  become  misologistsbecause arguments are apt to be deceivers.


  2. In former ages there was a customary rather than a reasoned belief in

the immortality of the soul. It was based on the authority of the Church, on

the necessity of such a belief to morality and the order of society, on the

evidence of an historical fact, and also on analogies and figures of speech

which  filled  up  the  void  or  gave  an  expression  in  words  to  a  cherished

instinct. The mass of mankind went on their way busy with the affairs of this

life, hardly stopping to think about another. But in our own day the question

has been reopened, and it is doubtful whether the belief which in the first

ages  of  Christianity  was  the  strongest  motive  of  action  can  survive  the

conflict with a scientific age in which the rules of evidence are stricter and

the  mind  has  become  more  sensitive  to  criticism.  It  has  faded  into  the

distance by a natural process as it was removed further and further from the

historical fact on which it has been supposed to rest. Arguments derived from

material things such as the seed and the ear of corn or transitions in the life of

animals from one state of being to another (the chrysalis and the butterfly) are

not 'in pari materia' with arguments from the visible to the invisible, and are

therefore felt to be no longer applicable. The evidence to the historical fact

seems to be weaker than was once supposed: it is not consistent with itself,

and is based upon documents which are of unknown origin. The immortality

of man must be proved by other arguments than these if it is again to become

a living belief. We must ask ourselves afresh why we still maintain it, and

seek to discover a foundation for it in the nature of God and in the first

principles of morality.


  3. At the outset of the discussion we may clear away a confusion. We

certainly do not mean by the immortality of the soul the immortality of fame,

which whether worth having or not can only be ascribed to a very select class

of  the  whole  race  of  mankind,  and  even  the  interest  in  these  few  is

comparatively short-lived. To have been a benefactor to the world, whether in

a higher or a lower sphere of life and thought, is a great thing: to have the

reputation of being one, when men have passed out of the sphere of earthly

praise or blame, is hardly worthy of consideration. The memory of a great

man, so far from being immortal, is really limited to his own generation:--so

long as his friends or his disciples are alive, so long as his books continue to

be read, so long as his political or military successes fill a page in the historyof his country. The praises which are bestowed upon him at his death hardly

last  longer  than  the  flowers  which  are  strewed  upon  his  coffin  or  the

'immortelles' which are laid upon his tomb. Literature makes the most of its

heroes, but the true man is well aware that far from enjoying an immortality

of fame, in a generation or two, or even in a much shorter time, he will be

forgotten and the world will get on without him.


  4.  Modern  philosophy  is  perplexed  at  this  whole  question,  which  is

sometimes  fairly  given  up  and  handed  over  to  the  realm  of  faith.  The

perplexity  should  not  be  forgotten  by  us  when  we  attempt  to  submit  the

Phaedo of Plato to the requirements of logic. For what idea can we form of

the soul when separated from the body? Or how can the soul be united with

the body and still be independent? Is the soul related to the body as the ideal

to the real, or as the whole to the parts, or as the subject to the object, or as

the  cause  to  the  effect,  or  as  the  end  to  the  means?  Shall  we  say  with

Aristotle, that the soul is the entelechy or form of an organized living body?

or with Plato, that she has a life of her own? Is the Pythagorean image of the

harmony, or that of the monad, the truer expression? Is the soul related to the

body as sight to the eye, or as the boatman to his boat? (Arist. de Anim.) And

in another state of being is the soul to be conceived of as vanishing into

infinity, hardly possessing an existence which she can call her own, as in the

pantheistic system of Spinoza: or as an individual informing another body

and entering into new relations, but retaining her own character? (Compare

Gorgias.) Or is the opposition of soul and body a mere illusion, and the true

self neither soul nor body, but the union of the two in the 'I' which is above

them? And is death the assertion of this individuality in the higher nature, and

the falling away into nothingness of the lower? Or are we vainly attempting

to pass the boundaries of human thought? The body and the soul seem to be

inseparable,  not  only  in  fact,  but  in  our  conceptions  of  them;  and  any

philosophy  which  too  closely  unites  them,  or  too  widely  separates  them,

either in this life or in another, disturbs the balance of human nature. No

thinker has perfectly adjusted them, or been entirely consistent with himself

in describing their relation to one another. Nor can we wonder that Plato in

the  infancy  of  human  thought  should  have  confused  mythology  and

philosophy, or have mistaken verbal arguments for real ones.


  5. Again, believing in the immortality of the soul, we must still ask thequestion of Socrates, 'What is that which we suppose to be immortal?' Is it

the personal and individual element in us, or the spiritual and universal? Is it

the principle of knowledge or of goodness, or the union of the two? Is it the

mere force of life which is determined to be, or the consciousness of self

which  cannot  be  got  rid  of,  or  the  fire  of  genius  which  refuses  to  be

extinguished? Or is there a hidden being which is allied to the Author of all

existence, who is because he is perfect, and to whom our ideas of perfection

give us a title to belong? Whatever answer is given by us to these questions,

there still remains the necessity of allowing the permanence of evil, if not for

ever, at any rate for a time, in order that the wicked 'may not have too good a

bargain.' For the annihilation of evil at death, or the eternal duration of it,

seem to involve equal difficulties in the moral government of the universe.

Sometimes we are led by our feelings, rather than by our reason, to think of

the good and wise only as existing in another life. Why should the mean, the

weak, the idiot, the infant, the herd of men who have never in any proper

sense the use of reason, reappear with blinking eyes in the light of another

world? But our second thought is that the hope of humanity is a common one,

and that all or none will be partakers of immortality. Reason does not allow

us to suppose that we have any greater claims than others, and experience

may often reveal to us unexpected flashes of the higher nature in those whom

we had despised. Why should the wicked suffer any more than ourselves?

had we been placed in their circumstances should we have been any better

than they? The worst of men are objects of pity rather than of anger to the

philanthropist; must they not be equally such to divine benevolence? Even

more than the good they have need of another life; not that they may be

punished, but that they may be educated. These are a few of the reflections

which  arise  in  our  minds  when  we  attempt  to  assign  any  form  to  our

conceptions of a future state.


  There are some other questions which are disturbing to us because we

have no answer to them. What is to become of the animals in a future state?

Have we not seen dogs more faithful and intelligent than men, and men who

are more stupid and brutal than any animals? Does their life cease at death, or

is there some 'better thing reserved' also for them? They may be said to have

a  shadow  or  imitation  of  morality,  and  imperfect  moral  claims  upon  the

benevolence of man and upon the justice of God. We cannot think of the least

or lowest of them, the insect, the bird, the inhabitants of the sea or the desert,as having any place in a future world, and if not all, why should those who

are specially attached to man be deemed worthy of any exceptional privilege?

When we reason about such a subject, almost at once we degenerate into

nonsense. It is a passing thought which has no real hold on the mind. We may

argue for the existence of animals in a future state from the attributes of God,

or from texts of Scripture ('Are not two sparrows sold for one farthing?' etc.),

but the truth is that we are only filling up the void of another world with our

own fancies. Again, we often talk about the origin of evil, that great bugbear

of  theologians,  by  which  they  frighten  us  into  believing  any  superstition.

What answer can be made to the old commonplace, 'Is not God the author of

evil, if he knowingly permitted, but could have prevented it?' Even if we

assume that the inequalities of this life are rectified by some transposition of

human beings in another, still the existence of the very least evil if it could

have been avoided, seems to be at variance with the love and justice of God.

And so we arrive at the conclusion that we are carrying logic too far, and that

the attempt to frame the world according to a rule of divine perfection is

opposed to experience and had better be given up. The case of the animals is

our own. We must admit that the Divine Being, although perfect himself, has

placed us in a state of life in which we may work together with him for good,

but we are very far from having attained to it.


  6. Again, ideas must be given through something; and we are always

prone to argue about the soul from analogies of outward things which may

serve to embody our thoughts, but are also partly delusive. For we cannot

reason from the natural to the spiritual, or from the outward to the inward.

The progress of physiological science, without bringing us nearer to the great

secret, has tended to remove some erroneous notions respecting the relations

of body and mind, and in this we have the advantage of the ancients. But no

one imagines that any seed of immortality is to be discerned in our mortal

frames. Most people have been content to rest their belief in another life on

the  agreement  of  the  more  enlightened  part  of  mankind,  and  on  the

inseparable connection of such a doctrine with the existence of a God--also in

a less degree on the impossibility of doubting about the continued existence

of those whom we love and reverence in this world. And after all has been

said, the figure, the analogy, the argument, are felt to be only approximations

in different forms to an expression of the common sentiment of the human

heart. That we shall live again is far more certain than that we shall take anyparticular form of life.


  7. When we speak of the immortality of the soul, we must ask further

what we mean by the word immortality. For of the duration of a living being

in countless ages we can form no conception; far less than a three years' old

child of the whole of life. The naked eye might as well try to see the furthest

star in the infinity of heaven. Whether time and space really exist when we

take away the limits of them may be doubted; at any rate the thought of them

when  unlimited  us  so  overwhelming  to  us  as  to  lose  all  distinctness.

Philosophers have spoken of them as forms of the human mind, but what is

the mind without them? As then infinite time, or an existence out of time,

which  are  the  only  possible  explanations  of  eternal  duration,  are  equally

inconceivable to us, let us substitute for them a hundred or a thousand years

after death, and ask not what will be our employment in eternity, but what

will happen to us in that definite portion of time; or what is now happening to

those  who  passed  out  of  life  a  hundred  or  a  thousand  years  ago.  Do  we

imagine that the wicked are suffering torments, or that the good are singing

the praises of God, during a period longer than that of a whole life, or of ten

lives of men? Is the suffering physical or mental? And does the worship of

God consist only of praise, or of many forms of service? Who are the wicked,

and who are the good, whom we venture to divide by a hard and fast line; and

in which of the two classes should we place ourselves and our friends? May

we not suspect that we are making differences of kind, because we are unable

to imagine differences of degree?--putting the whole human race into heaven

or hell for the greater convenience of logical division? Are we not at the same

time  describing  them  both  in  superlatives,  only  that  we  may  satisfy  the

demands of rhetoric? What is that pain which does not become deadened

after a thousand years? or what is the nature of that pleasure or happiness

which never wearies by monotony? Earthly pleasures and pains are short in

proportion as they are keen; of any others which are both intense and lasting

we have no experience, and can form no idea. The words or figures of speech

which we use are not consistent with themselves. For are we not imagining

Heaven under the similitude of a church, and Hell as a prison, or perhaps a

madhouse or chamber of horrors? And yet to beings constituted as we are, the

monotony of singing psalms would be as great an infliction as the pains of

hell, and might be even pleasantly interrupted by them. Where are the actions

worthy of rewards greater than those which are conferred on the greatestbenefactors of mankind? And where are the crimes which according to Plato's

merciful reckoning,--more merciful, at any rate, than the eternal damnation of

so-called  Christian  teachers,--for  every  ten  years  in  this  life  deserve  a

hundred of punishment in the life to come? We should be ready to die of pity

if we could see the least of the sufferings which the writers of Infernos and

Purgatorios have attributed to the damned. Yet these joys and terrors seem

hardly to exercise an appreciable influence over the lives of men. The wicked

man when old, is not, as Plato supposes (Republic), more agitated by the

terrors of another world when he is nearer to them, nor the good in an ecstasy

at the joys of which he is soon to be the partaker. Age numbs the sense of

both worlds; and the habit of life is strongest in death. Even the dying mother

is  dreaming  of  her  lost  children  as  they  were  forty  or  fifty  years  before,

'pattering over the boards,' not of reunion with them in another state of being.

Most persons when the last hour comes are resigned to the order of nature

and the will of God. They are not thinking of Dante's Inferno or Paradiso, or

of the Pilgrim's Progress. Heaven and hell are not realities to them, but words

or ideas; the outward symbols of some great mystery, they hardly know what.

Many  noble  poems  and  pictures  have  been  suggested  by  the  traditional

representations of them, which have been fixed in forms of art and can no

longer  be  altered.  Many  sermons  have  been  filled  with  descriptions  of

celestial or infernal mansions. But hardly even in childhood did the thought

of heaven and hell supply the motives of our actions, or at any time seriously

affect the substance of our belief.


  8. Another life must be described, if at all, in forms of thought and not of

sense.  To  draw  pictures  of  heaven  and  hell,  whether  in  the  language  of

Scripture or any other, adds nothing to our real knowledge, but may perhaps

disguise our ignorance. The truest conception which we can form of a future

life is a state of progress or education--a progress from evil to good, from

ignorance to knowledge. To this we are led by the analogy of the present life,

in which we see different races and nations of men, and different men and

women of the same nation, in various states or stages of cultivation; some

more  and  some  less  developed,  and  all  of  them  capable  of  improvement

under favourable circumstances. There are punishments too of children when

they are growing up inflicted by their parents, of elder offenders which are

imposed by the law of the land, of all men at all times of life, which are

attached by the laws of nature to the performance of certain actions. All thesepunishments are really educational; that is to say, they are not intended to

retaliate on the offender, but to teach him a lesson. Also there is an element

of chance in them, which is another name for our ignorance of the laws of

nature. There is evil too inseparable from good (compare Lysis); not always

punished  here,  as  good  is  not  always  rewarded.  It  is  capable  of  being

indefinitely diminished; and as knowledge increases, the element of chance

may more and more disappear.


  For we do not argue merely from the analogy of the present state of this

world to another, but from the analogy of a probable future to which we are

tending. The greatest changes of which we have had experience as yet are due

to  our  increasing  knowledge  of  history  and  of  nature.  They  have  been

produced by a few minds appearing in three or four favoured nations, in a

comparatively short period of time. May we be allowed to imagine the minds

of men everywhere working together during many ages for the completion of

our  knowledge?  May  not  the  science  of  physiology  transform  the  world?

Again,  the  majority  of  mankind  have  really  experienced  some  moral

improvement; almost every one feels that he has tendencies to good, and is

capable of becoming better. And these germs of good are often found to be

developed by new circumstances, like stunted trees when transplanted to a

better  soil.  The  differences  between  the  savage  and  the  civilized  man,  or

between  the  civilized  man  in  old  and  new  countries,  may  be  indefinitely

increased. The first difference is the effect of a few thousand, the second of a

few  hundred  years.  We  congratulate  ourselves  that  slavery  has  become

industry; that law and constitutional government have superseded despotism

and violence; that an ethical religion has taken the place of Fetichism. There

may yet come a time when the many may be as well off as the few; when no

one will be weighed down by excessive toil; when the necessity of providing

for the body will not interfere with mental improvement; when the physical

frame may be strengthened and developed; and the religion of all men may

become a reasonable service.


  Nothing therefore, either in the present state of man or in the tendencies

of the future, as far as we can entertain conjecture of them, would lead us to

suppose that God governs us vindictively in this world, and therefore we have

no reason to infer that he will govern us vindictively in another. The true

argument  from  analogy  is  not,  'This  life  is  a  mixed  state  of  justice  andinjustice,  of  great  waste,  of  sudden  casualties,  of  disproportionate

punishments, and therefore the like inconsistencies, irregularities, injustices

are to be expected in another;' but 'This life is subject to law, and is in a state

of  progress,  and  therefore  law  and  progress  may  be  believed  to  be  the

governing principles of another.' All the analogies of this world would be

against unmeaning punishments inflicted a hundred or a thousand years after

an  offence  had  been  committed.  Suffering  there  might  be  as  a  part  of

education, but not hopeless or protracted; as there might be a retrogression of

individuals or of bodies of men, yet not such as to interfere with a plan for the

improvement of the whole (compare Laws.)


  9. But some one will say: That we cannot reason from the seen to the

unseen, and that we are creating another world after the image of this, just as

men in former ages have created gods in their own likeness. And we, like the

companions  of  Socrates,  may  feel  discouraged  at  hearing  our  favourite

'argument from analogy' thus summarily disposed of. Like himself, too, we

may  adduce  other  arguments  in  which  he  seems  to  have  anticipated  us,

though he expresses them in different language. For we feel that the soul

partakes  of  the  ideal  and  invisible;  and  can  never  fall  into  the  error  of

confusing  the  external  circumstances  of  man  with  his  higher  self;  or  his

origin with his nature. It is as repugnant to us as it was to him to imagine that

our moral ideas are to be attributed only to cerebral forces. The value of a

human soul, like the value of a man's life to himself, is inestimable, and

cannot be reckoned in earthly or material things. The human being alone has

the consciousness of truth and justice and love, which is the consciousness of

God.  And  the  soul  becoming  more  conscious  of  these,  becomes  more

conscious of her own immortality.


  10. The last ground of our belief in immortality, and the strongest, is the

perfection of the divine nature. The mere fact of the existence of God does

not  tend  to  show  the  continued  existence  of  man.  An  evil  God  or  an

indifferent God might have had the power, but not the will, to preserve us. He

might have regarded us as fitted to minister to his service by a succession of

existences,--like  the  animals,  without  attributing  to  each  soul  an

incomparable value. But if he is perfect, he must will that all rational beings

should partake of that perfection which he himself is. In the words of the

Timaeus, he is good, and therefore he desires that all other things should beas like himself as possible. And the manner in which he accomplishes this is

by permitting evil, or rather degrees of good, which are otherwise called evil.

For all progress is good relatively to the past, and yet may be comparatively

evil when regarded in the light of the future. Good and evil are relative terms,

and degrees of evil are merely the negative aspect of degrees of good. Of the

absolute goodness of any finite nature we can form no conception; we are all

of us in process of transition from one degree of good or evil to another. The

difficulties which are urged about the origin or existence of evil are mere

dialectical puzzles, standing in the same relation to Christian philosophy as

the puzzles of the Cynics and Megarians to the philosophy of Plato. They

arise out of the tendency of the human mind to regard good and evil both as

relative and absolute; just as the riddles about motion are to be explained by

the double conception of space or matter, which the human mind has the

power of regarding either as continuous or discrete.


  In speaking of divine perfection, we mean to say that God is just and true

and loving, the author of order and not of disorder, of good and not of evil.

Or rather, that he is justice, that he is truth, that he is love, that he is order,

that he is the very progress of which we were speaking; and that wherever

these  qualities  are  present,  whether  in  the  human  soul  or  in  the  order  of

nature, there is God. We might still see him everywhere, if we had not been

mistakenly seeking for him apart from us, instead of in us; away from the

laws of nature, instead of in them. And we become united to him not by

mystical absorption, but by partaking, whether consciously or unconsciously,

of that truth and justice and love which he himself is.


  Thus the belief in the immortality of the soul rests at last on the belief in

God. If there is a good and wise God, then there is a progress of mankind

towards perfection; and if there is no progress of men towards perfection,

then  there  is  no  good  and  wise  God.  We  cannot  suppose  that  the  moral

government  of  God  of  which  we  see  the  beginnings  in  the  world  and  in

ourselves will cease when we pass out of life.


  11. Considering the 'feebleness of the human faculties and the uncertainty

of the subject,' we are inclined to believe that the fewer our words the better.

At the approach of death there is not much said; good men are too honest to

go out of the world professing more than they know. There is perhaps noimportant subject about which, at any time, even religious people speak so

little to one another. In the fulness of life the thought of death is mostly

awakened by the sight or recollection of the death of others rather than by the

prospect of our own. We must also acknowledge that there are degrees of the

belief in immortality, and many forms in which it presents itself to the mind.

Some persons will say no more than that they trust in God, and that they

leave all to Him. It is a great part of true religion not to pretend to know more

than we do. Others when they quit this world are comforted with the hope

'That they will see and know their friends in heaven.' But it is better to leave

them in the hands of God and to be assured that 'no evil shall touch them.'

There are others again to whom the belief in a divine personality has ceased

to have any longer a meaning; yet they are satisfied that the end of all is not

here, but that something still remains to us, 'and some better thing for the

good  than  for  the  evil.'  They  are  persuaded,  in  spite  of  their  theological

nihilism, that the ideas of justice and truth and holiness and love are realities.

They  cherish  an  enthusiastic  devotion  to  the  first  principles  of  morality.

Through these they see, or seem to see, darkly, and in a figure, that the soul is

immortal.


  But besides differences of theological opinion which must ever prevail

about things unseen, the hope of immortality is weaker or stronger in men at

one time of life than at another; it even varies from day to day. It comes and

goes; the mind, like the sky, is apt to be overclouded. Other generations of

men may have sometimes lived under an 'eclipse of faith,' to us the total

disappearance of it might be compared to the 'sun falling from heaven.' And

we may sometimes have to begin again and acquire the belief for ourselves;

or to win it back again when it is lost. It is really weakest in the hour of death.

For Nature, like a kind mother or nurse, lays us to sleep without frightening

us; physicians, who are the witnesses of such scenes, say that under ordinary

circumstances there is no fear of the future. Often, as Plato tells us, death is

accompanied 'with pleasure.' (Tim.) When the end is still uncertain, the cry of

many a one has been, 'Pray, that I may be taken.' The last thoughts even of

the best men depend chiefly on the accidents of their bodily state. Pain soon

overpowers the desire of life; old age, like the child, is laid to sleep almost in

a moment. The long experience of life will often destroy the interest which

mankind have in it. So various are the feelings with which different persons

draw near to death; and still more various the forms in which imaginationclothes it. For this alternation of feeling compare the Old Testament,--Psalm

vi.; Isaiah; Eccles.


  12. When we think of God and of man in his relation to God; of the

imperfection of our present state and yet of the progress which is observable

in the history of the world and of the human mind; of the depth and power of

our moral ideas which seem to partake of the very nature of God Himself;

when we consider the contrast between the physical laws to which we are

subject and the higher law which raises us above them and is yet a part of

them; when we reflect on our capacity of becoming the 'spectators of all time

and all existence,' and of framing in our own minds the ideal of a perfect

Being; when we see how the human mind in all the higher religions of the

world,  including  Buddhism,  notwithstanding  some  aberrations,  has  tended

towards such a belief--we have reason to think that our destiny is different

from that of animals; and though we cannot altogether shut out the childish

fear that the soul upon leaving the body may 'vanish into thin air,' we have

still, so far as the nature of the subject admits, a hope of immortality with

which we comfort ourselves on sufficient grounds. The denial of the belief

takes the heart out of human life; it lowers men to the level of the material.

As Goethe also says, 'He is dead even in this world who has no belief in

another.'


  13. It is well also that we should sometimes think of the forms of thought

under which the idea of immortality is most naturally presented to us. It is

clear that to our minds the risen soul can no longer be described, as in a

picture, by the symbol of a creature half-bird, half-human, nor in any other

form of sense. The multitude of angels, as in Milton, singing the Almighty 's

praises,  are  a  noble  image,  and  may  furnish  a  theme  for  the  poet  or  the

painter, but they are no longer an adequate expression of the kingdom of God

which is within us. Neither is there any mansion, in this world or another, in

which the departed can be imagined to dwell and carry on their occupations.

When this earthly tabernacle is dissolved, no other habitation or building can

take them in: it is in the language of ideas only that we speak of them.


  First of all there is the thought of rest and freedom from pain; they have

gone home, as the common saying is, and the cares of this world touch them

no more. Secondly, we may imagine them as they were at their best andbrightest,  humbly  fulfilling  their  daily  round  of  duties--selfless,  childlike,

unaffected by the world; when the eye was single and the whole body seemed

to be full of light; when the mind was clear and saw into the purposes of God.

Thirdly, we may think of them as possessed by a great love of God and man,

working out His will at a further stage in the heavenly pilgrimage. And yet

we acknowledge that these are the things which eye hath not seen nor ear

heard and therefore it hath not entered into the heart of man in any sensible

manner to conceive them. Fourthly, there may have been some moments in

our own lives when we have risen above ourselves, or been conscious of our

truer selves, in which the will of God has superseded our wills, and we have

entered into communion with Him, and been partakers for a brief season of

the Divine truth and love, in which like Christ we have been inspired to utter

the prayer, 'I in them, and thou in me, that we may be all made perfect in one.'

These  precious  moments,  if  we  have  ever  known  them,  are  the  nearest

approach which we can make to the idea of immortality.


  14.  Returning  now  to  the  earlier  stage  of  human  thought  which  is

represented by the writings of Plato, we find that many of the same questions

have  already  arisen:  there  is  the  same  tendency  to  materialism;  the  same

inconsistency in the application of the idea of mind; the same doubt whether

the soul is to be regarded as a cause or as an effect; the same falling back on

moral convictions. In the Phaedo the soul is conscious of her divine nature,

and the separation from the body which has been commenced in this life is

perfected in another. Beginning in mystery, Socrates, in the intermediate part

of the Dialogue, attempts to bring the doctrine of a future life into connection

with  his  theory  of  knowledge.  In  proportion  as  he  succeeds  in  this,  the

individual  seems  to  disappear  in  a  more  general  notion  of  the  soul;  the

contemplation of ideas 'under the form of eternity' takes the place of past and

future states of existence. His language may be compared to that of some

modern philosophers, who speak of eternity, not in the sense of perpetual

duration  of  time,  but  as  an  ever-  present  quality  of  the  soul.  Yet  at  the

conclusion  of  the  Dialogue,  having  'arrived  at  the  end  of  the  intellectual

world' (Republic), he replaces the veil of mythology, and describes the soul

and her attendant genius in the language of the mysteries or of a disciple of

Zoroaster. Nor can we fairly demand of Plato a consistency which is wanting

among ourselves, who acknowledge that another world is beyond the range

of human thought, and yet are always seeking to represent the mansions ofheaven or hell in the colours of the painter, or in the descriptions of the poet

or rhetorician.


  15. The doctrine of the immortality of the soul was not new to the Greeks

in the age of Socrates, but, like the unity of God, had a foundation in the

popular belief. The old Homeric notion of a gibbering ghost flitting away to

Hades; or of a few illustrious heroes enjoying the isles of the blest; or of an

existence divided between the two; or the Hesiodic, of righteous spirits, who

become guardian angels,--had given place in the mysteries and the Orphic

poets  to  representations,  partly  fanciful,  of  a  future  state  of  rewards  and

punishments. (Laws.) The reticence of the Greeks on public occasions and in

some part of their literature respecting this 'underground' religion, is not to be

taken as a measure of the diffusion of such beliefs. If Pericles in the funeral

oration is silent on the consolations of immortality, the poet Pindar and the

tragedians on the other hand constantly assume the continued existence of the

dead in an upper or under world. Darius and Laius are still alive; Antigone

will be dear to her brethren after death; the way to the palace of Cronos is

found  by  those  who  'have  thrice  departed  from  evil.'  The  tragedy  of  the

Greeks is not 'rounded' by this life, but is deeply set in decrees of fate and

mysterious  workings  of  powers  beneath  the  earth.  In  the  caricature  of

Aristophanes there is also a witness to the common sentiment. The Ionian and

Pythagorean philosophies arose, and some new elements were added to the

popular belief. The individual must find an expression as well as the world.

Either the soul was supposed to exist in the form of a magnet, or of a particle

of fire, or of light, or air, or water; or of a number or of a harmony of number;

or to be or have, like the stars, a principle of motion (Arist. de Anim.). At

length Anaxagoras, hardly distinguishing between life and mind, or between

mind human and divine, attained the pure abstraction; and this, like the other

abstractions of Greek philosophy, sank deep into the human intelligence. The

opposition  of  the  intelligible  and  the  sensible,  and  of  God  to  the  world,

supplied an analogy which assisted in the separation of soul and body. If

ideas were separable from phenomena, mind was also separable from matter;

if the ideas were eternal, the mind that conceived them was eternal too. As

the unity of God was more distinctly acknowledged, the conception of the

human soul became more developed. The succession, or alternation of life

and death, had occurred to Heracleitus. The Eleatic Parmenides had stumbled

upon the modern thesis, that 'thought and being are the same.' The Easternbelief in transmigration defined the sense of individuality; and some, like

Empedocles, fancied that the blood which they had shed in another state of

being was crying against them, and that for thirty thousand years they were to

be 'fugitives and vagabonds upon the earth.' The desire of recognizing a lost

mother or love or friend in the world below (Phaedo) was a natural feeling

which, in that age as well as in every other, has given distinctness to the hope

of immortality. Nor were ethical considerations wanting, partly derived from

the necessity of punishing the greater sort of criminals, whom no avenging

power of this world could reach. The voice of conscience, too, was heard

reminding the good man that he was not altogether innocent. (Republic.) To

these indistinct longings and fears an expression was given in the mysteries

and Orphic poets: a 'heap of books' (Republic), passing under the names of

Musaeus and Orpheus in Plato's time, were filled with notions of an under-

world.


  16. Yet after all the belief in the individuality of the soul after death had

but  a  feeble  hold  on  the  Greek  mind.  Like  the  personality  of  God,  the

personality of man in a future state was not inseparably bound up with the

reality  of  his  existence.  For  the  distinction  between  the  personal  and

impersonal, and also between the divine and human, was far less marked to

the Greek than to ourselves. And as Plato readily passes from the notion of

the good to that of God, he also passes almost imperceptibly to himself and

his reader from the future life of the individual soul to the eternal being of the

absolute soul. There has been a clearer statement and a clearer denial of the

belief in modern times than is found in early Greek philosophy, and hence the

comparative silence on the whole subject which is often remarked in ancient

writers, and particularly in Aristotle. For Plato and Aristotle are not further

removed in their teaching about the immortality of the soul than they are in

their theory of knowledge.


  17. Living in an age when logic was beginning to mould human thought,

Plato naturally cast his belief in immortality into a logical form. And when

we consider how much the doctrine of ideas was also one of words, it is not

surprising  that  he  should  have  fallen  into  verbal  fallacies:  early  logic  is

always mistaking the truth of the form for the truth of the matter. It is easy to

see that the alternation of opposites is not the same as the generation of them

out of each other; and that the generation of them out of each other, which isthe first argument in the Phaedo, is at variance with their mutual exclusion of

each other, whether in themselves or in us, which is the last. For even if we

admit the distinction which he draws between the opposites and the things

which have the opposites, still individuals fall under the latter class; and we

have to pass out of the region of human hopes and fears to a conception of an

abstract soul which is the impersonation of the ideas. Such a conception,

which in Plato himself is but half expressed, is unmeaning to us, and relative

only  to  a  particular  stage  in  the  history  of  thought.  The  doctrine  of

reminiscence is also a fragment of a former world, which has no place in the

philosophy of modern times. But Plato had the wonders of psychology just

opening to him, and he had not the explanation of them which is supplied by

the analysis of language and the history of the human mind. The question,

'Whence come our abstract ideas?' he could only answer by an imaginary

hypothesis. Nor is it difficult to see that his crowning argument is purely

verbal,  and  is  but  the  expression  of  an  instinctive  confidence  put  into  a

logical  form:--'The  soul  is  immortal  because  it  contains  a  principle  of

imperishableness.' Nor does he himself seem at all to be aware that nothing is

added to human knowledge by his 'safe and simple answer,' that beauty is the

cause of the beautiful; and that he is merely reasserting the Eleatic being

'divided by the Pythagorean numbers,' against the Heracleitean doctrine of

perpetual generation. The answer to the 'very serious question' of generation

and destruction is really the denial of them. For this he would substitute, as in

the  Republic,  a  system  of  ideas,  tested,  not  by  experience,  but  by  their

consequences, and not explained by actual causes, but by a higher, that is, a

more general notion. Consistency with themselves is the only test which is to

be applied to them. (Republic, and Phaedo.)


  18. To deal fairly with such arguments, they should be translated as far as

possible into their modern equivalents. 'If the ideas of men are eternal, their

souls are eternal, and if not the ideas, then not the souls.' Such an argument

stands nearly in the same relation to Plato and his age, as the argument from

the existence of God to immortality among ourselves. 'If God exists, then the

soul exists after death; and if there is no God, there is no existence of the soul

after death.' For the ideas are to his mind the reality, the truth, the principle of

permanence, as well as of intelligence and order in the world. When Simmias

and Cebes say that they are more strongly persuaded of the existence of ideas

than they are of the immortality of the soul, they represent fairly enough the