CLEINIAS:  No  doubt  this  fact  has  been  often  affirmed  positively  by  the

ancients of these athletes.


ATHENIAN: And had they the courage to abstain from what is ordinarily

deemed a pleasure for the sake of a victory in wrestling, running, and the

like; and shall our young men be incapable of a similar endurance for the

sake of a much nobler victory, which is the noblest of all, as from their youth

upwards we will tell them, charming them, as we hope, into the belief of this

by tales and sayings and songs?


CLEINIAS: Of what victory are you speaking?


ATHENIAN: Of the victory over pleasure, which if they win, they will live

happily; or if they are conquered, the reverse of happily. And, further, may

we not suppose that the fear of impiety will enable them to master that which

other inferior people have mastered?


CLEINIAS: I dare say.


ATHENIAN: And since we have reached this point in our legislation, and

have fallen into a difficulty by reason of the vices of mankind, I affirm that

our ordinance should simply run in the following terms: Our citizens ought

not to fall below the nature of birds and beasts in general, who are born in

great  multitudes,  and  yet  remain  until  the  age  for  procreation  virgin  and

unmarried, but when they have reached the proper time of life are coupled,

male and female, and lovingly pair together, and live the rest of their lives in

holiness and innocence, abiding firmly in their original compact: surely, we

will  say  to  them,  you  should  be  better  than  the  animals.  But  if  they  are

corrupted by the other Hellenes and the common practice of barbarians, and

they see with their eyes and hear with their ears of the so-called free love

everywhere prevailing among them, and they themselves are not able to get

the better of the temptation, the guardians of the law, exercising the functions

of lawgivers, shall devise a second law against them.


CLEINIAS: And what law would you advise them to pass if this one failed?


ATHENIAN: Clearly, Cleinias, the one which would naturally follow.CLEINIAS: What is that?


ATHENIAN:  Our  citizens  should  not  allow  pleasures  to  strengthen  with

indulgence, but should by toil divert the aliment and exuberance of them into

other parts of the body; and this will happen if no immodesty be allowed in

the practice of love. Then they will be ashamed of frequent intercourse, and

they will find pleasure, if seldom enjoyed, to be a less imperious mistress.

They should not be found out doing anything of the sort. Concealment shall

be  honourable,  and  sanctioned  by  custom  and  made  law  by  unwritten

prescription;  on  the  other  hand,  to  be  detected  shall  be  esteemed

dishonourable, but not, to abstain wholly. In this way there will be a second

legal standard of honourable and dishonourable, involving a second notion of

right. Three principles will comprehend all those corrupt natures whom we

call inferior to themselves, and who form but one class, and will compel them

not to transgress.


CLEINIAS: What are they?


ATHENIAN: The principle of piety, the love of honour, and the desire of

beauty,  not  in  the  body  but  in  the  soul.  These  are,  perhaps,  romantic

aspirations;  but  they  are  the  noblest  of  aspirations,  if  they  could  only  be

realised in all states, and, God willing, in the matter of love we may be able

to enforce one of two things--either that no one shall venture to touch any

person of the freeborn or noble class except his wedded wife, or sow the

unconsecrated and bastard seed among harlots, or in barren and unnatural

lusts; or at least we may abolish altogether the connection of men with men;

and as to women, if any man has to do with any but those who come into his

house duly married by sacred rites, whether they be bought or acquired in any

other way, and he offends publicly in the face of all mankind, we shall be

right in enacting that he be deprived of civic honours and privileges, and be

deemed to be, as he truly is, a stranger. Let this law, then, whether it is one,

or ought rather to be called two, be laid down respecting love in general, and

the intercourse of the sexes which arises out of the desires, whether rightly or

wrongly indulged.


MEGILLUS: I, for my part, Stranger, would gladly receive this law. Cleinias

shall speak for himself, and tell you what is his opinion.CLEINIAS: I will, Megillus, when an opportunity offers; at present, I think

that we had better allow the Stranger to proceed with his laws.


MEGILLUS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: We had got about as far as the establishment of the common

tables, which in most places would be difficult, but in Crete no one would

think of introducing any other custom. There might arise a question about the

manner of them--whether they shall be such as they are here in Crete, or such

as they are in Lacedaemon--or is there a third kind which may be better than

either of them? The answer to this question might be easily discovered, but

the  discovery  would  do  no  great  good,  for  at  present  they  are  very  well

ordered.


Leaving  the  common  tables,  we  may  therefore  proceed  to  the  means  of

providing food. Now, in cities the means of life are gained in many ways and

from divers sources, and in general from two sources, whereas our city has

only one. For most of the Hellenes obtain their food from sea and land, but

our citizens from land only. And this makes the task of the legislator less

difficult--half as many laws will be enough, and much less than half; and they

will be of a kind better suited to free men. For he has nothing to do with laws

about  shipowners  and  merchants  and  retailers  and  inn-keepers  and  tax

collectors  and  mines  and  moneylending  and  compound  interest  and

innumerable  other  things--bidding  good-bye  to  these,  he  gives  laws  to

husbandmen  and  shepherds  and  bee-keepers,  and  to  the  guardians  and

superintendents of their implements; and he has already legislated for greater

matters, as for example, respecting marriage and the procreation and nurture

of children, and for education, and the establishment of offices--and now he

must direct his laws to those who provide food and labour in preparing it.


Let us first of all, then, have a class of laws which shall be called the laws of

husbandmen.  And  let  the  first  of  them  be  the  law  of  Zeus,  the  God  of

boundaries. Let no one shift the boundary line either of a fellow- citizen who

is a neighbour, or, if he dwells at the extremity of the land, of any stranger

who is conterminous with him, considering that this is truly 'to move the

immovable,' and every one should be more willing to move the largest rock

which is not a landmark, than the least stone which is the sworn mark offriendship and hatred between neighbours; for Zeus, the god of kindred, is the

witness of the citizen, and Zeus, the god of strangers, of the stranger, and

when aroused, terrible are the wars which they stir up. He who obeys the law

will never know the fatal consequences of disobedience, but he who despises

the law shall be liable to a double penalty, the first coming from the Gods,

and the second from the law. For let no one wilfully remove the boundaries

of his neighbour's land, and if any one does, let him who will inform the

landowners, and let them bring him into court, and if he be convicted of re-

dividing the land by stealth or by force, let the court determine what he ought

to suffer or pay. In the next place, many small injuries done by neighbours to

one another, through their multiplication, may cause a weight of enmity, and

make neighbourhood a very disagreeable and bitter thing. Wherefore a man

ought to be very careful of committing any offence against his neighbour, and

especially of encroaching on his neighbour's land; for any man may easily do

harm, but not every man can do good to another. He who encroaches on his

neighbour's  land,  and  transgresses  his  boundaries,  shall  make  good  the

damage, and, to cure him of his impudence and also of his meanness, he shall

pay a double penalty to the injured party. Of these and the like matters the

wardens of the country shall take cognizance, and be the judges of them and

assessors of the damage; in the more important cases, as has been already

said, the whole number of them belonging to any one of the twelve divisions

shall decide, and in the lesser cases the commanders: or, again, if any one

pastures  his  cattle  on  his  neighbour's  land,  they  shall  see  the  injury,  and

adjudge the penalty. And if any one, by decoying the bees, gets possession of

another's swarms, and draws them to himself by making noises, he shall pay

the damage; or if any one sets fire to his own wood and takes no care of his

neighbour's property, he shall be fined at the discretion of the magistrates.

And if in planting he does not leave a fair distance between his own and his

neighbour's land, he shall be punished, in accordance with the enactments of

many lawgivers, which we may use, not deeming it necessary that the great

legislator of our state should determine all the trifles which might be decided

by any body; for example, husbandmen have had of old excellent laws about

waters, and there is no reason why we should propose to divert their course:

He who likes may draw water from the fountain-head of the common stream

on to his own land, if he do not cut off the spring which clearly belongs to

some other owner; and he may take the water in any direction which he

pleases,  except  through  a  house  or  temple  or  sepulchre,  but  he  must  becareful to do no harm beyond the channel. And if there be in any place a

natural dryness of the earth, which keeps in the rain from heaven, and causes

a deficiency in the supply of water, let him dig down on his own land as far

as the clay, and if at this depth he finds no water, let him obtain water from

his neighbours, as much as is required for his servants' drinking, and if his

neighbours, too, are limited in their supply, let him have a fixed measure,

which  shall  be  determined  by  the  wardens  of  the  country.  This  he  shall

receive each day, and on these terms have a share of his neighbours' water. If

there be heavy rain, and one of those on the lower ground injures some tiller

of the upper ground, or some one who has a common wall, by refusing to

give them an outlet for water; or, again, if some one living on the higher

ground recklessly lets off the water on his lower neighbour, and they cannot

come to terms with one another, let him who will call in a warden of the city,

if he be in the city, or if he be in the country, a warden of the country, and let

him obtain a decision determining what each of them is to do. And he who

will  not  abide  by  the  decision  shall  suffer  for  his  malignant  and  morose

temper, and pay a fine to the injured party, equivalent to double the value of

the injury, because he was unwilling to submit to the magistrates.


Now the participation of fruits shall be ordered on this wise. The goddess of

Autumn  has  two  gracious  gifts:  one  the  joy  of  Dionysus  which  is  not

treasured up; the other, which nature intends to be stored. Let this be the law,

then, concerning the fruits of autumn: He who tastes the common or storing

fruits of autumn, whether grapes or figs, before the season of vintage which

coincides with Arcturus, either on his own land or on that of others--let him

pay fifty drachmae, which shall be sacred to Dionysus, if he pluck them from

his  own  land;  and  if  from  his  neighbour's  land,  a  mina,  and  if  from  any

others', two-thirds of a mina. And he who would gather the 'choice' grapes or

the 'choice' figs, as they are now termed, if he take them off his own land, let

him pluck them how and when he likes; but if he take them from the ground

of  others  without  their  leave,  let  him  in  that  case  be  always  punished  in

accordance with the law which ordains that he should not move what he has

not  laid  down.  And  if  a  slave  touches  any  fruit  of  this  sort,  without  the

consent of the owner of the land, he shall be beaten with as many blows as

there are grapes on the bunch, or figs on the fig-tree. Let a metic purchase the

'choice' autumnal fruit, and then, if he pleases, he may gather it; but if a

stranger is passing along the road, and desires to eat, let him take of the'choice' grape for himself and a single follower without payment, as a tribute

of hospitality. The law however forbids strangers from sharing in the sort

which is not used for eating; and if any one, whether he be master or slave,

takes of them in ignorance, let the slave be beaten, and the freeman dismissed

with admonitions, and instructed to take of the other autumnal fruits which

are unfit for making raisins and wine, or for laying by as dried figs. As to

pears, and apples, and pomegranates, and similar fruits, there shall be no

disgrace in taking them secretly; but he who is caught, if he be of less than

thirty years of age, shall be struck and beaten off, but not wounded; and no

freeman shall have any right of satisfaction for such blows. Of these fruits the

stranger may partake, just as he may of the fruits of autumn. And if an elder,

who is more than thirty years of age, eat of them on the spot, let him, like the

stranger, be allowed to partake of all such fruits, but he must carry away

nothing. If, however, he will not obey the law, let him run the risk of failing

in the competition of virtue, in case any one takes notice of his actions before

the judges at the time.


Water is the greatest element of nutrition in gardens, but is easily polluted.

You  cannot  poison  the  soil,  or  the  sun,  or  the  air,  which  are  the  other

elements of nutrition in plants, or divert them, or steal them; but all these

things may very likely happen in regard to water, which must therefore be

protected by law. And let this be the law: If any one intentionally pollutes the

water of another, whether the water of a spring, or collected in reservoirs,

either by poisonous substances, or by digging, or by theft, let the injured

party bring the cause before the wardens of the city, and claim in writing the

value of the loss; if the accused be found guilty of injuring the water by

deleterious substances, let him not only pay damages, but purify the stream or

the  cistern  which  contains  the  water,  in  such  manner  as  the  laws  of  the

interpreters order the purification to be made by the offender in each case.


With respect to the gathering in of the fruits of the soil, let a man, if he

pleases, carry his own fruits through any place in which he either does no

harm to any one, or himself gains three times as much as his neighbour loses.

Now  of  these  things  the  magistrates  should  be  cognizant,  as  of  all  other

things in which a man intentionally does injury to another or to the property

of another, by fraud or force, in the use which he makes of his own property.

All  these  matters  a  man  should  lay  before  the  magistrates,  and  receivedamages, supposing the injury to be not more than three minae; or if he have

a charge against another which involves a larger amount, let him bring his

suit into the public courts and have the evil-doer punished. But if any of the

magistrates appear to adjudge the penalties which he imposes in an unjust

spirit, let him be liable to pay double to the injured party. Any one may bring

the offences of magistrates, in any particular case, before the public courts.

There are innumerable little matters relating to the modes of punishment, and

applications for suits, and summonses and the witnesses to summonses--for

example, whether two witnesses should be required for a summons, or how

many--and all such details, which cannot be omitted in legislation, but are

beneath  the  wisdom  of  an  aged  legislator.  These  lesser  matters,  as  they

indeed  are  in  comparison  with  the  greater  ones,  let  a  younger  generation

regulate by law, after the patterns which have preceded, and according to

their own experience of the usefulness and necessity of such laws; and when

they are duly regulated let there be no alteration, but let the citizens live in the

observance of them.


Now of artisans, let the regulations be as follows: In the first place, let no

citizen or servant of a citizen be occupied in handicraft arts; for he who is to

secure and preserve the public order of the state, has an art which requires

much study and many kinds of knowledge, and does not admit of being made

a secondary occupation; and hardly any human being is capable of pursuing

two  professions  or  two  arts  rightly,  or  of  practising  one  art  himself,  and

superintending some one else who is practising another. Let this, then, be our

first principle in the state: No one who is a smith shall also be a carpenter,

and if he be a carpenter, he shall not superintend the smith's art rather than his

own, under the pretext that in superintending many servants who are working

for him, he is likely to superintend them better, because more revenue will

accrue to him from them than from his own art; but let every man in the state

have one art, and get his living by that. Let the wardens of the city labour to

maintain this law, and if any citizen incline to any other art rather than the

study of virtue, let them punish him with disgrace and infamy, until they

bring him back into his own right course; and if any stranger profess two arts,

let them chastise him with bonds and money penalties, and expulsion from

the state, until they compel him to be one only and not many.


But as touching payments for hire, and contracts of work, or in case any onedoes wrong to any of the citizens, or they do wrong to any other, up to fifty

drachmae, let the wardens of the city decide the case; but if a greater amount

be involved, then let the public courts decide according to law. Let no one

pay any duty either on the importation or exportation of goods; and as to

frankincense and similar perfumes, used in the service of the Gods, which

come from abroad, and purple and other dyes which are not produced in the

country, or the materials of any art which have to be imported, and which are

not necessary--no one should import them; nor, again, should any one export

anything  which  is  wanted  in  the  country.  Of  all  these  things  let  there  be

inspectors and superintendents, taken from the guardians of the law; and they

shall be the twelve next in order to the five seniors. Concerning arms, and all

implements  which  are  required  for  military  purposes,  if  there  be  need  of

introducing any art, or plant, or metal, or chains of any kind, or animals for

use in war, let the commanders of the horse and the generals have authority

over their importation and exportation; the city shall send them out and also

receive them, and the guardians of the law shall make fit and proper laws

about them. But let there be no retail trade for the sake of moneymaking,

either in these or any other articles, in the city or country at all.


With respect to food and the distribution of the produce of the country, the

right and proper way seems to be nearly that which is the custom of Crete; for

all should be required to distribute the fruits of the soil into twelve parts, and

in this way consume them. Let the twelfth portion of each as for instance of

wheat and barley, to which the rest of the fruits of the earth shall be added, as

well as the animals which are for sale in each of the twelve divisions, be

divided in due proportion into three parts; one part for freemen, another for

their servants, and a third for craftsmen and in general for strangers, whether

sojourners who may be dwelling in the city, and like other men must live, or

those who come on some business which they have with the state, or with

some individual. Let only this third part of all necessaries be required to be

sold; out of the other two-thirds no one shall be compelled to sell. And how

will  they  be  best  distributed?  In  the  first  place,  we  see  clearly  that  the

distribution will be of equals in one point of view, and in another point of

view of unequals.


CLEINIAS: What do you mean?ATHENIAN: I mean that the earth of necessity produces and nourishes the

various articles of food, sometimes better and sometimes worse.


CLEINIAS: Of course.


ATHENIAN: Such being the case, let no one of the three portions be greater

than either of the other two--neither that which is assigned to masters or to

slaves, nor again that of the stranger; but let the distribution to all be equal

and alike, and let every citizen take his two portions and distribute them

among slaves and freemen, he having power to determine the quantity and

quality. And what remains he shall distribute by measure and number among

the  animals  who  have  to  be  sustained  from  the  earth,  taking  the  whole

number of them.


In the second place, our citizens should have separate houses duly ordered;

and this will be the order proper for men like them. There shall be twelve

hamlets, one in the middle of each twelfth portion, and in each hamlet they

shall first set apart a market-place, and the temples of the Gods, and of their

attendant demi-gods; and if there be any local deities of the Magnetes, or

holy seats of other ancient deities, whose memory has been preserved, to

these let them pay their ancient honours. But Hestia, and Zeus, and Athene

will have temples everywhere together with the God who presides in each of

the twelve districts. And the first erection of houses shall be around these

temples, where the ground is highest, in order to provide the safest and most

defensible place of retreat for the guards. All the rest of the country they shall

settle  in  the  following  manner:  They  shall  make  thirteen  divisions  of  the

craftsmen; one of them they shall establish in the city, and this, again, they

shall subdivide into twelve lesser divisions, among the twelve districts of the

city, and the remainder shall be distributed in the country round about; and in

each village they shall settle various classes of craftsmen, with a view to the

convenience of the husbandmen. And the chief officers of the wardens of the

country shall superintend all these matters, and see how many of them, and

which class of them, each place requires; and fix them where they are likely

to be least troublesome, and most useful to the husbandman. And the wardens

of the city shall see to similar matters in the city.


Now the wardens of the agora ought to see to the details of the agora. Theirfirst care, after the temples which are in the agora have been seen to, should

be to prevent any one from doing any wrong in dealings between man and

man; in the second place, as being inspectors of temperance and violence,

they  should  chastise  him  who  requires  chastisement.  Touching  articles  of

sale, they should first see whether the articles which the citizens are under

regulations to sell to strangers are sold to them, as the law ordains. And let

the law be as follows: On the first day of the month, the persons in charge,

whoever they are, whether strangers or slaves, who have the charge on behalf

of the citizens, shall produce to the strangers the portion which falls to them,

in the first place, a twelfth portion of the corn--the stranger shall purchase

corn for the whole month, and other cereals, on the first market day; and on

the tenth day of the month the one party shall sell, and the other buy, liquids

sufficient to last during the whole month; and on the twenty-third day there

shall be a sale of animals by those who are willing to sell to the people who

want to buy, and of implements and other things which husbandmen sell,

(such as skins and all kinds of clothing, either woven or made of felt and

other goods of the same sort) and which strangers are compelled to buy and

purchase of others. As to the retail trade in these things, whether of barley or

wheat set apart for meal and flour, or any other kind of food, no one shall sell

them to citizens or their slaves, nor shall any one buy of a citizen; but let the

stranger sell them in the market of strangers, to artisans and their slaves,

making an exchange of wine and food, which is commonly called retail trade.

And  butchers  shall  offer  for  sale  parts  of  dismembered  animals  to  the

strangers, and artisans, and their servants. Let any stranger who likes buy fuel

from day to day wholesale, from those who have the care of it in the country,

and let him sell to the strangers as much as he pleases and when he pleases.

As to other goods and implements which are likely to be wanted, they shall

sell them in the common market, at any place which the guardians of the law

and  the  wardens  of  the  market  and  city,  choosing  according  to  their

judgment,  shall  determine;  at  such  places  they  shall  exchange  money  for

goods, and goods for money, neither party giving credit to the other; and he

who gives credit must be satisfied, whether he obtain his money or not, for in

such exchanges he will not be protected by law. But whenever property has

been bought or sold, greater in quantity or value than is allowed by the law,

which has determined within what limits a man may increase and diminish

his possessions, let the excess be registered in the books of the guardians of

the law; or in case of diminution, let there be an erasure made. And let thesame rule be observed about the registration of the property of the metics.

Any  one  who  likes  may  come  and  be  a  metic  on  certain  conditions;  a

foreigner, if he likes, and is able to settle, may dwell in the land, but he must

practise an art, and not abide more than twenty years from the time at which

he has registered himself; and he shall pay no sojourner's tax, however small,

except good conduct, nor any other tax for buying and selling. But when the

twenty years have expired, he shall take his property with him and depart.

And if in the course of these years he should chance to distinguish himself by

any considerable benefit which he confers on the state, and he thinks that he

can persuade the council and assembly, either to grant him delay in leaving

the country, or to allow him to remain for the whole of his life, let him go and

persuade the city, and whatever they assent to at his instance shall take effect.

For the children of the metics, being artisans, and of fifteen years of age, let

the time of their sojourn commence after their fifteenth year; and let them

remain for twenty years, and then go where they like; but any of them who

wishes to remain, may do so, if he can persuade the council and assembly.

And if he depart, let him erase all the entries which have been made by him

in the register kept by the magistrates.BOOK IX.


Next to all the matters which have preceded in the natural order of legislation

will come suits of law. Of suits those which relate to agriculture have been

already described, but the more important have not been described. Having

mentioned them severally under their usual names, we will proceed to say

what punishments are to be inflicted for each offence, and who are to be the

judges of them.


CLEINIAS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: There is a sense of disgrace in legislating, as we are about to

do, for all the details of crime in a state which, as we say, is to be well

regulated and will be perfectly adapted to the practice of virtue. To assume

that in such a state there will arise some one who will be guilty of crimes as

heinous as any which are ever perpetrated in other states, and that we must

legislate for him by anticipation, and threaten and make laws against him if

he should arise, in order to deter him, and punish his acts, under the idea that

he will arise--this, as I was saying, is in a manner disgraceful. Yet seeing that

we are not like the ancient legislators, who gave laws to heroes and sons of

gods, being, according to the popular belief, themselves the offspring of the

gods, and legislating for others, who were also the children of divine parents,

but that we are only men who are legislating for the sons of men, there is no

uncharitableness in apprehending that some one of our citizens may be like a

seed which has touched the ox's horn, having a heart so hard that it cannot be

softened  any  more  than  those  seeds  can  be  softened  by  fire.  Among  our

citizens there may be those who cannot be subdued by all the strength of the

laws; and for their sake, though an ungracious task, I will proclaim my first

law about the robbing of temples, in case any one should dare to commit such

a crime. I do not expect or imagine that any well-brought-up citizen will ever

take the infection, but their servants, and strangers, and strangers' servants

may be guilty of many impieties. And with a view to them especially, and yet

not without a provident eye to the weakness of human nature generally, I will

proclaim the law about robbers of temples and similar incurable, or almost

incurable,  criminals.  Having  already  agreed  that  such  enactments  oughtalways to have a short prelude, we may speak to the criminal, whom some

tormenting desire by night and by day tempts to go and rob a temple, the

fewest possible words of admonition and exhortation: O sir, we will say to

him, the impulse which moves you to rob temples is not an ordinary human

malady, nor yet a visitation of heaven, but a madness which is begotten in a

man from ancient and unexpiated crimes of his race, an ever-recurring curse--

against this you must guard with all your might, and how you are to guard we

will explain to you. When any such thought comes into your mind, go and

perform expiations, go as a suppliant to the temples of the Gods who avert

evils, go to the society of those who are called good men among you; hear

them tell and yourself try to repeat after them, that every man should honour

the noble and the just. Fly from the company of the wicked--fly and turn not

back; and if your disorder is lightened by these remedies, well and good, but

if not, then acknowledge death to be nobler than life, and depart hence.


Such are the preludes which we sing to all who have thoughts of unholy and

treasonable actions, and to him who hearkens to them the law has nothing to

say. But to him who is disobedient when the prelude is over, cry with a loud

voice--He who is taken in the act of robbing temples, if he be a slave or

stranger, shall have his evil deed engraven on his face and hands, and shall be

beaten with as many stripes as may seem good to the judges, and be cast

naked beyond the borders of the land. And if he suffers this punishment he

will probably return to his right mind and be improved; for no penalty which

the law inflicts is designed for evil, but always makes him who suffers either

better or not so much worse as he would have been. But if any citizen be

found guilty of any great or unmentionable wrong, either in relation to the

Gods, or his parents, or the state, let the judge deem him to be incurable,

remembering that after receiving such an excellent education and training

from youth upward, he has not abstained from the greatest of crimes. His

punishment shall be death, which to him will be the least of evils; and his

example will benefit others, if he perish ingloriously, and be cast beyond the

borders of the land. But let his children and family, if they avoid the ways of

their father, have glory, and let honourable mention be made of them, as

having  nobly  and  manfully  escaped  out  of  evil  into  good.  None  of  them

should have their goods confiscated to the state, for the lots of the citizens

ought always to continue the same and equal.Touching  the  exaction  of  penalties,  when  a  man  appears  to  have  done

anything which deserves a fine, he shall pay the fine, if he have anything in

excess of the lot which is assigned to him; but more than that he shall not

pay.  And  to  secure  exactness,  let  the  guardians  of  the  law  refer  to  the

registers, and inform the judges of the precise truth, in order that none of the

lots may go uncultivated for want of money. But if any one seems to deserve

a greater penalty, let him undergo a long and public imprisonment and be

dishonoured, unless some of his friends are willing to be surety for him, and

liberate  him  by  assisting  him  to  pay  the  fine.  No  criminal  shall  go

unpunished, not even for a single offence, nor if he have fled the country; but

let the penalty be according to his deserts-- death, or bonds, or blows, or

degrading places of sitting or standing, or removal to some temple on the

borders of the land; or let him pay fines, as we said before. In cases of death,

let the judges be the guardians of the law, and a court selected by merit from

the last year's magistrates. But how the causes are to be brought into court,

how the summonses are to be served, and the like, these things may be left to

the younger generation of legislators to determine; the manner of voting we

must determine ourselves.


Let the vote be given openly; but before they come to the vote let the judges

sit in order of seniority over against plaintiff and defendant, and let all the

citizens who can spare time hear and take a serious interest in listening to

such causes. First of all the plaintiff shall make one speech, and then the

defendant shall make another; and after the speeches have been made the

eldest  judge  shall  begin  to  examine  the  parties,  and  proceed  to  make  an

adequate enquiry into what has been said; and after the oldest has spoken, the

rest  shall  proceed  in  order  to  examine  either  party  as  to  what  he  finds

defective in the evidence, whether of statement or omission; and he who has

nothing to ask shall hand over the examination to another. And on so much of

what has been said as is to the purpose all the judges shall set their seals, and

place the writings on the altar of Hestia. On the next day they shall meet

again, and in like manner put their questions and go through the cause, and

again set their seals upon the evidence; and when they have three times done

this, and have had witnesses and evidence enough, they shall each of them

give a holy vote, after promising by Hestia that they will decide justly and

truly to the utmost of their power; and so they shall put an end to the suit.Next, after what relates to the Gods, follows what relates to the dissolution of

the  state:  Whoever  by  permitting  a  man  to  power  enslaves  the  laws,  and

subjects the city to factions, using violence and stirring up sedition contrary

to law, him we will deem the greatest enemy of the whole state. But he who

takes no part in such proceedings, and, being one of the chief magistrates of

the state, has no knowledge of treason, or, having knowledge of it, by reason

of cowardice does not interfere on behalf of his country, such an one we must

consider nearly as bad. Every man who is worth anything will inform the

magistrates, and bring the conspirator to trial for making a violent and illegal

attempt to change the government. The judges of such cases shall be the same

as of the robbers of temples; and let the whole proceeding be carried on in the

same way, and the vote of the majority condemn to death. But let there be a

general rule, that the disgrace and punishment of the father is not to be visited

on the children, except in the case of some one whose father, grandfather, and

great-grandfather  have  successively  undergone  the  penalty  of  death.  Such

persons the city shall send away with all their possessions to the city and

country of their ancestors, retaining only and wholly their appointed lot. And

out of the citizens who have more than one son of not less than ten years of

age, they shall select ten whom their father or grandfather by the mother's or

father's side shall appoint, and let them send to Delphi the names of those

who are selected, and him whom the God chooses they shall establish as heir

of  the  house  which  has  failed;  and  may  he  have  better  fortune  than  his

predecessors!


CLEINIAS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: Once more let there be a third general law respecting the judges

who are to give judgment, and the manner of conducting suits against those

who are tried on an accusation of treason; and as concerning the remaining or

departure of their descendants--there shall be one law for all three, for the

traitor, and the robber of temples, and the subverter by violence of the laws of

the state. For a thief, whether he steal much or little, let there be one law, and

one punishment for all alike: in the first place, let him pay double the amount

of the theft if he be convicted, and if he have so much over and above the

allotment--if  he  have  not,  he  shall  be  bound  until  he  pay  the  penalty,  or

persuade him who has obtained the sentence against him to forgive him. But

if a person be convicted of a theft against the state, then if he can persuadethe city, or if he will pay back twice the amount of the theft, he shall be set

free from his bonds.


CLEINIAS: What makes you say, Stranger, that a theft is all one, whether the

thief may have taken much or little, and either from sacred or secular places--

and these are not the only differences in thefts--seeing, then, that they are of

many kinds, ought not the legislator to adapt himself to them, and impose

upon them entirely different penalties?


ATHENIAN:  Excellent.  I  was  running  on  too  fast,  Cleinias,  and  you

impinged upon me, and brought me to my senses, reminding me of what,

indeed,  had  occurred  to  my  mind  already,  that  legislation  was  never  yet

rightly worked out, as I may say in passing. Do you remember the image in

which I likened the men for whom laws are now made to slaves who are

doctored by slaves? For of this you may be very sure, that if one of those

empirical physicians, who practise medicine without science, were to come

upon the gentleman physician talking to his gentleman patient, and using the

language almost of philosophy, beginning at the beginning of the disease and

discoursing about the whole nature of the body, he would burst into a hearty

laugh--he would say what most of those who are called doctors always have

at their tongue's end: Foolish fellow, he would say, you are not healing the

sick man, but you are educating him; and he does not want to be made a

doctor, but to get well.


CLEINIAS: And would he not be right?


ATHENIAN: Perhaps he would; and he might remark upon us, that he who

discourses about laws, as we are now doing, is giving the citizens education

and not laws; that would be rather a telling observation.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: But we are fortunate.


CLEINIAS: In what way?


ATHENIAN: Inasmuch as we are not compelled to give laws, but we maytake into consideration every form of government, and ascertain what is best

and what is most needful, and how they may both be carried into execution;

and we may also, if we please, at this very moment choose what is best, or, if

we prefer, what is most necessary--which shall we do?


CLEINIAS: There is something ridiculous, Stranger, in our proposing such

an  alternative,  as  if  we  were  legislators,  simply  bound  under  some  great

necessity which cannot be deferred to the morrow. But we, as I may by the

grace  of  Heaven  affirm,  like  gatherers  of  stones  or  beginners  of  some

composite  work,  may  gather  a  heap  of  materials,  and  out  of  this,  at  our

leisure, select what is suitable for our projected construction. Let us then

suppose ourselves to be at leisure, not of necessity building, but rather like

men who are partly providing materials, and partly putting them together.

And we may truly say that some of our laws, like stones, are already fixed in

their places, and others lie at hand.


ATHENIAN: Certainly, in that case, Cleinias, our view of law will be more

in accordance with nature. For there is another matter affecting legislators,

which I must earnestly entreat you to consider.


CLEINIAS: What is it?


ATHENIAN: There are many writings to be found in cities, and among them

there are discourses composed by legislators as well as by other persons.


CLEINIAS: To be sure.


ATHENIAN: Shall we give heed rather to the writings of those others--poets

and the like, who either in metre or out of metre have recorded their advice

about the conduct of life, and not to the writings of legislators? or shall we

give heed to them above all?


CLEINIAS: Yes; to them far above all others.


ATHENIAN: And ought the legislator alone among writers to withhold his

opinion about the beautiful, the good, and the just, and not to teach what they

are, and how they are to be pursued by those who intend to be happy?CLEINIAS: Certainly not.


ATHENIAN: And is it disgraceful for Homer and Tyrtaeus and other poets to

lay down evil precepts in their writings respecting life and the pursuits of

men, but not so disgraceful for Lycurgus and Solon and others who were

legislators as well as writers? Is it not true that of all the writings to be found

in cities, those which relate to laws, when you unfold and read them, ought to

be by far the noblest and the best? and should not other writings either agree

with them, or if they disagree, be deemed ridiculous? We should consider

whether the laws of states ought not to have the character of loving and wise

parents, rather than of tyrants and masters, who command and threaten, and,

after  writing  their  decrees  on  walls,  go  their  ways;  and  whether,  in

discoursing of laws, we should not take the gentler view of them which may

or may not be attainable--at any rate, we will show our readiness to entertain

such a view, and be prepared to undergo whatever may be the result. And

may the result be good, and if God be gracious, it will be good!


CLEINIAS: Excellent; let us do as you say.


ATHENIAN: Then we will now consider accurately, as we proposed, what

relates to robbers of temples, and all kinds of thefts, and offences in general;

and we must not be annoyed if, in the course of legislation, we have enacted

some things, and have not made up our minds about some others; for as yet

we are not legislators, but we may soon be. Let us, if you please, consider

these matters.


CLEINIAS: By all means.


ATHENIAN:  Concerning  all  things  honourable  and  just,  let  us  then

endeavour to ascertain how far we are consistent with ourselves, and how far

we are inconsistent, and how far the many, from whom at any rate we should

profess a desire to differ, agree and disagree among themselves.


CLEINIAS: What are the inconsistencies which you observe in us?


ATHENIAN: I will endeavour to explain. If I am not mistaken, we are all

agreed that justice, and just men and things and actions, are all fair, and, if aperson were to maintain that just men, even when they are deformed in body,

are still perfectly beautiful in respect of the excellent justice of their minds,

no one would say that there was any inconsistency in this.


CLEINIAS: They would be quite right.


ATHENIAN: Perhaps; but let us consider further, that if all things which are

just are fair and honourable, in the term 'all' we must include just sufferings

which are the correlatives of just actions.


CLEINIAS: And what is the inference?


ATHENIAN:  The  inference  is,  that  a  just  action  in  partaking  of  the  just

partakes also in the same degree of the fair and honourable.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And must not a suffering which partakes of the just principle

be admitted to be in the same degree fair and honourable, if the argument is

consistently carried out?


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: But then if we admit suffering to be just and yet dishonourable,

and the term 'dishonourable' is applied to justice, will not the just and the

honourable disagree?


CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN: A thing not difficult to understand; the laws which have been

already enacted would seem to announce principles directly opposed to what

we are saying.


CLEINIAS: To what?


ATHENIAN:  We  had  enacted,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  that  the  robber  of

temples, and he who was the enemy of law and order, might justly be put to

death, and we were proceeding to make divers other enactments of a similarnature.  But  we  stopped  short,  because  we  saw  that  these  sufferings  are

infinite in number and degree, and that they are, at once, the most just and

also the most dishonourable of all sufferings. And if this be true, are not the

just and the honourable at one time all the same, and at another time in the

most diametrical opposition?


CLEINIAS: Such appears to be the case.


ATHENIAN: In this discordant and inconsistent fashion does the language of

the many rend asunder the honourable and just.


CLEINIAS: Very true, Stranger.


ATHENIAN:  Then  now,  Cleinias,  let  us  see  how  far  we  ourselves  are

consistent about these matters.


CLEINIAS: Consistent in what?


ATHENIAN:  I  think  that  I  have  clearly  stated  in  the  former  part  of  the

discussion, but if I did not, let me now state--


CLEINIAS: What?


ATHENIAN: That all bad men are always involuntarily bad; and from this I

must proceed to draw a further inference.


CLEINIAS: What is it?


ATHENIAN: That the unjust man may be bad, but that he is bad against his

will. Now that an action which is voluntary should be done involuntarily is a

contradiction; wherefore he who maintains that injustice is involuntary will

deem that the unjust does injustice involuntarily. I too admit that all men do

injustice involuntarily, and if any contentious or disputatious person says that

men are unjust against their will, and yet that many do injustice willingly, I

do not agree with him. But, then, how can I avoid being inconsistent with

myself, if you, Cleinias, and you, Megillus, say to me--Well, Stranger, if all

this be as you say, how about legislating for the city of the Magnetes--shall

we legislate or not--what do you advise? Certainly we will, I should reply.Then  will  you  determine  for  them  what  are  voluntary  and  what  are

involuntary crimes, and shall we make the punishments greater of voluntary

errors  and  crimes  and  less  for  the  involuntary?  or  shall  we  make  the

punishment of all to be alike, under the idea that there is no such thing as

voluntary crime?


CLEINIAS: Very good, Stranger; and what shall we say in answer to these

objections?


ATHENIAN: That is a very fair question. In the first place, let us--


CLEINIAS: Do what?


ATHENIAN: Let us remember what has been well said by us already, that

our ideas of justice are in the highest degree confused and contradictory.

Bearing this in mind, let us proceed to ask ourselves once more whether we

have discovered a way out of the difficulty. Have we ever determined in what

respect these two classes of actions differ from one another? For in all states

and  by  all  legislators  whatsoever,  two  kinds  of  actions  have  been

distinguished--the  one,  voluntary,  the  other,  involuntary;  and  they  have

legislated about them accordingly. But shall this new word of ours, like an

oracle of God, be only spoken, and get away without giving any explanation

or  verification  of  itself?  How  can  a  word  not  understood  be  the  basis  of

legislation? Impossible. Before proceeding to legislate, then, we must prove

that they are two, and what is the difference between them, that when we

impose the penalty upon either, every one may understand our proposal, and

be able in some way to judge whether the penalty is fitly or unfitly inflicted.


CLEINIAS: I agree with you, Stranger; for one of two things is certain: either

we must not say that all unjust acts are involuntary, or we must show the

meaning and truth of this statement.


ATHENIAN: Of these two alternatives, the one is quite intolerable--not to

speak what I believe to be the truth would be to me unlawful and unholy. But

if acts of injustice cannot be divided into voluntary and involuntary, I must

endeavour to find some other distinction between them.CLEINIAS:  Very  true,  Stranger;  there  cannot  be  two  opinions  among  us

upon that point.


ATHENIAN:  Reflect,  then;  there  are  hurts  of  various  kinds  done  by  the

citizens to one another in the intercourse of life, affording plentiful examples

both of the voluntary and involuntary.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN:  I  would  not  have  any  one  suppose  that  all  these  hurts  are

injuries,  and  that  these  injuries  are  of  two  kinds--one,  voluntary,  and  the

other, involuntary; for the involuntary hurts of all men are quite as many and

as great as the voluntary. And please to consider whether I am right or quite

wrong in what I am going to say; for I deny, Cleinias and Megillus, that he

who harms another involuntarily does him an injury involuntarily, nor should

I  legislate  about  such  an  act  under  the  idea  that  I  am  legislating  for  an

involuntary injury. But I should rather say that such a hurt, whether great or

small, is not an injury at all; and, on the other hand, if I am right, when a

benefit is wrongly conferred, the author of the benefit may often be said to

injure. For I maintain, O my friends, that the mere giving or taking away of

anything is not to be described either as just or unjust; but the legislator has to

consider  whether  mankind  do  good  or  harm  to  one  another  out  of  a  just

principle and intention. On the distinction between injustice and hurt he must

fix his eye; and when there is hurt, he must, as far as he can, make the hurt

good by law, and save that which is ruined, and raise up that which is fallen,

and make that which is dead or wounded whole. And when compensation has

been given for injustice, the law must always seek to win over the doers and

sufferers of the several hurts from feelings of enmity to those of friendship.


CLEINIAS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: Then as to unjust hurts (and gains also, supposing the injustice

to bring gain), of these we may heal as many as are capable of being healed,

regarding them as diseases of the soul; and the cure of injustice will take the

following direction.


CLEINIAS: What direction?ATHENIAN: When any one commits any injustice, small or great, the law

will admonish and compel him either never at all to do the like again, or

never voluntarily, or at any rate in a far less degree; and he must in addition

pay for the hurt. Whether the end is to be attained by word or action, with

pleasure or pain, by giving or taking away privileges, by means of fines or

gifts,  or  in  whatsoever  way  the  law  shall  proceed  to  make  a  man  hate

injustice, and love or not hate the nature of the just--this is quite the noblest

work of law. But if the legislator sees any one who is incurable, for him he

will  appoint  a  law  and  a  penalty.  He  knows  quite  well  that  to  such  men

themselves there is no profit in the continuance of their lives, and that they

would  do  a  double  good  to  the  rest  of  mankind  if  they  would  take  their

departure, inasmuch as they would be an example to other men not to offend,

and they would relieve the city of bad citizens. In such cases, and in such

cases only, the legislator ought to inflict death as the punishment of offences.


CLEINIAS: What you have said appears to me to be very reasonable, but will

you favour me by stating a little more clearly the difference between hurt and

injustice,  and  the  various  complications  of  the  voluntary  and  involuntary

which enter into them?


ATHENIAN: I will endeavour to do as you wish: Concerning the soul, thus

much would be generally said and allowed, that one element in her nature is

passion, which may be described either as a state or a part of her, and is hard

to be striven against and contended with, and by irrational force overturns

many things.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: And pleasure is not the same with passion, but has an opposite

power, working her will by persuasion and by the force of deceit in all things.


CLEINIAS: Quite true.


ATHENIAN: A man may truly say that ignorance is a third cause of crimes.

Ignorance, however, may be conveniently divided by the legislator into two

sorts: there is simple ignorance, which is the source of lighter offences, and

double ignorance, which is accompanied by a conceit of wisdom; and he whois under the influence of the latter fancies that he knows all about matters of

which he knows nothing. This second kind of ignorance, when possessed of

power and strength, will be held by the legislator to be the source of great and

monstrous crimes, but when attended with weakness, will only result in the

errors of children and old men; and these he will treat as errors, and will

make laws accordingly for those who commit them, which will be the mildest

and most merciful of all laws.


CLEINIAS: You are perfectly right.


ATHENIAN: We all of us remark of one man that he is superior to pleasure

and passion, and of another that he is inferior to them; and this is true.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: But no one was ever yet heard to say that one of us is superior

and another inferior to ignorance.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: We are speaking of motives which incite men to the fulfilment

of their will; although an individual may be often drawn by them in opposite

directions at the same time.


CLEINIAS: Yes, often.


ATHENIAN: And now I can define to you clearly, and without ambiguity,

what I mean by the just and unjust, according to my notion of them: When

anger and fear, and pleasure and pain, and jealousies and desires, tyrannize

over the soul, whether they do any harm or not--I call all this injustice. But

when the opinion of the best, in whatever part of human nature states or

individuals may suppose that to dwell, has dominion in the soul and orders

the life of every man, even if it be sometimes mistaken, yet what is done in

accordance therewith, and the principle in individuals which obeys this rule,

and is best for the whole life of man, is to be called just; although the hurt

done by mistake is thought by many to be involuntary injustice. Leaving the

question  of  names,  about  which  we  are  not  going  to  quarrel,  and  havingalready delineated three sources of error, we may begin by recalling them

somewhat more vividly to our memory: One of them was of the painful sort,

which we denominate anger and fear.


CLEINIAS: Quite right.


ATHENIAN: There was a second consisting of pleasures and desires, and a

third of hopes, which aimed at true opinion about the best. The latter being

subdivided into three, we now get five sources of actions, and for these five

we will make laws of two kinds.


CLEINIAS: What are the two kinds?


ATHENIAN: There is one kind of actions done by violence and in the light

of day, and another kind of actions which are done in darkness and with

secret  deceit,  or  sometimes  both  with  violence  and  deceit;  the  laws

concerning these last ought to have a character of severity.


CLEINIAS: Naturally.


ATHENIAN: And now let us return from this digression and complete the

work of legislation. Laws have been already enacted by us concerning the

robbers of the Gods, and concerning traitors, and also concerning those who

corrupt the laws for the purpose of subverting the government. A man may

very likely commit some of these crimes, either in a state of madness or when

affected by disease, or under the influence of extreme old age, or in a fit of

childish  wantonness,  himself  no  better  than  a  child.  And  if  this  be  made

evident to the judges elected to try the cause, on the appeal of the criminal or

his advocate, and he be judged to have been in this state when he committed

the offence, he shall simply pay for the hurt which he may have done to

another; but he shall be exempt from other penalties, unless he have slain

some one, and have on his hands the stain of blood. And in that case he shall

go to another land and country, and there dwell for a year; and if he return

before the expiration of the time which the law appoints, or even set his foot

at all on his native land, he shall be bound by the guardians of the law in the

public prison for two years, and then go free.Having  begun  to  speak  of  homicide,  let  us  endeavour  to  lay  down  laws

concerning  every  different  kind  of  homicide;  and,  first  of  all,  concerning

violent and involuntary homicides. If any one in an athletic contest, and at the

public games, involuntarily kills a friend, and he dies either at the time or

afterwards  of  the  blows  which  he  has  received;  or  if  the  like  misfortune

happens to any one in war, or military exercises, or mimic contests of which

the magistrates enjoin the practice, whether with or without arms, when he

has been purified according to the law brought from Delphi relating to these

matters, he shall be innocent. And so in the case of physicians: if their patient

dies against their will, they shall be held guiltless by the law. And if one slay

another with his own hand, but unintentionally, whether he be unarmed or

have some instrument or dart in his hand; or if he kill him by administering

food or drink, or by the application of fire or cold, or by suffocating him,

whether he do the deed by his own hand, or by the agency of others, he shall

be deemed the agent, and shall suffer one of the following penalties: If he kill

the slave of another in the belief that he is his own, he shall bear the master of

the dead man harmless from loss, or shall pay a penalty of twice the value of

the dead man, which the judges shall assess; but purifications must be used

greater and more numerous than for those who committed homicide at the

games--what they are to be, the interpreters whom the God appoints shall be

authorised to declare. And if a man kills his own slave, when he has been

purified according to law, he shall be quit of the homicide. And if a man kills

a freeman unintentionally, he shall undergo the same purification as he did

who killed the slave. But let him not forget also a tale of olden time, which is

to this effect: He who has suffered a violent end, when newly dead, if he has

had the soul of a freeman in life, is angry with the author of his death; and

being himself full of fear and panic by reason of his violent end, when he

sees his murderer walking about in his own accustomed haunts, he is stricken

with terror and becomes disordered, and this disorder of his, aided by the

guilty recollection of the other, is communicated by him with overwhelming

force to the murderer and his deeds. Wherefore also the murderer must go out

of the way of his victim for the entire period of a year, and not himself be

found in any spot which was familiar to him throughout the country. And if

the dead man be a stranger, the homicide shall be kept from the country of

the stranger during a like period. If any one voluntarily obeys this law, the

next of kin to the deceased, seeing all that has happened, shall take pity on

him, and make peace with him, and show him all gentleness. But if any one isdisobedient, and either ventures to go to any of the temples and sacrifice

unpurified, or will not continue in exile during the appointed time, the next of

kin  to  the  deceased  shall  proceed  against  him  for  murder;  and  if  he  be

convicted, every part of his punishment shall be doubled. And if the next of

kin do not proceed against the perpetrator of the crime, then the pollution

shall be deemed to fall upon his own head--the murdered man will fix the

guilt upon his kinsman, and he who has a mind to proceed against him may

compel him to be absent from his country during five years, according to law.

If a stranger unintentionally kill a stranger who is dwelling in the city, he who

likes shall prosecute the cause according to the same rules. If he be a metic,

let him be absent for a year, or if he be an entire stranger, in addition to the

purification, whether he have slain a stranger, or a metic, or a citizen, he shall

be banished for life from the country which is in possession of our laws. And

if he return contrary to law, let the guardians of the law punish him with

death; and let them hand over his property, if he have any, to him who is next

of kin to the sufferer. And if he be wrecked, and driven on the coast against

his will, he shall take up his abode on the seashore, wetting his feet in the sea,

and watching for an opportunity of sailing; but if he be brought by land, and

is not his own master, let the magistrate whom he first comes across in the

city, release him and send him unharmed over the border.


If  any  one  slays  a  freeman  with  his  own  hand,  and  the  deed  be  done  in

passion, in the case of such actions we must begin by making a distinction.

For a deed is done from passion either when men suddenly, and without

intention  to  kill,  cause  the  death  of  another  by  blows  and  the  like  on  a

momentary impulse, and are sorry for the deed immediately afterwards; or

again, when after having been insulted in deed or word, men pursue revenge,

and kill a person intentionally, and are not sorry for the act. And, therefore,

we must assume that these homicides are of two kinds, both of them arising

from passion, which may be justly said to be in a mean between the voluntary

and involuntary; at the same time, they are neither of them anything more

than  a  likeness  or  shadow  of  either.  He  who  treasures  up  his  anger,  and

avenges  himself,  not  immediately  and  at  the  moment,  but  with  insidious

design,  and  after  an  interval,  is  like  the  voluntary;  but  he  who  does  not

treasure up his anger, and takes vengeance on the instant, and without malice

prepense, approaches to the involuntary; and yet even he is not altogether

involuntary, but is only the image or shadow of the involuntary; whereforeabout homicides committed in hot blood, there is a difficulty in determining

whether  in  legislating  we  shall  reckon  them  as  voluntary  or  as  partly

involuntary.  The  best  and  truest  view  is  to  regard  them  respectively  as

likenesses  only  of  the  voluntary  and  involuntary,  and  to  distinguish  them

accordingly as they are done with or without premeditation. And we should

make  the  penalties  heavier  for  those  who  commit  homicide  with  angry

premeditation, and lighter for those who do not premeditate, but smite upon

the instant; for that which is like a greater evil should be punished more

severely, and that which is like a less evil should be punished less severely:

this shall be the rule of our laws.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Let us proceed: If any one slays a freeman with his own hand,

and the deed be done in a moment of anger, and without premeditation, let

the offender suffer in other respects as the involuntary homicide would have

suffered, and also undergo an exile of two years, that he may learn to school

his passions. But he who slays another from passion, yet with premeditation,

shall in other respects suffer as the former; and to this shall be added an exile

of three instead of two years--his punishment is to be longer because his

passion is greater. The manner of their return shall be on this wise: (and here

the law has difficulty in determining exactly; for in some cases the murderer

who is judged by the law to be the worse may really be the less cruel, and he

who is judged the less cruel may be really the worse, and may have executed

the  murder  in  a  more  savage  manner,  whereas  the  other  may  have  been

gentler. But in general the degrees of guilt will be such as we have described

them. Of all these things the guardians of the law must take cognizance):

When  a  homicide  of  either  kind  has  completed  his  term  of  exile,  the

guardians shall send twelve judges to the borders of the land; these during the

interval shall have informed themselves of the actions of the criminals, and

they shall judge respecting their pardon and reception; and the homicides

shall abide by their judgment. But if after they have returned home, any one

of them in a moment of anger repeats the deed, let him be an exile, and return

no more; or if he returns, let him suffer as the stranger was to suffer in a

similar case. He who kills his own slave shall undergo a purification, but if he

kills the slave of another in anger, he shall pay twice the amount of the loss to

his  owner.  And  if  any  homicide  is  disobedient  to  the  law,  and  withoutpurification pollutes the agora, or the games, or the temples, he who pleases

may bring to trial the next of kin to the dead man for permitting him, and the

murderer with him, and may compel the one to exact and the other to suffer a

double  amount  of  fines  and  purifications;  and  the  accuser  shall  himself

receive the fine in accordance with the law. If a slave in a fit of passion kills

his  master,  the  kindred  of  the  deceased  man  may  do  with  the  murderer

(provided only they do not spare his life) whatever they please, and they will

be pure; or if he kills a freeman, who is not his master, the owner shall give

up  the  slave  to  the  relatives  of  the  deceased,  and  they  shall  be  under  an

obligation to put him to death, but this may be done in any manner which

they please. And if (which is a rare occurrence, but does sometimes happen) a

father or a mother in a moment of passion slays a son or daughter by blows,

or some other violence, the slayer shall undergo the same purification as in

other cases, and be exiled during three years; but when the exile returns the

wife shall separate from the husband, and the husband from the wife, and

they shall never afterwards beget children together, or live under the same

roof, or partake of the same sacred rites with those whom they have deprived

of a child or of a brother. And he who is impious and disobedient in such a

case shall be brought to trial for impiety by any one who pleases. If in a fit of

anger a husband kills his wedded wife, or the wife her husband, the slayer

shall undergo the same purification, and the term of exile shall be three years.

And when he who has committed any such crime returns, let him have no

communication in sacred rites with his children, neither let him sit at the

same table with them, and the father or son who disobeys shall be liable to be

brought to trial for impiety by any one who pleases. If a brother or a sister in

a fit of passion kills a brother or a sister, they shall undergo purification and

exile, as was the case with parents who killed their offspring: they shall not

come under the same roof, or share in the sacred rites of those whom they

have  deprived  of  their  brethren,  or  of  their  children.  And  he  who  is

disobedient shall be justly liable to the law concerning impiety, which relates

to these matters. If any one is so violent in his passion against his parents,

that in the madness of his anger he dares to kill one of them, if the murdered

person  before  dying  freely  forgives  the  murderer,  let  him  undergo  the

purification which is assigned to those who have been guilty of involuntary

homicide, and do as they do, and he shall be pure. But if he be not acquitted,

the perpetrator of such a deed shall be amenable to many laws--he shall be

amenable to the extreme punishments for assault, and impiety, and robbing oftemples, for he has robbed his parent of life; and if a man could be slain more

than once, most justly would he who in a fit of passion has slain father or

mother, undergo many deaths. How can he, whom, alone of all men, even in

defence of his life, and when about to suffer death at the hands of his parents,

no law will allow to kill his father or his mother who are the authors of his

being, and whom the legislator will command to endure any extremity rather

than do this-- how can he, I say, lawfully receive any other punishment? Let

death then be the appointed punishment of him who in a fit of passion slays

his father or his mother. But if brother kills brother in a civil broil, or under

other like circumstances, if the other has begun, and he only defends himself,

let him be free from guilt, as he would be if he had slain an enemy; and the

same rule will apply if a citizen kill a citizen, or a stranger a stranger. Or if a

stranger kill a citizen or a citizen a stranger in self-defence, let him be free

from guilt in like manner; and so in the case of a slave who has killed a slave;

but if a slave have killed a freeman in self-defence, let him be subject to the

same law as he who has killed a father; and let the law about the remission of

penalties  in  the  case  of  parricide  apply  equally  to  every  other  remission.

Whenever any sufferer of his own accord remits the guilt of homicide to

another, under the idea that his act was involuntary, let the perpetrator of the

deed undergo a purification and remain in exile for a year, according to law.


Enough has been said of murders violent and involuntary and committed in

passion: we have now to speak of voluntary crimes done with injustice of

every kind and with premeditation, through the influence of pleasures, and

desires, and jealousies.


CLEINIAS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: Let us first speak, as far as we are able, of their various kinds.

The  greatest  cause  of  them  is  lust,  which  gets  the  mastery  of  the  soul

maddened by desire; and this is most commonly found to exist where the

passion  reigns  which  is  strongest  and  most  prevalent  among  the  mass  of

mankind: I mean where the power of wealth breeds endless desires of never-

to-be-satisfied acquisition, originating in natural disposition, and a miserable

want of education. Of this want of education, the false praise of wealth which

is bruited about both among Hellenes and barbarians is the cause; they deem

that to be the first of goods which in reality is only the third. And in this waythey wrong both posterity and themselves, for nothing can be nobler and

better than that the truth about wealth should be spoken in all states--namely,

that riches are for the sake of the body, as the body is for the sake of the soul.

They are good, and wealth is intended by nature to be for the sake of them,

and is therefore inferior to them both, and third in order of excellence. This

argument teaches us that he who would be happy ought not to seek to be rich,

or rather he should seek to be rich justly and temperately, and then there

would be no murders in states requiring to be purged away by other murders.

But now, as I said at first, avarice is the chiefest cause and source of the

worst trials for voluntary homicide. A second cause is ambition: this creates

jealousies, which are troublesome companions, above all to the jealous man

himself, and in a less degree to the chiefs of the state. And a third cause is

cowardly and unjust fear, which has been the occasion of many murders.

When a man is doing or has done something which he desires that no one

should know him to be doing or to have done, he will take the life of those

who are likely to inform of such things, if he have no other means of getting

rid of them. Let this be said as a prelude concerning crimes of violence in

general; and I must not omit to mention a tradition which is firmly believed

by many, and has been received by them from those who are learned in the

mysteries: they say that such deeds will be punished in the world below, and

also that when the perpetrators return to this world they will pay the natural

penalty which is due to the sufferer, and end their lives in like manner by the

hand of another. If he who is about to commit murder believes this, and is

made by the mere prelude to dread such a penalty, there is no need to proceed

with the proclamation of the law. But if he will not listen, let the following

law be declared and registered against him: Whoever shall wrongfully and of

design slay with his own hand any of his kinsmen, shall in the first place be

deprived of legal privileges; and he shall not pollute the temples, or the agora,

or the harbours, or any other place of meeting, whether he is forbidden of

men or not; for the law, which represents the whole state, forbids him, and

always is and will be in the attitude of forbidding him. And if a cousin or

nearer relative of the deceased, whether on the male or female side, does not

prosecute the homicide when he ought, and have him proclaimed an outlaw,

he shall in the first place be involved in the pollution, and incur the hatred of

the Gods, even as the curse of the law stirs up the voices of men against him;

and in the second place he shall be liable to be prosecuted by any one who is

willing to inflict retribution on behalf of the dead. And he who would avengea murder shall observe all the precautionary ceremonies of lavation, and any

others  which  the  God  commands  in  cases  of  this  kind.  Let  him  have

proclamation made, and then go forth and compel the perpetrator to suffer the

execution of justice according to the law. Now the legislator may easily show

that these things must be accomplished by prayers and sacrifices to certain

Gods, who are concerned with the prevention of murders in states. But who

these Gods are, and what should be the true manner of instituting such trials

with  due  regard  to  religion,  the  guardians  of  the  law,  aided  by  the

interpreters, and the prophets, and the God, shall determine, and when they

have determined let them carry on the prosecution at law. The cause shall

have the same judges who are appointed to decide in the case of those who

plunder temples. Let him who is convicted be punished with death, and let

him not be buried in the country of the murdered man, for this would be

shameless as well as impious. But if he fly and will not stand his trial, let him

fly for ever; or, if he set foot anywhere on any part of the murdered man's

country, let any relation of the deceased, or any other citizen who may first

happen to meet with him, kill him with impunity, or bind and deliver him to

those among the judges of the case who are magistrates, that they may put

him  to  death.  And  let  the  prosecutor  demand  surety  of  him  whom  he

prosecutes; three sureties sufficient in the opinion of the magistrates who try

the cause shall be provided by him, and they shall undertake to produce him

at the trial. But if he be unwilling or unable to provide sureties, then the

magistrates shall take him and keep him in bonds, and produce him at the day

of trial.


If a man do not commit a murder with his own hand, but contrives the death

of another, and is the author of the deed in intention and design, and he

continues to dwell in the city, having his soul not pure of the guilt of murder,

let him be tried in the same way, except in what relates to the sureties; and

also, if he be found guilty, his body after execution may have burial in his

native land, but in all other respects his case shall be as the former; and

whether a stranger shall kill a citizen, or a citizen a stranger, or a slave a

slave, there shall be no difference as touching murder by one's own hand or

by contrivance, except in the matter of sureties; and these, as has been said,

shall  be  required  of  the  actual  murderer  only,  and  he  who  brings  the

accusation shall bind them over at the time. If a slave be convicted of slaying

a freeman voluntarily, either by his own hand or by contrivance, let the publicexecutioner take him in the direction of the sepulchre, to a place whence he

can see the tomb of the dead man, and inflict upon him as many stripes as the

person who caught him orders, and if he survive, let him put him to death.

And if any one kills a slave who has done no wrong, because he is afraid that

he may inform of some base and evil deeds of his own, or for any similar

reason, in such a case let him pay the penalty of murder, as he would have

done if he had slain a citizen. There are things about which it is terrible and

unpleasant to legislate, but impossible not to legislate. If, for example, there

should be murders of kinsmen, either perpetrated by the hands of kinsmen, or

by  their  contrivance,  voluntary  and  purely  malicious,  which  most  often

happen in ill-regulated and ill-educated states, and may perhaps occur even in

a country where a man would not expect to find them, we must repeat once

more the tale which we narrated a little while ago, in the hope that he who

hears us will be the more disposed to abstain voluntarily on these grounds

from  murders  which  are  utterly  abominable.  For  the  myth,  or  saying,  or

whatever we ought to call it, has been plainly set forth by priests of old; they

have  pronounced  that  the  justice  which  guards  and  avenges  the  blood  of

kindred, follows the law of retaliation, and ordains that he who has done any

murderous act should of necessity suffer that which he has done. He who has

slain a father shall himself be slain at some time or other by his children--if a

mother, he shall of necessity take a woman's nature, and lose his life at the

hands of his offspring in after ages; for where the blood of a family has been

polluted there is no other purification, nor can the pollution be washed out

until the homicidal soul which did the deed has given life for life, and has

propitiated and laid to sleep the wrath of the whole family. These are the

retributions of Heaven, and by such punishments men should be deterred. But

if they are not deterred, and any one should be incited by some fatality to

deprive his father, or mother, or brethren, or children, of life voluntarily and

of purpose, for him the earthly lawgiver legislates as follows: There shall be

the same proclamations about outlawry, and there shall be the same sureties

which  have  been  enacted  in  the  former  cases.  But  in  his  case,  if  he  be

convicted, the servants of the judges and the magistrates shall slay him at an

appointed place without the city where three ways meet, and there expose his

body naked, and each of the magistrates on behalf of the whole city shall take

a stone and cast it upon the head of the dead man, and so deliver the city from

pollution; after that, they shall bear him to the borders of the land, and cast

him forth unburied, according to law. And what shall he suffer who slays himwho of all men, as they say, is his own best friend? I mean the suicide, who

deprives himself by violence of his appointed share of life, not because the

law of the state requires him, nor yet under the compulsion of some painful

and inevitable misfortune which has come upon him, nor because he has had

to suffer from irremediable and intolerable shame, but who from sloth or

want of manliness imposes upon himself an unjust penalty. For him, what

ceremonies there are to be of purification and burial God knows, and about

these the next of kin should enquire of the interpreters and of the laws thereto

relating, and do according to their injunctions. They who meet their death in

this way shall be buried alone, and none shall be laid by their side; they shall

be buried ingloriously in the borders of the twelve portions of the land, in

such places as are uncultivated and nameless, and no column or inscription

shall mark the place of their interment. And if a beast of burden or other

animal cause the death of any one, except in the case of anything of that kind

happening to a competitor in the public contests, the kinsmen of the deceased

shall prosecute the slayer for murder, and the wardens of the country, such,

and so many as the kinsmen appoint, shall try the cause, and let the beast

when condemned be slain by them, and let them cast it beyond the borders.

And  if  any  lifeless  thing  deprive  a  man  of  life,  except  in  the  case  of  a

thunderbolt or other fatal dart sent from the Gods--whether a man is killed by

lifeless objects falling upon him, or by his falling upon them, the nearest of

kin shall appoint the nearest neighbour to be a judge, and thereby acquit

himself and the whole family of guilt. And he shall cast forth the guilty thing

beyond the border, as has been said about the animals.


If a man is found dead, and his murderer be unknown, and after a diligent

search cannot be detected, there shall be the same proclamation as in the

previous cases, and the same interdict on the murderer; and having proceeded

against him, they shall proclaim in the agora by a herald, that he who has

slain such and such a person, and has been convicted of murder, shall not set

his foot in the temples, nor at all in the country of the murdered man, and if

he appears and is discovered, he shall die, and be cast forth unburied beyond

the border. Let this one law then be laid down by us about murder; and let

cases of this sort be so regarded.


And now let us say in what cases and under what circumstances the murderer

is rightly free from guilt: If a man catch a thief coming into his house bynight to steal, and he take and kill him, or if he slay a footpad in self-defence,

he shall be guiltless. And any one who does violence to a free woman or a

youth, shall be slain with impunity by the injured person, or by his or her

father or brothers or sons. If a man find his wife suffering violence, he may

kill the violator, and be guiltless in the eye of the law; or if a person kill

another in warding off death from his father or mother or children or brethren

or wife who are doing no wrong, he shall assuredly be guiltless.


Thus much as to the nurture and education of the living soul of man, having

which, he can, and without which, if he unfortunately be without them, he

cannot live; and also concerning the punishments which are to be inflicted for

violent deaths, let thus much be enacted. Of the nurture and education of the

body we have spoken before, and next in order we have to speak of deeds of

violence, voluntary and involuntary, which men do to one another; these we

will now distinguish, as far as we are able, according to their nature and

number, and determine what will be the suitable penalties of each, and so

assign to them their proper place in the series of our enactments. The poorest

legislator will have no difficulty in determining that wounds and mutilations

arising out of wounds should follow next in order after deaths. Let wounds be

divided as homicides were divided--into those which are involuntary, and

which are given in passion or from fear, and those inflicted voluntarily and

with  premeditation.  Concerning  all  this,  we  must  make  some  such

proclamation  as  the  following:  Mankind  must  have  laws,  and  conform  to

them, or their life would be as bad as that of the most savage beast. And the

reason of this is that no man's nature is able to know what is best for human

society; or knowing, always able and willing to do what is best. In the first

place,  there  is  a  difficulty  in  apprehending  that  the  true  art  of  politics  is

concerned,  not  with  private  but  with  public  good  (for  public  good  binds

together states, but private only distracts them); and that both the public and

private good as well of individuals as of states is greater when the state and

not the individual is first considered. In the second place, although a person

knows in the abstract that this is true, yet if he be possessed of absolute and

irresponsible power, he will never remain firm in his principles or persist in

regarding the public good as primary in the state, and the private good as

secondary.  Human  nature  will  be  always  drawing  him  into  avarice  and

selfishness, avoiding pain and pursuing pleasure without any reason, and will

bring  these  to  the  front,  obscuring  the  juster  and  better;  and  so  workingdarkness in his soul will at last fill with evils both him and the whole city. For

if a man were born so divinely gifted that he could naturally apprehend the

truth, he would have no need of laws to rule over him; for there is no law or

order which is above knowledge, nor can mind, without impiety, be deemed

the subject or slave of any man, but rather the lord of all. I speak of mind,

true and free, and in harmony with nature. But then there is no such mind

anywhere, or at least not much; and therefore we must choose law and order,

which are second best. These look at things as they exist for the most part

only,  and  are  unable  to  survey  the  whole  of  them.  And  therefore  I  have

spoken as I have.


And now we will determine what penalty he ought to pay or suffer who has

hurt or wounded another. Any one may easily imagine the questions which

have to be asked in all such cases: What did he wound, or whom, or how, or

when? for there are innumerable particulars of this sort which greatly vary

from one another. And to allow courts of law to determine all these things, or

not to determine any of them, is alike impossible. There is one particular

which they must determine in all cases--the question of fact. And then, again,

that the legislator should not permit them to determine what punishment is to

be inflicted in any of these cases, but should himself decide about all of them,

small or great, is next to impossible.


CLEINIAS: Then what is to be the inference?


ATHENIAN: The inference is, that some things should be left to courts of

law; others the legislator must decide for himself.


CLEINIAS: And what ought the legislator to decide, and what ought he to

leave to the courts of law?


ATHENIAN: I may reply, that in a state in which the courts are bad and

mute,  because  the  judges  conceal  their  opinions  and  decide  causes

clandestinely; or what is worse, when they are disorderly and noisy, as in a

theatre, clapping or hooting in turn this or that orator--I say that then there is

a very serious evil, which affects the whole state. Unfortunate is the necessity

of  having  to  legislate  for  such  courts,  but  where  the  necessity  exists,  the

legislator  should  only  allow  them  to  ordain  the  penalties  for  the  smallestoffences; if the state for which he is legislating be of this character, he must

take most matters into his own hands and speak distinctly. But when a state

has good courts, and the judges are well trained and scrupulously tested, the

determination of the penalties or punishments which shall be inflicted on the

guilty may fairly and with advantage be left to them. And we are not to be

blamed for not legislating concerning all that large class of matters which

judges far worse educated than ours would be able to determine, assigning to

each  offence  what  is  due  both  to  the  perpetrator  and  to  the  sufferer.  We

believe  those  for  whom  we  are  legislating  to  be  best  able  to  judge,  and

therefore to them the greater part may be left. At the same time, as I have

often said, we should exhibit to the judges, as we have done, the outline and

form of the punishments to be inflicted, and then they will not transgress the

just  rule.  That  was  an  excellent  practice,  which  we  observed  before,  and

which now that we are resuming the work of legislation, may with advantage

be repeated by us.


Let the enactment about wounding be in the following terms: If any one has a

purpose and intention to slay another who is not his enemy, and whom the

law does not permit him to slay, and he wounds him, but is unable to kill him,

he who had the intent and has wounded him is not to be pitied--he deserves

no  consideration,  but  should  be  regarded  as  a  murderer  and  be  tried  for

murder. Still having respect to the fortune which has in a manner favoured

him, and to the providence which in pity to him and to the wounded man

saved the one from a fatal blow, and the other from an accursed fate and

calamity--as a thank-offering to this deity, and in order not to oppose his will-

-in such a case the law will remit the punishment of death, and only compel

the offender to emigrate to a neighbouring city for the rest of his life, where

he shall remain in the enjoyment of all his possessions. But if he have injured

the wounded man, he shall make such compensation for the injury as the

court deciding the cause shall assess, and the same judges shall decide who

would  have  decided  if  the  man  had  died  of  his  wounds.  And  if  a  child

intentionally wound his parents, or a servant his master, death shall be the

penalty. And if a brother or a sister intentionally wound a brother or a sister,

and is found guilty, death shall be the penalty. And if a husband wound a

wife, or a wife a husband, with intent to kill, let him or her undergo perpetual

exile; if they have sons or daughters who are still young, the guardians shall

take care of their property, and have charge of the children as orphans. If theirsons are grown up, they shall be under no obligation to support the exiled

parent, but they shall possess the property themselves. And if he who meets

with such a misfortune has no children, the kindred of the exiled man to the

degree  of  sons  of  cousins,  both  on  the  male  and  female  side,  shall  meet

together,  and  after  taking  counsel  with  the  guardians  of  the  law  and  the

priests, shall appoint a 5040th citizen to be the heir of the house, considering

and reasoning that no house of all the 5040 belongs to the inhabitant or to the

whole family, but is the public and private property of the state. Now the

state should seek to have its houses as holy and happy as possible. And if any

one of the houses be unfortunate, and stained with impiety, and the owner

leave  no  posterity,  but  dies  unmarried,  or  married  and  childless,  having

suffered  death  as  the  penalty  of  murder  or  some  other  crime  committed

against the Gods or against his fellow-citizens, of which death is the penalty

distinctly laid down in the law; or if any of the citizens be in perpetual exile,

and  also  childless,  that  house  shall  first  of  all  be  purified  and  undergo

expiation according to law; and then let the kinsmen of the house, as we were

just now saying, and the guardians of the law, meet and consider what family

there is in the state which is of the highest repute for virtue and also for good

fortune, in which there are a number of sons; from that family let them take

one and introduce him to the father and forefathers of the dead man as their

son, and, for the sake of the omen, let him be called so, that he may be the

continuer of their family, the keeper of their hearth, and the minister of their

sacred rites with better fortune than his father had; and when they have made

this  supplication,  they  shall  make  him  heir  according  to  law,  and  the

offending  person  they  shall  leave  nameless  and  childless  and  portionless

when calamities such as these overtake him.


Now the boundaries of some things do not touch one another, but there is a

borderland which comes in between, preventing them from touching. And we

were saying that actions done from passion are of this nature, and come in

between the voluntary and involuntary. If a person be convicted of having

inflicted wounds in a passion, in the first place he shall pay twice the amount

of the injury, if the wound be curable, or, if incurable, four times the amount

of the injury; or if the wound be curable, and at the same time cause great and

notable disgrace to the wounded person, he shall pay fourfold. And whenever

any one in wounding another injures not only the sufferer, but also the city,

and makes him incapable of defending his country against the enemy, he,besides the other penalties, shall pay a penalty for the loss which the state has

incurred.  And  the  penalty  shall  be,  that  in  addition  to  his  own  times  of

service, he shall serve on behalf of the disabled person, and shall take his

place in war; or, if he refuse, he shall be liable to be convicted by law of

refusal to serve. The compensation for the injury, whether to be twofold or

threefold or fourfold, shall be fixed by the judges who convict him. And if, in

like manner, a brother wounds a brother, the parents and kindred of either

sex, including the children of cousins, whether on the male or female side,

shall  meet,  and  when  they  have  judged  the  cause,  they  shall  entrust  the

assessment of damages to the parents, as is natural; and if the estimate be

disputed, then the kinsmen on the male side shall make the estimate, or if

they cannot, they shall commit the matter to the guardians of the law. And

when  similar  charges  of  wounding  are  brought  by  children  against  their

parents, those who are more than sixty years of age, having children of their

own, not adopted, shall be required to decide; and if any one is convicted,

they shall determine whether he or she ought to die, or suffer some other

punishment  either  greater  than  death,  or,  at  any  rate,  not  much  less.  A

kinsman of the offender shall not be allowed to judge the cause, not even if

he be of the age which is prescribed by the law. If a slave in a fit of anger

wound a freeman, the owner of the slave shall give him up to the wounded

man, who may do as he pleases with him, and if he do not give him up he

shall himself make good the injury. And if any one says that the slave and the

wounded man are conspiring together, let him argue the point, and if he is

cast, he shall pay for the wrong three times over, but if he gains his case, the

freeman  who  conspired  with  the  slave  shall  be  liable  to  an  action  for

kidnapping. And if any one unintentionally wounds another he shall simply

pay for the harm, for no legislator is able to control chance. In such a case the

judges shall be the same as those who are appointed in the case of children

suing their parents; and they shall estimate the amount of the injury.


All the preceding injuries and every kind of assault are deeds of violence; and

every  man,  woman,  or  child  ought  to  consider  that  the  elder  has  the

precedence of the younger in honour, both among the Gods and also among

men who would live in security and happiness. Wherefore it is a foul thing

and hateful to the Gods to see an elder man assaulted by a younger in the city,

and it is reasonable that a young man when struck by an elder should lightly

endure his anger, laying up in store for himself a like honour when he is old.Let this be the law: Every one shall reverence his elder in word and deed; he

shall respect any one who is twenty years older than himself, whether male or

female, regarding him or her as his father or mother; and he shall abstain

from laying hands on any one who is of an age to have been his father or

mother, out of reverence to the Gods who preside over birth; similarly he

shall  keep  his  hands  from  a  stranger,  whether  he  be  an  old  inhabitant  or

newly arrived; he shall not venture to correct such an one by blows, either as

the aggressor or in self-defence. If he thinks that some stranger has struck

him out of wantonness or insolence, and ought to be punished, he shall take

him to the wardens of the city, but let him not strike him, that the stranger

may be kept far away from the possibility of lifting up his hand against a

citizen, and let the wardens of the city take the offender and examine him, not

forgetting their duty to the God of Strangers, and in case the stranger appears

to have struck the citizen unjustly, let them inflict upon him as many blows

with the scourge as he was himself inflicted, and quell his presumption. But if

he be innocent, they shall threaten and rebuke the man who arrested him, and

let them both go. If a person strikes another of the same age or somewhat

older than himself, who has no children, whether he be an old man who

strikes an old man or a young man who strikes a young man, let the person

struck defend himself in the natural way without a weapon and with his hands

only. He who, being more than forty years of age, dares to fight with another,

whether he be the aggressor or in self- defence, shall be regarded as rude and

ill-mannered and slavish--this will be a disgraceful punishment, and therefore

suitable to him. The obedient nature will readily yield to such exhortations,

but the disobedient, who heeds not the prelude, shall have the law ready for

him: If any man smite another who is older than himself, either by twenty or

by more years, in the first place, he who is at hand, not being younger than

the combatants, nor their equal in age, shall separate them, or be disgraced

according to law; but if he be the equal in age of the person who is struck or

younger, he shall defend the person injured as he would a brother or father or

still older relative. Further, let him who dares to smite an elder be tried for

assault, as I have said, and if he be found guilty, let him be imprisoned for a

period of not less than a year, or if the judges approve of a longer period,

their decision shall be final. But if a stranger or metic smite one who is older

by  twenty  years  or  more,  the  same  law  shall  hold  about  the  bystanders

assisting, and he who is found guilty in such a suit, if he be a stranger but not

resident, shall be imprisoned during a period of two years; and a metic whodisobeys the laws shall be imprisoned for three years, unless the court assign

him a longer term. And let him who was present in any of these cases and did

not assist according to law be punished, if he be of the highest class, by

paying a fine of a mina; or if he be of the second class, of fifty drachmas; or

if of the third class, by a fine of thirty drachmas; or if he be of the fourth

class,  by  a  fine  of  twenty  drachmas;  and  the  generals  and  taxiarchs  and

phylarchs and hipparchs shall form the court in such cases.


Laws are partly framed for the sake of good men, in order to instruct them

how they may live on friendly terms with one another, and partly for the sake

of  those  who  refuse  to  be  instructed,  whose  spirit  cannot  be  subdued,  or

softened, or hindered from plunging into evil. These are the persons who

cause the word to be spoken which I am about to utter; for them the legislator

legislates of necessity, and in the hope that there may be no need of his laws.

He who shall dare to lay violent hands upon his father or mother, or any still

older relative, having no fear either of the wrath of the Gods above, or of the

punishments  that  are  spoken  of  in  the  world  below,  but  transgresses  in

contempt of ancient and universal traditions as though he were too wise to

believe in them, requires some extreme measure of prevention. Now death is

not the worst that can happen to men; far worse are the punishments which

are said to pursue them in the world below. But although they are most true

tales, they work on such souls no prevention; for if they had any effect there

would be no slayers of mothers, or impious hands lifted up against parents;

and therefore the punishments of this world which are inflicted during life

ought not in such cases to fall short, if possible, of the terrors of the world

below. Let our enactment then be as follows: If a man dare to strike his father

or his mother, or their fathers or mothers, he being at the time of sound mind,

then let any one who is at hand come to the rescue as has been already said,

and the metic or stranger who comes to the rescue shall be called to the first

place in the games; but if he do not come he shall suffer the punishment of

perpetual exile. He who is not a metic, if he comes to the rescue, shall have

praise, and if he do not come, blame. And if a slave come to the rescue, let

him be made free, but if he do not come to the rescue, let him receive 100

strokes of the whip, by order of the wardens of the agora, if the occurrence

take place in the agora; or if somewhere in the city beyond the limits of the

agora, any warden of the city who is in residence shall punish him; or if in the

country, then the commanders of the wardens of the country. If those who arenear at the time be inhabitants of the same place, whether they be youths, or

men,  or  women,  let  them  come  to  the  rescue  and  denounce  him  as  the

impious one; and he who does not come to the rescue shall fall under the

curse of Zeus, the God of kindred and of ancestors, according to law. And if

any one is found guilty of assaulting a parent, let him in the first place be

forever banished from the city into the country, and let him abstain from the

temples; and if he do not abstain, the wardens of the country shall punish him

with blows, or in any way which they please, and if he return he shall be put

to  death.  And  if  any  freeman  eat  or  drink,  or  have  any  other  sort  of

intercourse with him, or only meeting him have voluntarily touched him, he

shall not enter into any temple, nor into the agora, nor into the city, until he is

purified; for he should consider that he has become tainted by a curse. And if

he disobeys the law, and pollutes the city and the temples contrary to law,

and one of the magistrates sees him and does not indict him, when he gives in

his account this omission shall be a most serious charge.


If a slave strike a freeman, whether a stranger or a citizen, let any one who is

present come to the rescue, or pay the penalty already mentioned; and let the

bystanders  bind  him,  and  deliver  him  up  to  the  injured  person,  and  he

receiving him shall put him in chains, and inflict on him as many stripes as he

pleases;  but  having  punished  him  he  must  surrender  him  to  his  master

according to law, and not deprive him of his property. Let the law be as

follows:  The  slave  who  strikes  a  freeman,  not  at  the  command  of  the

magistrates,  his  owner  shall  receive  bound  from  the  man  whom  he  has

stricken, and not release him until the slave has persuaded the man whom he

has stricken that he ought to be released. And let there be the same laws

about women in relation to women, and about men and women in relation to

one another.BOOK X.


And now having spoken of assaults, let us sum up all acts of violence under a

single law, which shall be as follows: No one shall take or carry away any of

his neighbour's goods, neither shall he use anything which is his neighbour's

without the consent of the owner; for these are the offences which are and

have been, and will ever be, the source of all the aforesaid evils. The greatest

of them are excesses and insolences of youth, and are offences against the

greatest when they are done against religion; and especially great when in

violation of public and holy rites, or of the partly-common rites in which

tribes  and  phratries  share;  and  in  the  second  degree  great  when  they  are

committed against private rites and sepulchres, and in the third degree (not to

repeat the acts formerly mentioned), when insults are offered to parents; the

fourth kind of violence is when any one, regardless of the authority of the

rulers, takes or carries away or makes use of anything which belongs to them,

not having their consent; and the fifth kind is when the violation of the civil

rights of an individual demands reparation. There should be a common law

embracing all these cases. For we have already said in general terms what

shall be the punishment of sacrilege, whether fraudulent or violent, and now

we have to determine what is to be the punishment of those who speak or act

insolently toward the Gods. But first we must give them an admonition which

may be in the following terms: No one who in obedience to the laws believed

that there were Gods, ever intentionally did any unholy act, or uttered any

unlawful word; but he who did must have supposed one of three things--

either that they did not exist--which is the first possibility, or secondly, that,

if  they  did,  they  took  no  care  of  man,  or  thirdly,  that  they  were  easily

appeased and turned aside from their purpose by sacrifices and prayers.


CLEINIAS: What shall we say or do to these persons?


ATHENIAN: My good friend, let us first hear the jests which I suspect that

they in their superiority will utter against us.


CLEINIAS: What jests?


ATHENIAN:  They  will  make  some  irreverent  speech  of  this  sort:  'Oinhabitants of Athens, and Sparta, and Cnosus,' they will reply, 'in that you

speak truly; for some of us deny the very existence of the Gods, while others,

as you say, are of opinion that they do not care about us; and others that they

are turned from their course by gifts. Now we have a right to claim, as you

yourself allowed, in the matter of laws, that before you are hard upon us and

threaten  us,  you  should  argue  with  us  and  convince  us--you  should  first

attempt to teach and persuade us that there are Gods by reasonable evidences,

and also that they are too good to be unrighteous, or to be propitiated, or

turned from their course by gifts. For when we hear such things said of them

by those who are esteemed to be the best of poets, and orators, and prophets,

and priests, and by innumerable others, the thoughts of most of us are not set

upon abstaining from unrighteous acts, but upon doing them and atoning for

them. When lawgivers profess that they are gentle and not stern, we think that

they should first of all use persuasion to us, and show us the existence of

Gods, if not in a better manner than other men, at any rate in a truer; and who

knows but that we shall hearken to you? If then our request is a fair one,

please to accept our challenge.


CLEINIAS: But is there any difficulty in proving the existence of the Gods?


ATHENIAN: How would you prove it?


CLEINIAS: How? In the first place, the earth and the sun, and the stars and

the universe, and the fair order of the seasons, and the division of them into

years and months, furnish proofs of their existence, and also there is the fact

that all Hellenes and barbarians believe in them.


ATHENIAN:  I  fear,  my  sweet  friend,  though  I  will  not  say  that  I  much

regard, the contempt with which the profane will be likely to assail us. For

you do not understand the nature of their complaint, and you fancy that they

rush into impiety only from a love of sensual pleasure.


CLEINIAS: Why, Stranger, what other reason is there?


ATHENIAN: One which you who live in a different atmosphere would never

guess.CLEINIAS: What is it?


ATHENIAN: A very grievous sort of ignorance which is imagined to be the

greatest wisdom.


CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN: At Athens there are tales preserved in writing which the virtue

of your state, as I am informed, refuses to admit. They speak of the Gods in

prose as well as verse, and the oldest of them tell of the origin of the heavens

and of the world, and not far from the beginning of their story they proceed to

narrate the birth of the Gods, and how after they were born they behaved to

one  another.  Whether  these  stories  have  in  other  ways  a  good  or  a  bad

influence, I should not like to be severe upon them, because they are ancient;

but, looking at them with reference to the duties of children to their parents, I

cannot praise them, or think that they are useful, or at all true. Of the words

of the ancients I have nothing more to say; and I should wish to say of them

only what is pleasing to the Gods. But as to our younger generation and their

wisdom, I cannot let them off when they do mischief. For do but mark the

effect of their words: when you and I argue for the existence of the Gods, and

produce the sun, moon, stars, and earth, claiming for them a divine being, if

we would listen to the aforesaid philosophers we should say that they are

earth and stones only, which can have no care at all of human affairs, and that

all religion is a cooking up of words and a make-believe.


CLEINIAS: One such teacher, O stranger, would be bad enough, and you

imply that there are many of them, which is worse.


ATHENIAN: Well, then; what shall we say or do? Shall we assume that

some one is accusing us among unholy men, who are trying to escape from

the effect of our legislation; and that they say of us--How dreadful that you

should legislate on the supposition that there are Gods! Shall we make a

defence of ourselves? or shall we leave them and return to our laws, lest the

prelude should become longer than the law? For the discourse will certainly

extend to great length, if we are to treat the impiously disposed as they desire,

partly demonstrating to them at some length the things of which they demand

an explanation, partly making them afraid or dissatisfied, and then proceed tothe requisite enactments.


CLEINIAS: Yes, Stranger; but then how often have we repeated already that

on the present occasion there is no reason why brevity should be preferred to

length; for who is 'at our heels?' as the saying goes, and it would be paltry

and ridiculous to prefer the shorter to the better. It is a matter of no small

consequence, in some way or other to prove that there are Gods, and that they

are good, and regard justice more than men do. The demonstration of this

would be the best and noblest prelude of all our laws. And therefore, without

impatience, and without hurry, let us unreservedly consider the whole matter,

summoning up all the power of persuasion which we possess.


ATHENIAN: Seeing you thus in earnest, I would fain offer up a prayer that I

may succeed: but I must proceed at once. Who can be calm when he is called

upon  to  prove  the  existence  of  the  Gods?  Who  can  avoid  hating  and

abhorring the men who are and have been the cause of this argument; I speak

of those who will not believe the tales which they have heard as babes and

sucklings from their mothers and nurses, repeated by them both in jest and

earnest, like charms, who have also heard them in the sacrificial prayers, and

seen sights accompanying them--sights and sounds delightful to children--

and  their  parents  during  the  sacrifices  showing  an  intense  earnestness  on

behalf of their children and of themselves, and with eager interest talking to

the Gods, and beseeching them, as though they were firmly convinced of

their existence; who likewise see and hear the prostrations and invocations

which are made by Hellenes and barbarians at the rising and setting of the

sun and moon, in all the vicissitudes of life, not as if they thought that there

were no Gods, but as if there could be no doubt of their existence, and no

suspicion  of  their  non-  existence;  when  men,  knowing  all  these  things,

despise them on no real grounds, as would be admitted by all who have any

particle  of  intelligence,  and  when  they  force  us  to  say  what  we  are  now

saying, how can any one in gentle terms remonstrate with the like of them,

when he has to begin by proving to them the very existence of the Gods? Yet

the attempt must be made; for it would be unseemly that one half of mankind

should go mad in their lust of pleasure, and the other half in their indignation

at such persons. Our address to these lost and perverted natures should not be

spoken in passion; let us suppose ourselves to select some one of them, and

gently reason with him, smothering our anger: O my son, we will say to him,you are young, and the advance of time will make you reverse many of the

opinions which you now hold. Wait awhile, and do not attempt to judge at

present of the highest things; and that is the highest of which you now think

nothing--to know the Gods rightly and to live accordingly. And in the first

place let me indicate to you one point which is of great importance, and about

which I cannot be deceived: You and your friends are not the first who have

held this opinion about the Gods. There have always been persons more or

less numerous who have had the same disorder. I have known many of them,

and can tell you, that no one who had taken up in youth this opinion, that the

Gods do not exist, ever continued in the same until he was old; the two other

notions certainly do continue in some cases, but not in many; the notion, I

mean, that the Gods exist, but take no heed of human things, and the other

notion  that  they  do  take  heed  of  them,  but  are  easily  propitiated  with

sacrifices and prayers. As to the opinion about the Gods which may some day

become clear to you, I advise you to wait and consider if it be true or not; ask

of others, and above all of the legislator. In the meantime take care that you

do not offend against the Gods. For the duty of the legislator is and always

will be to teach you the truth of these matters.


CLEINIAS: Our address, Stranger, thus far, is excellent.


ATHENIAN: Quite true, Megillus and Cleinias, but I am afraid that we have

unconsciously lighted on a strange doctrine.


CLEINIAS: What doctrine do you mean?


ATHENIAN: The wisest of all doctrines, in the opinion of many.


CLEINIAS: I wish that you would speak plainer.


ATHENIAN: The doctrine that all things do become, have become, and will

become, some by nature, some by art, and some by chance.


CLEINIAS: Is not that true?


ATHENIAN: Well, philosophers are probably right; at any rate we may as

well follow in their track, and examine what is the meaning of them and theirdisciples.


CLEINIAS: By all means.


ATHENIAN: They say that the greatest and fairest things are the work of

nature  and  of  chance,  the  lesser  of  art,  which,  receiving  from  nature  the

greater and primeval creations, moulds and fashions all those lesser works

which are generally termed artificial.


CLEINIAS: How is that?


ATHENIAN: I will explain my meaning still more clearly. They say that fire

and water, and earth and air, all exist by nature and chance, and none of them

by art, and that as to the bodies which come next in order--earth, and sun, and

moon,  and  stars--they  have  been  created  by  means  of  these  absolutely

inanimate existences. The elements are severally moved by chance and some

inherent force according to certain affinities among them --of hot with cold,

or of dry with moist, or of soft with hard, and according to all the other

accidental admixtures of opposites which have been formed by necessity.

After this fashion and in this manner the whole heaven has been created, and

all that is in the heaven, as well as animals and all plants, and all the seasons

come from these elements, not by the action of mind, as they say, or of any

God, or from art, but as I was saying, by nature and chance only. Art sprang

up afterwards and out of these, mortal and of mortal birth, and produced in

play certain images and very partial imitations of the truth, having an affinity

to one another, such as music and painting create and their companion arts.

And there are other arts which have a serious purpose, and these co-operate

with nature, such, for example, as medicine, and husbandry, and gymnastic.

And they say that politics co-operate with nature, but in a less degree, and

have more of art; also that legislation is entirely a work of art, and is based on

assumptions which are not true.


CLEINIAS: How do you mean?


ATHENIAN: In the first place, my dear friend, these people would say that

the Gods exist not by nature, but by art, and by the laws of states, which are

different in different places, according to the agreement of those who makethem; and that the honourable is one thing by nature and another thing by

law, and that the principles of justice have no existence at all in nature, but

that mankind are always disputing about them and altering them; and that the

alterations which are made by art and by law have no basis in nature, but are

of authority for the moment and at the time at which they are made. These,

my friends, are the sayings of wise men, poets and prose writers, which find a

way into the minds of youth. They are told by them that the highest right is

might, and in this way the young fall into impieties, under the idea that the

Gods are not such as the law bids them imagine; and hence arise factions,

these philosophers inviting them to lead a true life according to nature, that is,

to live in real dominion over others, and not in legal subjection to them.


CLEINIAS:  What  a  dreadful  picture,  Stranger,  have  you  given,  and  how

great is the injury which is thus inflicted on young men to the ruin both of

states and families!


ATHENIAN: True, Cleinias; but then what should the lawgiver do when this

evil is of long standing? should he only rise up in the state and threaten all

mankind, proclaiming that if they will not say and think that the Gods are

such  as  the  law  ordains  (and  this  may  be  extended  generally  to  the

honourable, the just, and to all the highest things, and to all that relates to

virtue and vice), and if they will not make their actions conform to the copy

which the law gives them, then he who refuses to obey the law shall die, or

suffer  stripes  and  bonds,  or  privation  of  citizenship,  or  in  some  cases  be

punished by loss of property and exile? Should he not rather, when he is

making laws for men, at the same time infuse the spirit of persuasion into his

words, and mitigate the severity of them as far as he can?


CLEINIAS:  Why,  Stranger,  if  such  persuasion  be  at  all  possible,  then  a

legislator who has anything in him ought never to weary of persuading men;

he ought to leave nothing unsaid in support of the ancient opinion that there

are Gods, and of all those other truths which you were just now mentioning;

he ought to support the law and also art, and acknowledge that both alike

exist by nature, and no less than nature, if they are the creations of mind in

accordance with right reason, as you appear to me to maintain, and I am

disposed to agree with you in thinking.ATHENIAN: Yes, my enthusiastic Cleinias; but are not these things when

spoken to a multitude hard to be understood, not to mention that they take up

a dismal length of time?


CLEINIAS:  Why,  Stranger,  shall  we,  whose  patience  failed  not  when

drinking or music were the themes of discourse, weary now of discoursing

about the Gods, and about divine things? And the greatest help to rational

legislation is that the laws when once written down are always at rest; they

can be put to the test at any future time, and therefore, if on first hearing they

seem difficult, there is no reason for apprehension about them, because any

man however dull can go over them and consider them again and again; nor

if they are tedious but useful, is there any reason or religion, as it seems to

me, in any man refusing to maintain the principles of them to the utmost of

his power.


MEGILLUS: Stranger, I like what Cleinias is saying.


ATHENIAN: Yes, Megillus, and we should do as he proposes; for if impious

discourses  were  not  scattered,  as  I  may  say,  throughout  the  world,  there

would have been no need for any vindication of the existence of the Gods--

but seeing that they are spread far and wide, such arguments are needed; and

who should come to the rescue of the greatest laws, when they are being

undermined by bad men, but the legislator himself?


MEGILLUS: There is no more proper champion of them.


ATHENIAN:  Well,  then,  tell  me,  Cleinias--for  I  must  ask  you  to  be  my

partner--does not he who talks in this way conceive fire and water and earth

and air to be the first elements of all things? these he calls nature, and out of

these he supposes the soul to be formed afterwards; and this is not a mere

conjecture of ours about his meaning, but is what he really means.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: Then, by Heaven, we have discovered the source of this vain

opinion of all those physical investigators; and I would have you examine

their  arguments  with  the  utmost  care,  for  their  impiety  is  a  very  seriousmatter; they not only make a bad and mistaken use of argument, but they lead

away the minds of others: that is my opinion of them.


CLEINIAS: You are right; but I should like to know how this happens.


ATHENIAN: I fear that the argument may seem singular.


CLEINIAS: Do not hesitate, Stranger; I see that you are afraid of such a

discussion carrying you beyond the limits of legislation. But if there be no

other way of showing our agreement in the belief that there are Gods, of

whom the law is said now to approve, let us take this way, my good sir.


ATHENIAN: Then I suppose that I must repeat the singular argument of

those who manufacture the soul according to their own impious notions; they

affirm that which is the first cause of the generation and destruction of all

things, to be not first, but last, and that which is last to be first, and hence

they have fallen into error about the true nature of the Gods.


CLEINIAS: Still I do not understand you.


ATHENIAN:  Nearly  all  of  them,  my  friends,  seem  to  be  ignorant  of  the

nature and power of the soul, especially in what relates to her origin: they do

not know that she is among the first of things, and before all bodies, and is

the chief author of their changes and transpositions. And if this is true, and if

the soul is older than the body, must not the things which are of the soul's

kindred be of necessity prior to those which appertain to the body?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Then thought and attention and mind and art and law will be

prior to that which is hard and soft and heavy and light; and the great and

primitive works and actions will be works of art; they will be the first, and

after them will come nature and works of nature, which however is a wrong

term  for  men  to  apply  to  them;  these  will  follow,  and  will  be  under  the

government of art and mind.


CLEINIAS: But why is the word 'nature' wrong?ATHENIAN: Because those who use the term mean to say that nature is the

first creative power; but if the soul turn out to be the primeval element, and

not fire or air, then in the truest sense and beyond other things the soul may

be said to exist by nature; and this would be true if you proved that the soul is

older than the body, but not otherwise.


CLEINIAS: You are quite right.


ATHENIAN: Shall we, then, take this as the next point to which our attention

should be directed?


CLEINIAS: By all means.


ATHENIAN: Let us be on our guard lest this most deceptive argument with

its  youthful  looks,  beguiling  us  old  men,  give  us  the  slip  and  make  a

laughing-stock of us. Who knows but we may be aiming at the greater, and

fail of attaining the lesser? Suppose that we three have to pass a rapid river,

and I, being the youngest of the three and experienced in rivers, take upon me

the duty of making the attempt first by myself; leaving you in safety on the

bank,  I  am  to  examine  whether  the  river  is  passable  by  older  men  like

yourselves,  and  if  such  appears  to  be  the  case  then  I  shall  invite  you  to

follow, and my experience will help to convey you across; but if the river is

impassable  by  you,  then  there  will  have  been  no  danger  to  anybody  but

myself--would not that seem to be a very fair proposal? I mean to say that the

argument in prospect is likely to be too much for you, out of your depth and

beyond your strength, and I should be afraid that the stream of my questions

might create in you who are not in the habit of answering, giddiness and

confusion of mind, and hence a feeling of unpleasantness and unsuitableness

might arise. I think therefore that I had better first ask the questions and then

answer them myself while you listen in safety; in that way I can carry on the

argument until I have completed the proof that the soul is prior to the body.


CLEINIAS: Excellent, Stranger, and I hope that you will do as you propose.


ATHENIAN: Come, then, and if ever we are to call upon the Gods, let us call

upon them now in all seriousness to come to the demonstration of their own

existence. And so holding fast to the rope we will venture upon the depths ofthe argument. When questions of this sort are asked of me, my safest answer

would appear to be as follows: Some one says to me, 'O Stranger, are all

things at rest and nothing in motion, or is the exact opposite of this true, or

are some things in motion and others at rest?' To this I shall reply that some

things are in motion and others at rest. 'And do not things which move move

in  a  place,  and  are  not  the  things  which  are  at  rest  at  rest  in  a  place?'

Certainly. 'And some move or rest in one place and some in more places than

one?' You mean to say, we shall rejoin, that those things which rest at the

centre move in one place, just as the circumference goes round of globes

which are said to be at rest? 'Yes.' And we observe that, in the revolution, the

motion which carries round the larger and the lesser circle at the same time is

proportionally distributed to greater and smaller, and is greater and smaller in

a  certain  proportion.  Here  is  a  wonder  which  might  be  thought  an

impossibility, that the same motion should impart swiftness and slowness in

due proportion to larger and lesser circles. 'Very true.' And when you speak

of bodies moving in many places, you seem to me to mean those which move

from one place to another, and sometimes have one centre of motion and

sometimes more than one because they turn upon their axis; and whenever

they meet anything, if it be stationary, they are divided by it; but if they get in

the midst between bodies which are approaching and moving towards the

same spot from opposite directions, they unite with them. 'I admit the truth of

what you are saying.' Also when they unite they grow, and when they are

divided  they  waste  away--that  is,  supposing  the  constitution  of  each  to

remain, or if that fails, then there is a second reason of their dissolution. 'And

when are all things created and how?' Clearly, they are created when the first

principle receives increase and attains to the second dimension, and from this

arrives at the one which is neighbour to this, and after reaching the third

becomes perceptible to sense. Everything which is thus changing and moving

is in process of generation; only when at rest has it real existence, but when

passing into another state it is destroyed utterly. Have we not mentioned all

motions  that  there  are,  and  comprehended  them  under  their  kinds  and

numbered them with the exception, my friends, of two?


CLEINIAS: Which are they?


ATHENIAN: Just the two, with which our present enquiry is concerned.CLEINIAS: Speak plainer.


ATHENIAN: I suppose that our enquiry has reference to the soul?


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: Let us assume that there is a motion able to move other things,

but not to move itself; that is one kind; and there is another kind which can

move  itself  as  well  as  other  things,  working  in  composition  and

decomposition, by increase and diminution and generation and destruction--

that is also one of the many kinds of motion.


CLEINIAS: Granted.


ATHENIAN: And we will assume that which moves other, and is changed by

other,  to  be  the  ninth,  and  that  which  changes  itself  and  others,  and  is

coincident with every action and every passion, and is the true principle of

change and motion in all that is--that we shall be inclined to call the tenth.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And which of these ten motions ought we to prefer as being the

mightiest and most efficient?


CLEINIAS: I must say that the motion which is able to move itself is ten

thousand times superior to all the others.


ATHENIAN: Very good; but may I make one or two corrections in what I

have been saying?


CLEINIAS: What are they?


ATHENIAN: When I spoke of the tenth sort of motion, that was not quite

correct.


CLEINIAS: What was the error?


ATHENIAN: According to the true order, the tenth was really the first ingeneration and power; then follows the second, which was strangely enough

termed the ninth by us.


CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN: I mean this: when one thing changes another, and that another,

of such will there be any primary changing element? How can a thing which

is moved by another ever be the beginning of change? Impossible. But when

the self-moved changes other, and that again other, and thus thousands upon

tens of thousands of bodies are set in motion, must not the beginning of all

this motion be the change of the self-moving principle?


CLEINIAS: Very true, and I quite agree.


ATHENIAN:  Or,  to  put  the  question  in  another  way,  making  answer  to

ourselves: If, as most of these philosophers have the audacity to affirm, all

things were at rest in one mass, which of the above-mentioned principles of

motion would first spring up among them?


CLEINIAS: Clearly the self-moving; for there could be no change in them

arising  out  of  any  external  cause;  the  change  must  first  take  place  in

themselves.


ATHENIAN:  Then  we  must  say  that  self-motion  being  the  origin  of  all

motions, and the first which arises among things at rest as well as among

things in motion, is the eldest and mightiest principle of change, and that

which is changed by another and yet moves other is second.


CLEINIAS: Quite true.


ATHENIAN: At this stage of the argument let us put a question.


CLEINIAS: What question?


ATHENIAN: If we were to see this power existing in any earthy, watery, or

fiery substance, simple or compound--how should we describe it?


CLEINIAS: You mean to ask whether we should call such a self-movingpower life?


ATHENIAN: I do.


CLEINIAS: Certainly we should.


ATHENIAN: And when we see soul in anything, must we not do the same--

must we not admit that this is life?


CLEINIAS: We must.


ATHENIAN: And now, I beseech you, reflect--you would admit that we have

a threefold knowledge of things?


CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN:  I  mean  that  we  know  the  essence,  and  that  we  know  the

definition of the essence, and the name--these are the three; and there are two

questions which may be raised about anything.


CLEINIAS: How two?


ATHENIAN: Sometimes a person may give the name and ask the definition;

or he may give the definition and ask the name. I may illustrate what I mean

in this way.


CLEINIAS: How?


ATHENIAN: Number like some other things is capable of being divided into

equal parts; when thus divided, number is named 'even,' and the definition of

the name 'even' is 'number divisible into two equal parts'?


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: I mean, that when we are asked about the definition and give

the name, or when we are asked about the name and give the definition--in

either case, whether we give name or definition, we speak of the same thing,

calling 'even' the number which is divided into two equal parts.CLEINIAS: Quite true.


ATHENIAN: And what is the definition of that which is named 'soul'? Can

we conceive of any other than that which has been already given--the motion

which can move itself?


CLEINIAS: You mean to say that the essence which is defined as the self-

moved is the same with that which has the name soul?


ATHENIAN:  Yes;  and  if  this  is  true,  do  we  still  maintain  that  there  is

anything wanting in the proof that the soul is the first origin and moving

power of all that is, or has become, or will be, and their contraries, when she

has been clearly shown to be the source of change and motion in all things?


CLEINIAS: Certainly not; the soul as being the source of motion, has been

most satisfactorily shown to be the oldest of all things.


ATHENIAN: And is not that motion which is produced in another, by reason

of another, but never has any self-moving power at all, being in truth the

change of an inanimate body, to be reckoned second, or by any lower number

which you may prefer?


CLEINIAS: Exactly.


ATHENIAN: Then we are right, and speak the most perfect and absolute

truth, when we say that the soul is prior to the body, and that the body is

second and comes afterwards, and is born to obey the soul, which is the

ruler?


CLEINIAS: Nothing can be more true.


ATHENIAN: Do you remember our old admission, that if the soul was prior

to the body the things of the soul were also prior to those of the body?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Then characters and manners, and wishes and reasonings, and

true  opinions,  and  reflections,  and  recollections  are  prior  to  length  andbreadth and depth and strength of bodies, if the soul is prior to the body.


CLEINIAS: To be sure.


ATHENIAN: In the next place, we must not of necessity admit that the soul

is the cause of good and evil, base and honourable, just and unjust, and of all

other opposites, if we suppose her to be the cause of all things?


CLEINIAS: We must.


ATHENIAN:  And  as  the  soul  orders  and  inhabits  all  things  that  move,

however moving, must we not say that she orders also the heavens?


CLEINIAS: Of course.


ATHENIAN: One soul or more? More than one--I will answer for you; at any

rate, we must not suppose that there are less than two--one the author of

good, and the other of evil.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: Yes, very true; the soul then directs all things in heaven, and

earth, and sea by her movements, and these are described by the terms-- will,

consideration, attention, deliberation, opinion true and false, joy and sorrow,

confidence, fear, hatred, love, and other primary motions akin to these; which

again receive the secondary motions of corporeal substances, and guide all

things to growth and decay, to composition and decomposition, and to the

qualities  which  accompany  them,  such  as  heat  and  cold,  heaviness  and

lightness,  hardness  and  softness,  blackness  and  whiteness,  bitterness  and

sweetness, and all those other qualities which the soul uses, herself a goddess,

when truly receiving the divine mind she disciplines all things rightly to their

happiness; but when she is the companion of folly, she does the very contrary

of all this. Shall we assume so much, or do we still entertain doubts?


CLEINIAS: There is no room at all for doubt.


ATHENIAN: Shall we say then that it is the soul which controls heaven and

earth, and the whole world? that it is a principle of wisdom and virtue, or aprinciple which has neither wisdom nor virtue? Suppose that we make answer

as follows:


CLEINIAS: How would you answer?


ATHENIAN: If, my friend, we say that the whole path and movement of

heaven, and of all that is therein, is by nature akin to the movement and

revolution and calculation of mind, and proceeds by kindred laws, then, as is

plain, we must say that the best soul takes care of the world and guides it

along the good path.


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: But if the world moves wildly and irregularly, then the evil

soul guides it.


CLEINIAS: True again.


ATHENIAN: Of what nature is the movement of mind? To this question it is

not easy to give an intelligent answer; and therefore I ought to assist you in

framing one.


CLEINIAS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: Then let us not answer as if we would look straight at the sun,

making  ourselves  darkness  at  midday--I  mean  as  if  we  were  under  the

impression that we could see with mortal eyes, or know adequately the nature

of mind--it will be safer to look at the image only.


CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN: Let us select of the ten motions the one which mind chiefly

resembles;  this  I  will  bring  to  your  recollection,  and  will  then  make  the

answer on behalf of us all.


CLEINIAS: That will be excellent.


ATHENIAN: You will surely remember our saying that all things were eitherat rest or in motion?


CLEINIAS: I do.


ATHENIAN: And that of things in motion some were moving in one place,

and others in more than one?


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: Of these two kinds of motion, that which moves in one place

must move about a centre like globes made in a lathe, and is most entirely

akin and similar to the circular movement of mind.


CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN: In saying that both mind and the motion which is in one place

move in the same and like manner, in and about the same, and in relation to

the same, and according to one proportion and order, and are like the motion

of  a  globe,  we  invented  a  fair  image,  which  does  no  discredit  to  our

ingenuity.


CLEINIAS: It does us great credit.


ATHENIAN: And the motion of the other sort which is not after the same

manner, nor in the same, nor about the same, nor in relation to the same, nor

in one place, nor in order, nor according to any rule or proportion, may be

said to be akin to senselessness and folly?


CLEINIAS: That is most true.


ATHENIAN:  Then,  after  what  has  been  said,  there  is  no  difficulty  in

distinctly stating, that since soul carries all things round, either the best soul

or  the  contrary  must  of  necessity  carry  round  and  order  and  arrange  the

revolution of the heaven.


CLEINIAS: And judging from what has been said, Stranger, there would be

impiety in asserting that any but the most perfect soul or souls carries round

the heavens.ATHENIAN:  You  have  understood  my  meaning  right  well,  Cleinias,  and

now let me ask you another question.


CLEINIAS: What are you going to ask?


ATHENIAN: If the soul carries round the sun and moon, and the other stars,

does she not carry round each individual of them?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Then of one of them let us speak, and the same argument will

apply to all.


CLEINIAS: Which will you take?


ATHENIAN: Every one sees the body of the sun, but no one sees his soul,

nor the soul of any other body living or dead; and yet there is great reason to

believe that this nature, unperceived by any of our senses, is circumfused

around  them  all,  but  is  perceived  by  mind;  and  therefore  by  mind  and

reflection only let us apprehend the following point.


CLEINIAS: What is that?


ATHENIAN: If the soul carries round the sun, we shall not be far wrong in

supposing one of three alternatives.


CLEINIAS: What are they?


ATHENIAN: Either the soul which moves the sun this way and that, resides

within the circular and visible body, like the soul which carries us about

every way; or the soul provides herself with an external body of fire or air, as

some affirm, and violently propels body by body; or thirdly, she is without

such a body, but guides the sun by some extraordinary and wonderful power.


CLEINIAS: Yes, certainly; the soul can only order all things in one of these

three ways.


ATHENIAN: And this soul of the sun, which is therefore better than the sun,whether taking the sun about in a chariot to give light to men, or acting from

without, or in whatever way, ought by every man to be deemed a God.


CLEINIAS: Yes, by every man who has the least particle of sense.


ATHENIAN: And of the stars too, and of the moon, and of the years and

months and seasons, must we not say in like manner, that since a soul or

souls having every sort of excellence are the causes of all of them, those souls

are Gods, whether they are living beings and reside in bodies, and in this way

order  the  whole  heaven,  or  whatever  be  the  place  and  mode  of  their

existence--and will any one who admits all this venture to deny that all things

are full of Gods?


CLEINIAS: No one, Stranger, would be such a madman.


ATHENIAN: And now, Megillus and Cleinias, let us offer terms to him who

has hitherto denied the existence of the Gods, and leave him.


CLEINIAS: What terms?


ATHENIAN: Either he shall teach us that we were wrong in saying that the

soul is the original of all things, and arguing accordingly; or, if he be not able

to say anything better, then he must yield to us and live for the remainder of

his life in the belief that there are Gods. Let us see, then, whether we have

said enough or not enough to those who deny that there are Gods.


CLEINIAS: Certainly, quite enough, Stranger.


ATHENIAN: Then to them we will say no more. And now we are to address

him who, believing that there are Gods, believes also that they take no heed

of human affairs: To him we say--O thou best of men, in believing that there

are Gods you are led by some affinity to them, which attracts you towards

your kindred and makes you honour and believe in them. But the fortunes of

evil and unrighteous men in private as well as public life, which, though not

really happy, are wrongly counted happy in the judgment of men, and are

celebrated both by poets and prose writers--these draw you aside from your

natural piety. Perhaps you have seen impious men growing old and leavingtheir  children's  children  in  high  offices,  and  their  prosperity  shakes  your

faith--you  have  known  or  heard  or  been  yourself  an  eyewitness  of  many

monstrous  impieties,  and  have  beheld  men  by  such  criminal  means  from

small beginnings attaining to sovereignty and the pinnacle of greatness; and

considering  all  these  things  you  do  not  like  to  accuse  the  Gods  of  them,

because they are your relatives; and so from some want of reasoning power,

and also from an unwillingness to find fault with them, you have come to

believe that they exist indeed, but have no thought or care of human things.

Now, that your present evil opinion may not grow to still greater impiety, and

that we may if possible use arguments which may conjure away the evil

before it arrives, we will add another argument to that originally addressed to

him who utterly denied the existence of the Gods. And do you, Megillus and

Cleinias, answer for the young man as you did before; and if any impediment

comes in our way, I will take the word out of your mouths, and carry you

over the river as I did just now.


CLEINIAS: Very good; do as you say, and we will help you as well as we

can.


ATHENIAN: There will probably be no difficulty in proving to him that the

Gods care about the small as well as about the great. For he was present and

heard what was said, that they are perfectly good, and that the care of all

things is most entirely natural to them.


CLEINIAS: No doubt he heard that.


ATHENIAN: Let us consider together in the next place what we mean by this

virtue which we ascribe to them. Surely we should say that to be temperate

and to possess mind belongs to virtue, and the contrary to vice?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Yes; and courage is a part of virtue, and cowardice of vice?


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: And the one is honourable, and the other dishonourable?CLEINIAS: To be sure.


ATHENIAN: And the one, like other meaner things, is a human quality, but

the Gods have no part in anything of the sort?


CLEINIAS: That again is what everybody will admit.


ATHENIAN: But do we imagine carelessness and idleness and luxury to be

virtues? What do you think?


CLEINIAS: Decidedly not.


ATHENIAN: They rank under the opposite class?


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: And their opposites, therefore, would fall under the opposite

class?


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: But are we to suppose that one who possesses all these good

qualities will be luxurious and heedless and idle, like those whom the poet

compares to stingless drones?


CLEINIAS: And the comparison is a most just one.


ATHENIAN: Surely God must not be supposed to have a nature which He

Himself hates? he who dares to say this sort of thing must not be tolerated for

a moment.


CLEINIAS: Of course not. How could he have?


ATHENIAN: Should we not on any principle be entirely mistaken in praising

any one who has some special business entrusted to him, if he have a mind

which takes care of great matters and no care of small ones? Reflect; he who

acts  in  this  way,  whether  he  be  God  or  man,  must  act  from  one  of  two

principles.CLEINIAS: What are they?


ATHENIAN: Either he must think that the neglect of the small matters is of

no consequence to the whole, or if he knows that they are of consequence,

and  he  neglects  them,  his  neglect  must  be  attributed  to  carelessness  and

indolence. Is there any other way in which his neglect can be explained? For

surely, when it is impossible for him to take care of all, he is not negligent if

he fails to attend to these things great or small, which a God or some inferior

being might be wanting in strength or capacity to manage?


CLEINIAS: Certainly not.


ATHENIAN:  Now,  then,  let  us  examine  the  offenders,  who  both  alike

confess that there are Gods, but with a difference--the one saying that they

may be appeased, and the other that they have no care of small matters: there

are three of us and two of them, and we will say to them--In the first place,

you both acknowledge that the Gods hear and see and know all things, and

that nothing can escape them which is matter of sense and knowledge: do you

admit this?


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: And do you admit also that they have all power which mortals

and immortals can have?


CLEINIAS: They will, of course, admit this also.


ATHENIAN:  And  surely  we  three  and  they  two--five  in  all--have

acknowledged that they are good and perfect?


CLEINIAS: Assuredly.


ATHENIAN:  But,  if  they  are  such  as  we  conceive  them  to  be,  can  we

possibly  suppose  that  they  ever  act  in  the  spirit  of  carelessness  and

indolence? For in us inactivity is the child of cowardice, and carelessness of

inactivity and indolence.


CLEINIAS: Most true.ATHENIAN:  Then  not  from  inactivity  and  carelessness  is  any  God  ever

negligent; for there is no cowardice in them.


CLEINIAS: That is very true.


ATHENIAN: Then the alternative which remains is, that if the Gods neglect

the lighter and lesser concerns of the universe, they neglect them because

they  know  that  they  ought  not  to  care  about  such  matters--what  other

alternative is there but the opposite of their knowing?


CLEINIAS: There is none.


ATHENIAN: And, O most excellent and best of men, do I understand you to

mean that they are careless because they are ignorant, and do not know that

they ought to take care, or that they know, and yet like the meanest sort of

men, knowing the better, choose the worse because they are overcome by

pleasures and pains?


CLEINIAS: Impossible.


ATHENIAN: Do not all human things partake of the nature of soul? And is

not man the most religious of all animals?


CLEINIAS: That is not to be denied.


ATHENIAN: And we acknowledge that all mortal creatures are the property

of the Gods, to whom also the whole of heaven belongs?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And, therefore, whether a person says that these things are to

the Gods great or small--in either case it would not be natural for the Gods

who own us, and who are the most careful and the best of owners, to neglect

us. There is also a further consideration.


CLEINIAS: What is it?ATHENIAN: Sensation and power are in an inverse ratio to each other in

respect to their ease and difficulty.


CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN: I mean that there is greater difficulty in seeing and hearing the

small than the great, but more facility in moving and controlling and taking

care of small and unimportant things than of their opposites.


CLEINIAS: Far more.


ATHENIAN: Suppose the case of a physician who is willing and able to cure

some living thing as a whole--how will the whole fare at his hands if he takes

care only of the greater and neglects the parts which are lesser?


CLEINIAS: Decidedly not well.


ATHENIAN:  No  better  would  be  the  result  with  pilots  or  generals,  or

householders  or  statesmen,  or  any  other  such  class,  if  they  neglected  the

small and regarded only the great--as the builders say, the larger stones do

not lie well without the lesser.


CLEINIAS: Of course not.


ATHENIAN: Let us not, then, deem God inferior to human workmen, who,

in proportion to their skill, finish and perfect their works, small as well as

great, by one and the same art; or that God, the wisest of beings, who is both

willing and able to take care, is like a lazy good-for-nothing, or a coward,

who turns his back upon labour and gives no thought to smaller and easier

matters, but to the greater only.


CLEINIAS: Never, Stranger, let us admit a supposition about the Gods which

is both impious and false.


ATHENIAN: I think that we have now argued enough with him who delights

to accuse the Gods of neglect.


CLEINIAS: Yes.ATHENIAN: He has been forced to acknowledge that he is in error, but he

still seems to me to need some words of consolation.


CLEINIAS: What consolation will you offer him?


ATHENIAN: Let us say to the youth: The ruler of the universe has ordered

all things with a view to the excellence and preservation of the whole, and

each part, as far as may be, has an action and passion appropriate to it. Over

these, down to the least fraction of them, ministers have been appointed to

preside, who have wrought out their perfection with infinitesimal exactness.

And one of these portions of the universe is thine own, unhappy man, which,

however little, contributes to the whole; and you do not seem to be aware that

this and every other creation is for the sake of the whole, and in order that the

life of the whole may be blessed; and that you are created for the sake of the

whole, and not the whole for the sake of you. For every physician and every

skilled artist does all things for the sake of the whole, directing his effort

towards the common good, executing the part for the sake of the whole, and

not the whole for the sake of the part. And you are annoyed because you are

ignorant how what is best for you happens to you and to the universe, as far

as the laws of the common creation admit. Now, as the soul combining first

with one body and then with another undergoes all sorts of changes, either of

herself, or through the influence of another soul, all that remains to the player

of the game is that he should shift the pieces; sending the better nature to the

better place, and the worse to the worse, and so assigning to them their proper

portion.


CLEINIAS: In what way do you mean?


ATHENIAN: In a way which may be supposed to make the care of all things

easy to the Gods. If any one were to form or fashion all things without any

regard to the whole--if, for example, he formed a living element of water out

of fire, instead of forming many things out of one or one out of many in

regular order attaining to a first or second or third birth, the transmutation

would have been infinite; but now the ruler of the world has a wonderfully

easy task.


CLEINIAS: How so?ATHENIAN: I will explain: When the king saw that our actions had life, and

that there was much virtue in them and much vice, and that the soul and

body, although not, like the Gods of popular opinion, eternal, yet having once

come  into  existence,  were  indestructible  (for  if  either  of  them  had  been

destroyed, there would have been no generation of living beings); and when

he observed that the good of the soul was ever by nature designed to profit

men, and the evil to harm them--he, seeing all this, contrived so to place each

of the parts that their position might in the easiest and best manner procure

the victory of good and the defeat of evil in the whole. And he contrived a

general plan by which a thing of a certain nature found a certain seat and

room. But the formation of qualities he left to the wills of individuals. For

every one of us is made pretty much what he is by the bent of his desires and

the nature of his soul.


CLEINIAS: Yes, that is probably true.


ATHENIAN:  Then  all  things  which  have  a  soul  change,  and  possess  in

themselves a principle of change, and in changing move according to law and

to the order of destiny: natures which have undergone a lesser change move

less and on the earth's surface, but those which have suffered more change

and have become more criminal sink into the abyss, that is to say, into Hades

and other places in the world below, of which the very names terrify men,

and which they picture to themselves as in a dream, both while alive and

when released from the body. And whenever the soul receives more of good

or evil from her own energy and the strong influence of others--when she has

communion with divine virtue and becomes divine, she is carried into another

and better place, which is perfect in holiness; but when she has communion

with evil, then she also changes the place of her life.


'This is the justice of the Gods who inhabit Olympus.'


O youth or young man, who fancy that you are neglected by the Gods, know

that if you become worse you shall go to the worse souls, or if better to the

better, and in every succession of life and death you will do and suffer what

like may fitly suffer at the hands of like. This is the justice of heaven, which

neither you nor any other unfortunate will ever glory in escaping, and which

the ordaining powers have specially ordained; take good heed thereof, for itwill be sure to take heed of you. If you say: I am small and will creep into the

depths of the earth, or I am high and will fly up to heaven, you are not so

small or so high but that you shall pay the fitting penalty, either here or in the

world  below  or  in  some  still  more  savage  place  whither  you  shall  be

conveyed. This is also the explanation of the fate of those whom you saw,

who had done unholy and evil deeds, and from small beginnings had grown

great, and you fancied that from being miserable they had become happy; and

in their actions, as in a mirror, you seemed to see the universal neglect of the

Gods, not knowing how they make all things work together and contribute to

the great whole. And thinkest thou, bold man, that thou needest not to know

this? he who knows it not can never form any true idea of the happiness or

unhappiness  of  life  or  hold  any  rational  discourse  respecting  either.  If

Cleinias and this our reverend company succeed in proving to you that you

know not what you say of the Gods, then will God help you; but should you

desire to hear more, listen to what we say to the third opponent, if you have

any understanding whatsoever. For I think that we have sufficiently proved

the existence of the Gods, and that they care for men: The other notion that

they are appeased by the wicked, and take gifts, is what we must not concede

to any one, and what every man should disprove to the utmost of his power.


CLEINIAS: Very good; let us do as you say.


ATHENIAN: Well, then, by the Gods themselves I conjure you to tell me--if

they are to be propitiated, how are they to be propitiated? Who are they, and

what  is  their  nature?  Must  they  not  be  at  least  rulers  who  have  to  order

unceasingly the whole heaven?


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: And to what earthly rulers can they be compared, or who to

them?  How  in  the  less  can  we  find  an  image  of  the  greater?  Are  they

charioteers of contending pairs of steeds, or pilots of vessels? Perhaps they

might be compared to the generals of armies, or they might be likened to

physicians providing against the diseases which make war upon the body, or

to husbandmen observing anxiously the effects of the seasons on the growth

of  plants;  or  perhaps  to  shepherds  of  flocks.  For  as  we  acknowledge  the

world to be full of many goods and also of evils, and of more evils thangoods, there is, as we affirm, an immortal conflict going on among us, which

requires marvellous watchfulness; and in that conflict the Gods and demigods

are our allies, and we are their property. Injustice and insolence and folly are

the  destruction  of  us,  and  justice  and  temperance  and  wisdom  are  our

salvation; and the place of these latter is in the life of the Gods, although

some vestige of them may occasionally be discerned among mankind. But

upon this earth we know that there dwell souls possessing an unjust spirit,

who  may  be  compared  to  brute  animals,  which  fawn  upon  their  keepers,

whether dogs or shepherds, or the best and most perfect masters; for they in

like  manner,  as  the  voices  of  the  wicked  declare,  prevail  by  flattery  and

prayers and incantations, and are allowed to make their gains with impunity.

And this sin, which is termed dishonesty, is an evil of the same kind as what

is termed disease in living bodies or pestilence in years or seasons of the year,

and in cities and governments has another name, which is injustice.


CLEINIAS: Quite true.


ATHENIAN: What else can he say who declares that the Gods are always

lenient to the doers of unjust acts, if they divide the spoil with them? As if

wolves were to toss a portion of their prey to the dogs, and they, mollified by

the gift, suffered them to tear the flocks. Must not he who maintains that the

Gods can be propitiated argue thus?


CLEINIAS: Precisely so.


ATHENIAN:  And  to  which  of  the  above-mentioned  classes  of  guardians

would any man compare the Gods without absurdity? Will he say that they

are like pilots, who are themselves turned away from their duty by 'libations

of wine and the savour of fat,' and at last overturn both ship and sailors?


CLEINIAS: Assuredly not.


ATHENIAN: And surely they are not like charioteers who are bribed to give

up the victory to other chariots?


CLEINIAS: That would be a fearful image of the Gods.ATHENIAN: Nor are they like generals, or physicians, or husbandmen, or

shepherds; and no one would compare them to dogs who have been silenced

by wolves.


CLEINIAS: A thing not to be spoken of.


ATHENIAN: And are not all the Gods the chiefest of all guardians, and do

they not guard our highest interests?


CLEINIAS: Yes; the chiefest.


ATHENIAN: And shall we say that those who guard our noblest interests,

and are the best of guardians, are inferior in virtue to dogs, and to men even

of moderate excellence, who would never betray justice for the sake of gifts

which unjust men impiously offer them?


CLEINIAS: Certainly not; nor is such a notion to be endured, and he who

holds  this  opinion  may  be  fairly  singled  out  and  characterized  as  of  all

impious men the wickedest and most impious.


ATHENIAN: Then are the three assertions--that the Gods exist, and that they

take care of men, and that they can never be persuaded to do injustice, now

sufficiently demonstrated? May we say that they are?


CLEINIAS: You have our entire assent to your words.


ATHENIAN: I have spoken with vehemence because I am zealous against

evil men; and I will tell you, dear Cleinias, why I am so. I would not have the

wicked think that, having the superiority in argument, they may do as they

please and act according to their various imaginations about the Gods; and

this zeal has led me to speak too vehemently; but if we have at all succeeded

in  persuading  the  men  to  hate  themselves  and  love  their  opposites,  the

prelude of our laws about impiety will not have been spoken in vain.


CLEINIAS:  So  let  us  hope;  and  even  if  we  have  failed,  the  style  of  our

argument will not discredit the lawgiver.


ATHENIAN: After the prelude shall follow a discourse, which will be theinterpreter of the law; this shall proclaim to all impious persons that they

must depart from their ways and go over to the pious. And to those who

disobey, let the law about impiety be as follows: If a man is guilty of any

impiety  in  word  or  deed,  any  one  who  happens  to  be  present  shall  give

information to the magistrates, in aid of the law; and let the magistrates who

first receive the information bring him before the appointed court according

to the law; and if a magistrate, after receiving information, refuses to act, he

shall  be  tried  for  impiety  at  the  instance  of  any  one  who  is  willing  to

vindicate  the  laws;  and  if  any  one  be  cast,  the  court  shall  estimate  the

punishment of each act of impiety; and let all such criminals be imprisoned.

There shall be three prisons in the state: the first of them is to be the common

prison  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  agora  for  the  safe-keeping  of  the

generality of offenders; another is to be in the neighbourhood of the nocturnal

council, and is to be called the 'House of Reformation'; another, to be situated

in some wild and desolate region in the centre of the country, shall be called

by some name expressive of retribution. Now, men fall into impiety from

three causes, which have been already mentioned, and from each of these

causes arise two sorts of impiety, in all six, which are worth distinguishing,

and should not all have the same punishment. For he who does not believe in

the Gods, and yet has a righteous nature, hates the wicked and dislikes and

refuses to do injustice, and avoids unrighteous men, and loves the righteous.

But  they  who  besides  believing  that  the  world  is  devoid  of  Gods  are

intemperate, and have at the same time good memories and quick wits, are

worse; although both of them are unbelievers, much less injury is done by the

one than by the other. The one may talk loosely about the Gods and about

sacrifices and oaths, and perhaps by laughing at other men he may make

them like himself, if he be not punished. But the other who holds the same

opinions and is called a clever man, is full of stratagem and deceit --men of

this class deal in prophecy and jugglery of all kinds, and out of their ranks

sometimes come tyrants and demagogues and generals and hierophants of

private mysteries and the Sophists, as they are termed, with their ingenious

devices.  There  are  many  kinds  of  unbelievers,  but  two  only  for  whom

legislation is required; one the hypocritical sort, whose crime is deserving of

death many times over, while the other needs only bonds and admonition. In

like manner also the notion that the Gods take no thought of men produces

two  other  sorts  of  crimes,  and  the  notion  that  they  may  be  propitiated

produces two more. Assuming these divisions, let those who have been madewhat they are only from want of understanding, and not from malice or an

evil nature, be placed by the judge in the House of Reformation, and ordered

to suffer imprisonment during a period of not less than five years. And in the

meantime let them have no intercourse with the other citizens, except with

members of the nocturnal council, and with them let them converse with a

view to the improvement of their soul's health. And when the time of their

imprisonment  has  expired,  if  any  of  them  be  of  sound  mind  let  him  be

restored to sane company, but if not, and if he be condemned a second time,

let him be punished with death. As to that class of monstrous natures who not

only  believe  that  there  are  no  Gods,  or  that  they  are  negligent,  or  to  be

propitiated, but in contempt of mankind conjure the souls of the living and

say  that  they  can  conjure  the  dead  and  promise  to  charm  the  Gods  with

sacrifices  and  prayers,  and  will  utterly  overthrow  individuals  and  whole

houses and states for the sake of money--let him who is guilty of any of these

things be condemned by the court to be bound according to law in the prison

which is in the centre of the land, and let no freeman ever approach him, but

let him receive the rations of food appointed by the guardians of the law from

the hands of the public slaves; and when he is dead let him be cast beyond the

borders unburied, and if any freeman assist in burying him, let him pay the

penalty of impiety to any one who is willing to bring a suit against him. But if

he leaves behind him children who are fit to be citizens, let the guardians of

orphans take care of them, just as they would of any other orphans, from the

day on which their father is convicted.


In all these cases there should be one law, which will make men in general

less liable to transgress in word or deed, and less foolish, because they will

not be allowed to practise religious rites contrary to law. And let this be the

simple form of the law: No man shall have sacred rites in a private house.

When  he  would  sacrifice,  let  him  go  to  the  temples  and  hand  over  his

offerings to the priests and priestesses, who see to the sanctity of such things,

and let him pray himself, and let any one who pleases join with him in prayer.

The reason of this is as follows: Gods and temples are not easily instituted,

and to establish them rightly is the work of a mighty intellect. And women

especially, and men too, when they are sick or in danger, or in any sort of

difficulty,  or  again  on  their  receiving  any  good  fortune,  have  a  way  of

consecrating the occasion, vowing sacrifices, and promising shrines to Gods,

demigods,  and  sons  of  Gods;  and  when  they  are  awakened  by  terribleapparitions and dreams or remember visions, they find in altars and temples

the remedies of them, and will fill every house and village with them, placing

them in the open air, or wherever they may have had such visions; and with a

view to all these cases we should obey the law. The law has also regard to the

impious, and would not have them fancy that by the secret performance of

these actions--by raising temples and by building altars in private houses,

they can propitiate the God secretly with sacrifices and prayers, while they

are really multiplying their crimes infinitely, bringing guilt from heaven upon

themselves, and also upon those who permit them, and who are better men

than they are; and the consequence is that the whole state reaps the fruit of

their impiety, which, in a certain sense, is deserved. Assuredly God will not

blame the legislator, who will enact the following law: No one shall possess

shrines of the Gods in private houses, and he who is found to possess them,

and perform any sacred rites not publicly authorised--supposing the offender

to be some man or woman who is not guilty of any other great and impious

crime--shall be informed against by him who is acquainted with the fact,

which shall be announced by him to the guardians of the law; and let them

issue orders that he or she shall carry away their private rites to the public

temples, and if they do not persuade them, let them inflict a penalty on them

until they comply. And if a person be proven guilty of impiety, not merely

from childish levity, but such as grown-up men may be guilty of, whether he

have sacrificed publicly or privately to any Gods, let him be punished with

death, for his sacrifice is impure. Whether the deed has been done in earnest,

or only from childish levity, let the guardians of the law determine, before

they bring the matter into court and prosecute the offender for impiety.BOOK XI.


In  the  next  place,  dealings  between  man  and  man  require  to  be  suitably

regulated. The principle of them is very simple: Thou shalt not, if thou canst

help, touch that which is mine, or remove the least thing which belongs to me

without my consent; and may I be of a sound mind, and do to others as I

would that they should do to me. First, let us speak of treasure-trove: May I

never pray the Gods to find the hidden treasure, which another has laid up for

himself and his family, he not being one of my ancestors, nor lift, if I should

find, such a treasure. And may I never have any dealings with those who are

called diviners, and who in any way or manner counsel me to take up the

deposit entrusted to the earth, for I should not gain so much in the increase of

my possessions, if I take up the prize, as I should grow in justice and virtue of

soul, if I abstain; and this will be a better possession to me than the other in a

better part of myself; for the possession of justice in the soul is preferable to

the possession of wealth. And of many things it is well said--'Move not the

immovables,' and this may be regarded as one of them. And we shall do well

to believe the common tradition which says, that such deeds prevent a man

from having a family. Now as to him who is careless about having children

and regardless of the legislator, taking up that which neither he deposited, nor

any  ancestor  of  his,  without  the  consent  of  the  depositor,  violating  the

simplest and noblest of laws which was the enactment of no mean man: 'Take

not up that which was not laid down by thee'--of him, I say, who despises

these two legislators, and takes up, not some small matter which he has not

deposited, but perhaps a great heap of treasure, what he ought to suffer at the

hands of the Gods, God only knows; but I would have the first person who

sees him go and tell the wardens of the city, if the occurrence has taken place

in the city, or if the occurrence has taken place in the agora he shall tell the

wardens of the agora, or if in the country he shall tell the wardens of the

country and their commanders. When information has been received the city

shall send to Delphi, and, whatever the God answers about the money and the

remover of the money, that the city shall do in obedience to the oracle; the

informer, if he be a freeman, shall have the honour of doing rightly, and he

who informs not, the dishonour of doing wrongly; and if he be a slave who

gives information, let him be freed, as he ought to be, by the state, whichshall give his master the price of him; but if he do not inform he shall be

punished with death. Next in order shall follow a similar law, which shall

apply equally to matters great and small: If a man happens to leave behind

him some part of his property, whether intentionally or unintentionally, let

him who may come upon the left property suffer it to remain, reflecting that

such  things  are  under  the  protection  of  the  Goddess  of  ways,  and  are

dedicated to her by the law. But if any one defies the law, and takes the

property home with him, let him, if the thing is of little worth, and the man

who takes it a slave, be beaten with many stripes by him who meets him,

being a person of not less than thirty years of age. Or if he be a freeman, in

addition to being thought a mean person and a despiser of the laws, let him

pay ten times the value of the treasure which he has moved to the leaver. And

if  some  one  accuses  another  of  having  anything  which  belongs  to  him,

whether little or much, and the other admits that he has this thing, but denies

that the property in dispute belongs to the other, if the property be registered

with  the  magistrates  according  to  law,  the  claimant  shall  summon  the

possessor, who shall bring it before the magistrates; and when it is brought

into court, if it be registered in the public registers, to which of the litigants it

belonged, let him take it and go his way. Or if the property be registered as

belonging  to  some  one  who  is  not  present,  whoever  will  offer  sufficient

surety on behalf of the absent person that he will give it up to him, shall take

it  away  as  the  representative  of  the  other.  But  if  the  property  which  is

deposited be not registered with the magistrates, let it remain until the time of

trial with three of the eldest of the magistrates; and if it be an animal which is

deposited, then he who loses the suit shall pay the magistrates for its keep,

and they shall determine the cause within three days.


Any one who is of sound mind may arrest his own slave, and do with him

whatever he will of such things as are lawful; and he may arrest the runaway

slave of any of his friends or kindred with a view to his safe- keeping. And if

any one takes away him who is being carried off as a slave, intending to

liberate him, he who is carrying him off shall let him go; but he who takes

him away shall give three sufficient sureties; and if he give them, and not

without giving them, he may take him away, but if he take him away after

any other manner he shall be deemed guilty of violence, and being convicted

shall pay as a penalty double the amount of the damages claimed to him who

has been deprived of the slave. Any man may also carry off a freedman, if hedo  not  pay  respect  or  sufficient  respect  to  him  who  freed  him.  Now  the

respect shall be, that the freedman go three times in the month to the hearth of

the person who freed him, and offer to do whatever he ought, so far as he

can;  and  he  shall  agree  to  make  such  a  marriage  as  his  former  master

approves. He shall not be permitted to have more property than he who gave

him liberty, and what more he has shall belong to his master. The freedman

shall not remain in the state more than twenty years, but like other foreigners

shall go away, taking his entire property with him, unless he has the consent

of the magistrates and of his former master to remain. If a freedman or any

other stranger has a property greater than the census of the third class, at the

expiration of thirty days from the day on which this comes to pass, he shall

take that which is his and go his way, and in this case he shall not be allowed

to  remain  any  longer  by  the  magistrates.  And  if  any  one  disobeys  this

regulation, and is brought into court and convicted, he shall be punished with

death, and his property shall be confiscated. Suits about these matters shall

take place before the tribes, unless the plaintiff and defendant have got rid of

the  accusation  either  before  their  neighbours  or  before  judges  chosen  by

them. If a man lay claim to any animal or anything else which he declares to

be his, let the possessor refer to the seller or to some honest and trustworthy

person, who has given, or in some legitimate way made over the property to

him; if he be a citizen or a metic, sojourning in the city, within thirty days, or,

if the property have been delivered to him by a stranger, within five months,

of which the middle month shall include the summer solstice. When goods

are exchanged by selling and buying, a man shall deliver them, and receive

the price of them, at a fixed place in the agora, and have done with the matter;

but he shall not buy or sell anywhere else, nor give credit. And if in any other

manner or in any other place there be an exchange of one thing for another,

and the seller give credit to the man who buys from him, he must do this on

the understanding that the law gives no protection in cases of things sold not

in accordance with these regulations. Again, as to contributions, any man

who likes may go about collecting contributions as a friend among friends,

but  if  any  difference  arises  about  the  collection,  he  is  to  act  on  the

understanding that the law gives no protection in such cases. He who sells

anything above the value of fifty drachmas shall be required to remain in the

city for ten days, and the purchaser shall be informed of the house of the

seller, with a view to the sort of charges which are apt to arise in such cases,

and the restitutions which the law allows. And let legal restitution be on thiswise: If a man sells a slave who is in a consumption, or who has the disease

of the stone, or of strangury, or epilepsy, or some other tedious and incurable

disorder of body or mind, which is not discernible to the ordinary man, if the

purchaser be a physician or trainer, he shall have no right of restitution; nor

shall there be any right of restitution if the seller has told the truth beforehand

to the buyer. But if a skilled person sells to another who is not skilled, let the

buyer appeal for restitution within six months, except in the case of epilepsy,

and  then  the  appeal  may  be  made  within  a  year.  The  cause  shall  be

determined by such physicians as the parties may agree to choose; and the

defendant, if he lose the suit, shall pay double the price at which he sold. If a

private  person  sell  to  another  private  person,  he  shall  have  the  right  of

restitution, and the decision shall be given as before, but the defendant, if he

be cast, shall only pay back the price of the slave. If a person sells a homicide

to another, and they both know of the fact, let there be no restitution in such a

case, but if he do not know of the fact, there shall be a right of restitution,

whenever the buyer makes the discovery; and the decision shall rest with the

five youngest guardians of the law, and if the decision be that the seller was

cognisant of the fact, he shall purify the house of the purchaser, according to

the  law  of  the  interpreters,  and  shall  pay  back  three  times  the  purchase-

money.


If  a  man  exchanges  either  money  for  money,  or  anything  whatever  for

anything  else,  either  with  or  without  life,  let  him  give  and  receive  them

genuine and unadulterated, in accordance with the law. And let us have a

prelude about all this sort of roguery, like the preludes of our other laws.

Every  man  should  regard  adulteration  as  of  one  and  the  same  class  with

falsehood and deceit, concerning which the many are too fond of saying that

at proper times and places the practice may often be right. But they leave the

occasion, and the when, and the where, undefined and unsettled, and from

this want of definiteness in their language they do a great deal of harm to

themselves  and  to  others.  Now  a  legislator  ought  not  to  leave  the  matter

undetermined; he ought to prescribe some limit, either greater or less. Let this

be the rule prescribed: No one shall call the Gods to witness, when he says or

does anything false or deceitful or dishonest, unless he would be the most

hateful of mankind to them. And he is most hateful to them who takes a false

oath, and pays no heed to the Gods; and in the next degree, he who tells a

falsehood in the presence of his superiors. Now better men are the superiorsof worse men, and in general elders are the superiors of the young; wherefore

also  parents  are  the  superiors  of  their  offspring,  and  men  of  women  and

children, and rulers of their subjects; for all men ought to reverence any one

who is in any position of authority, and especially those who are in state

offices. And this is the reason why I have spoken of these matters. For every

one who is guilty of adulteration in the agora tells a falsehood, and deceives,

and when he invokes the Gods, according to the customs and cautions of the

wardens of the agora, he does but swear without any respect for God or man.

Certainly, it is an excellent rule not lightly to defile the names of the Gods,

after the fashion of men in general, who care little about piety and purity in

their religious actions. But if a man will not conform to this rule, let the law

be as follows: He who sells anything in the agora shall not ask two prices for

that which he sells, but he shall ask one price, and if he do not obtain this, he

shall take away his goods; and on that day he shall not value them either at

more or less; and there shall be no praising of any goods, or oath taken about

them. If a person disobeys this command, any citizen who is present, not

being less than thirty years of age, may with impunity chastise and beat the

swearer, but if instead of obeying the laws he takes no heed, he shall be liable

to the charge of having betrayed them. If a man sells any adulterated goods

and will not obey these regulations, he who knows and can prove the fact,

and does prove it in the presence of the magistrates, if he be a slave or a

metic, shall have the adulterated goods; but if he be a citizen, and do not

pursue the charge, he shall be called a rogue, and deemed to have robbed the

Gods of the agora; or if he proves the charge, he shall dedicate the goods to

the Gods of the agora. He who is proved to have sold any adulterated goods,

in addition to losing the goods themselves, shall be beaten with stripes--a

stripe for a drachma, according to the price of the goods; and the herald shall

proclaim in the agora the offence for which he is going to be beaten. The

wardens of the agora and the guardians of the law shall obtain information

from experienced persons about the rogueries and adulterations of the sellers,

and shall write up what the seller ought and ought not to do in each case; and

let them inscribe their laws on a column in front of the court of the wardens

of the agora, that they may be clear instructors of those who have business in

the agora. Enough has been said in what has preceded about the wardens of

the city, and if anything seems to be wanting, let them communicate with the

guardians of the law, and write down the omission, and place on a column in

the court of the wardens of the city the primary and secondary regulationswhich are laid down for them about their office.


After  the  practices  of  adulteration  naturally  follow  the  practices  of  retail

trade.  Concerning  these,  we  will  first  of  all  give  a  word  of  counsel  and

reason, and the law shall come afterwards. Retail trade in a city is not by

nature  intended  to  do  any  harm,  but  quite  the  contrary;  for  is  not  he  a

benefactor who reduces the inequalities and incommensurabilities of goods to

equality  and  common  measure?  And  this  is  what  the  power  of  money

accomplishes, and the merchant may be said to be appointed for this purpose.

The hireling and the tavern-keeper, and many other occupations, some of

them more and others less seemly--all alike have this object--they seek to

satisfy our needs and equalize our possessions. Let us then endeavour to see

what has brought retail trade into ill-odour, and wherein lies the dishonour

and unseemliness of it, in order that if not entirely, we may yet partially, cure

the evil by legislation. To effect this is no easy matter, and requires a great

deal of virtue.


CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN: Dear Cleinias, the class of men is small--they must have been

rarely  gifted  by  nature,  and  trained  by  education--who,  when  assailed  by

wants and desires, are able to hold out and observe moderation, and when

they might make a great deal of money are sober in their wishes, and prefer a

moderate to a large gain. But the mass of mankind are the very opposite: their

desires are unbounded, and when they might gain in moderation they prefer

gains without limit; wherefore all that relates to retail trade, and merchandise,

and the keeping of taverns, is denounced and numbered among dishonourable

things. For if what I trust may never be and will not be, we were to compel, if

I may venture to say a ridiculous thing, the best men everywhere to keep

taverns for a time, or carry on retail trade, or do anything of that sort; or if, in

consequence of some fate or necessity, the best women were compelled to

follow similar callings, then we should know how agreeable and pleasant all

these  things  are;  and  if  all  such  occupations  were  managed  on  incorrupt

principles, they would be honoured as we honour a mother or a nurse. But

now that a man goes to desert places and builds houses which can only be

reached by long journeys, for the sake of retail trade, and receives strangers

who are in need at the welcome resting-place, and gives them peace and calmwhen they are tossed by the storm, or cool shade in the heat; and then instead

of behaving to them as friends, and showing the duties of hospitality to his

guests, treats them as enemies and captives who are at his mercy, and will not

release  them  until  they  have  paid  the  most  unjust,  abominable,  and

extortionate ransom--these are the sort of practises, and foul evils they are,

which cast a reproach upon the succour of adversity. And the legislator ought

always to be devising a remedy for evils of this nature. There is an ancient

saying, which is also a true one--'To fight against two opponents is a difficult

thing,' as is seen in diseases and in many other cases. And in this case also the

war is against two enemies-- wealth and poverty; one of whom corrupts the

soul  of  man  with  luxury,  while  the  other  drives  him  by  pain  into  utter

shamelessness. What remedy can a city of sense find against this disease? In

the first place, they must have as few retail traders as possible; and in the

second place, they must assign the occupation to that class of men whose

corruption will be the least injury to the state; and in the third place, they

must  devise  some  way  whereby  the  followers  of  these  occupations

themselves will not readily fall into habits of unbridled shamelessness and

meanness.


After this preface let our law run as follows, and may fortune favour us: No

landowner  among  the  Magnetes,  whose  city  the  God  is  restoring  and

resettling--no one, that is, of the 5040 families, shall become a retail trader

either voluntarily or involuntarily; neither shall he be a merchant, or do any

service for private persons unless they equally serve him, except for his father

or his mother, and their fathers and mothers; and in general for his elders who

are  freemen,  and  whom  he  serves  as  a  freeman.  Now  it  is  difficult  to

determine accurately the things which are worthy or unworthy of a freeman,

but let those who have obtained the prize of virtue give judgment about them

in accordance with their feelings of right and wrong. He who in any way

shares in the illiberality of retail trades may be indicted for dishonouring his

race by any one who likes, before those who have been judged to be the first

in  virtue;  and  if  he  appear  to  throw  dirt  upon  his  father's  house  by  an

unworthy occupation, let him be imprisoned for a year and abstain from that

sort of thing; and if he repeat the offence, for two years; and every time that

he is convicted let the length of his imprisonment be doubled. This shall be

the second law: He who engages in retail trade must be either a metic or a

stranger. And a third law shall be: In order that the retail trader who dwells inour city may be as good or as little bad as possible, the guardians of the law

shall remember that they are not only guardians of those who may be easily

watched and prevented from becoming lawless or bad, because they are well-

born and bred; but still more should they have a watch over those who are of

another sort, and follow pursuits which have a very strong tendency to make

men bad. And, therefore, in respect of the multifarious occupations of retail

trade, that is to say, in respect of such of them as are allowed to remain,

because they seem to be quite necessary in a state--about these the guardians

of the law should meet and take counsel with those who have experience of

the  several  kinds  of  retail  trade,  as  we  before  commanded  concerning

adulteration (which is a matter akin to this), and when they meet they shall

consider what amount of receipts, after deducting expenses, will produce a

moderate gain to the retail trades, and they shall fix in writing and strictly

maintain what they find to be the right percentage of profit; this shall be seen

to by the wardens of the agora, and by the wardens of the city, and by the

wardens of the country. And so retail trade will benefit every one, and do the

least possible injury to those in the state who practise it.


When  a  man  makes  an  agreement  which  he  does  not  fulfil,  unless  the

agreement be of a nature which the law or a vote of the assembly does not

allow, or which he has made under the influence of some unjust compulsion,

or which he is prevented from fulfilling against his will by some unexpected

chance, the other party may go to law with him in the courts of the tribes, for

not having completed his agreement, if the parties are not able previously to

come  to  terms  before  arbiters  or  before  their  neighbours.  The  class  of

craftsmen  who  have  furnished  human  life  with  the  arts  is  dedicated  to

Hephaestus and Athene; and there is a class of craftsmen who preserve the

works of all craftsmen by arts of defence, the votaries of Ares and Athene, to

which divinities they too are rightly dedicated. All these continue through life

serving the country and the people; some of them are leaders in battle; others

make for hire implements and works, and they ought not to deceive in such

matters, out of respect to the Gods who are their ancestors. If any craftsman

through indolence omit to execute his work in a given time, not reverencing

the God who gives him the means of life, but considering, foolish fellow, that

he is his own God and will let him off easily, in the first place, he shall suffer

at the hands of the God, and in the second place, the law shall follow in a

similar spirit. He shall owe to him who contracted with him the price of theworks  which  he  has  failed  in  performing,  and  he  shall  begin  again  and

execute them gratis in the given time. When a man undertakes a work, the

law gives him the same advice which was given to the seller, that he should

not attempt to raise the price, but simply ask the value; this the law enjoins

also on the contractor; for the craftsman assuredly knows the value of his

work. Wherefore, in free states the man of art ought not to attempt to impose

upon private individuals by the help of his art, which is by nature a true thing;

and he who is wronged in a matter of this sort, shall have a right of action

against the party who has wronged him. And if any one lets out work to a

craftsman, and does not pay him duly according to the lawful agreement,

disregarding Zeus the guardian of the city and Athene, who are the partners

of the state, and overthrows the foundations of society for the sake of a little

gain, in his case let the law and the Gods maintain the common bonds of the

state. And let him who, having already received the work in exchange, does

not pay the price in the time agreed, pay double the price; and if a year has

elapsed, although interest is not to be taken on loans, yet for every drachma

which he owes to the contractor let him pay a monthly interest of an obol.

Suits about these matters are to be decided by the courts of the tribes; and by

the way, since we have mentioned craftsmen at all, we must not forget that

other craft of war, in which generals and tacticians are the craftsmen, who

undertake  voluntarily  or  involuntarily  the  work  of  our  safety,  as  other

craftsmen undertake other public works--if they execute their work well the

law will never tire of praising him who gives them those honours which are

the just rewards of the soldier; but if any one, having already received the

benefit of any noble service in war, does not make the due return of honour,

the law will blame him. Let this then be the law, having an ingredient of

praise, not compelling but advising the great body of the citizens to honour

the  brave  men  who  are  the  saviours  of  the  whole  state,  whether  by  their

courage or by their military skill--they should honour them, I say, in the

second place; for the first and highest tribute of respect is to be given to those

who are able above other men to honour the words of good legislators.


The  greater  part  of  the  dealings  between  man  and  man  have  been  now

regulated by us with the exception of those that relate to orphans and the

supervision of orphans by their guardians. These follow next in order, and

must be regulated in some way. But to arrive at them we must begin with the

testamentary  wishes  of  the  dying  and  the  case  of  those  who  may  havehappened to die intestate. When I said, Cleinias, that we must regulate them, I

had in my mind the difficulty and perplexity in which all such matters are

involved. You cannot leave them unregulated, for individuals would make

regulations at variance with one another, and repugnant to the laws and habits

of  the  living  and  to  their  own  previous  habits,  if  a  person  were  simply

allowed to make any will which he pleased, and this were to take effect in

whatever state he may have been at the end of his life; for most of us lose our

senses in a manner, and feel crushed when we think that we are about to die.


CLEINIAS: What do you mean, Stranger?


ATHENIAN: O Cleinias, a man when he is about to die is an intractable

creature, and is apt to use language which causes a great deal of anxiety and

trouble to the legislator.


CLEINIAS: In what way?


ATHENIAN: He wants to have the entire control of all his property, and will

use angry words.


CLEINIAS: Such as what?


ATHENIAN: O ye Gods, he will say, how monstrous that I am not allowed

to give, or not to give, my own to whom I will--less to him who has been bad

to me, and more to him who has been good to me, and whose badness and

goodness have been tested by me in time of sickness or in old age and in

every other sort of fortune!


CLEINIAS: Well, Stranger, and may he not very fairly say so?


ATHENIAN: In my opinion, Cleinias, the ancient legislators were too good-

natured, and made laws without sufficient observation or consideration of

human things.


CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN:  I  mean,  my  friend,  that  they  were  afraid  of  the  testator's

reproaches,  and  so  they  passed  a  law  to  the  effect  that  a  man  should  beallowed to dispose of his property in all respects as he liked; but you and I, if

I am not mistaken, will have something better to say to our departing citizens.


CLEINIAS: What?


ATHENIAN: O my friends, we will say to them, hard is it for you, who are

creatures of a day, to know what is yours--hard too, as the Delphic oracle

says, to know yourselves at this hour. Now I, as the legislator, regard you and

your possessions, not as belonging to yourselves, but as belonging to your

whole family, both past and future, and yet more do I regard both family and

possessions as belonging to the state; wherefore, if some one steals upon you

with  flattery,  when  you  are  tossed  on  the  sea  of  disease  or  old  age,  and

persuades you to dispose of your property in a way that is not for the best, I

will not, if I can help, allow this; but I will legislate with a view to the whole,

considering what is best both for the state and for the family, esteeming as I

ought the feelings of an individual at a lower rate; and I hope that you will

depart in peace and kindness towards us, as you are going the way of all

mankind;  and  we  will  impartially  take  care  of  all  your  concerns,  not

neglecting any of them, if we can possibly help. Let this be our prelude and

consolation to the living and dying, Cleinias, and let the law be as follows:

He who makes a disposition in a testament, if he be the father of a family,

shall first of all inscribe as his heir any one of his sons whom he may think

fit; and if he gives any of his children to be adopted by another citizen, let the

adoption be inscribed. And if he has a son remaining over and above who has

not been adopted upon any lot, and who may be expected to be sent out to a

colony according to law, to him his father may give as much as he pleases of

the rest of his property, with the exception of the paternal lot and the fixtures

on the lot. And if there are other sons, let him distribute among them what

there is more than the lot in such portions as he pleases. And if one of the

sons has already a house of his own, he shall not give him of the money, nor

shall he give money to a daughter who has been betrothed, but if she is not

betrothed he may give her money. And if any of the sons or daughters shall

be found to have another lot of land in the country, which has accrued after

the  testament  has  been  made,  they  shall  leave  the  lot  which  they  have

inherited to the heir of the man who has made the will. If the testator has no

sons,  but  only  daughters,  let  him  choose  the  husband  of  any  one  of  his

daughters whom he pleases, and leave and inscribe him as his son and heir.And if a man have lost his son, when he was a child, and before he could be

reckoned among grown up men, whether his own or an adopted son, let the

testator make mention of the circumstance and inscribe whom he will to be

his second son in hope of better fortune. If the testator has no children at all,

he may select and give to any one whom he pleases the tenth part of the

property which he has acquired; but let him not be blamed if he gives all the

rest to his adopted son, and makes a friend of him according to the law. If the

sons of a man require guardians, and the father when he dies leaves a will

appointing guardians, those who have been named by him, whoever they are

and whatever their number be, if they are able and willing to take charge of

the children, shall be recognised according to the provisions of the will. But if

he  dies  and  has  made  no  will,  or  a  will  in  which  he  has  appointed  no

guardians, then the next of kin, two on the father's and two on the mother's

side,  and  one  of  the  friends  of  the  deceased,  shall  have  the  authority  of

guardians, whom the guardians of the law shall appoint when the orphans

require guardians. And the fifteen eldest guardians of the law shall have the

whole  care  and  charge  of  the  orphans,  divided  into  threes  according  to

seniority--a body of three for one year, and then another body of three for the

next year, until the cycle of the five periods is complete; and this, as far as

possible, is to continue always. If a man dies, having made no will at all, and

leaves  sons  who  require  the  care  of  guardians,  they  shall  share  in  the

protection which is afforded by these laws. And if a man dying by some

unexpected fate leaves daughters behind him, let him pardon the legislator if

when he gives them in marriage, he have a regard only to two out of three

conditions--nearness of kin and the preservation of the lot, and omits the third

condition, which a father would naturally consider, for he would choose out

of all the citizens a son for himself, and a husband for his daughter, with a

view  to  his  character  and  disposition--the  father,  I  say,  shall  forgive  the

legislator if he disregards this, which to him is an impossible consideration.

Let the law about these matters where practicable be as follows: If a man dies

without making a will, and leaves behind him daughters, let his brother, being

the son of the same father or of the same mother, having no lot, marry the

daughter and have the lot of the dead man. And if he have no brother, but

only a brother's son, in like manner let them marry, if they be of a suitable

age; and if there be not even a brother's son, but only the son of a sister, let

them do likewise, and so in the fourth degree, if there be only the testator's

father's brother, or in the fifth degree, his father's brother's son, or in the sixthdegree, the child of his father's sister. Let kindred be always reckoned in this

way:  if  a  person  leaves  daughters  the  relationship  shall  proceed  upwards

through brothers and sisters, and brothers' and sisters' children, and first the

males shall come, and after them the females in the same family. The judge

shall  consider  and  determine  the  suitableness  or  unsuitableness  of  age  in

marriage; he shall make an inspection of the males naked, and of the women

naked down to the navel. And if there be a lack of kinsmen in a family

extending  to  grandchildren  of  a  brother,  or  to  the  grandchildren  of  a

grandfather's  children,  the  maiden  may  choose  with  the  consent  of  her

guardians any one of the citizens who is willing and whom she wills, and he

shall  be  the  heir  of  the  dead  man,  and  the  husband  of  his  daughter.

Circumstances  vary,  and  there  may  sometimes  be  a  still  greater  lack  of

relations within the limits of the state; and if any maiden has no kindred

living in the city, and there is some one who has been sent out to a colony,

and she is disposed to make him the heir of her father's possessions, if he be

indeed  of  her  kindred,  let  him  proceed  to  take  the  lot  according  to  the

regulation of the law; but if he be not of her kindred, she having no kinsmen

within  the  city,  and  he  be  chosen  by  the  daughter  of  the  dead  man,  and

empowered to marry by the guardians, let him return home and take the lot of

him who died intestate. And if a man has no children, either male or female,

and dies without making a will, let the previous law in general hold; and let a

man and a woman go forth from the family and share the deserted house, and

let the lot belong absolutely to them; and let the heiress in the first degree be

a sister, and in a second degree a daughter of a brother, and in the third, a

daughter of a sister, in the fourth degree the sister of a father, and in the fifth

degree the daughter of a father's brother, and in a sixth degree of a father's

sister; and these shall dwell with their male kinsmen, according to the degree

of relationship and right, as we enacted before. Now we must not conceal

from ourselves that such laws are apt to be oppressive and that there may

sometimes be a hardship in the lawgiver commanding the kinsman of the

dead man to marry his relation; he may be thought not to have considered the

innumerable hindrances which may arise among men in the execution of such

ordinances; for there may be cases in which the parties refuse to obey, and

are ready to do anything rather than marry, when there is some bodily or

mental malady or defect among those who are bidden to marry or be married.

Persons  may  fancy  that  the  legislator  never  thought  of  this,  but  they  are

mistaken; wherefore let us make a common prelude on behalf of the lawgiverand of his subjects, the law begging the latter to forgive the legislator, in that

he, having to take care of the common weal, cannot order at the same time

the various circumstances of individuals, and begging him to pardon them if

naturally they are sometimes unable to fulfil the act which he in his ignorance

imposes upon them.


CLEINIAS:  And  how,  Stranger,  can  we  act  most  fairly  under  the

circumstances?


ATHENIAN: There must be arbiters chosen to deal with such laws and the

subjects of them.


CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN: I mean to say, that a case may occur in which the nephew,

having a rich father, will be unwilling to marry the daughter of his uncle; he

will have a feeling of pride, and he will wish to look higher. And there are

cases in which the legislator will be imposing upon him the greatest calamity,

and he will be compelled to disobey the law, if he is required, for example, to

take a wife who is mad, or has some other terrible malady of soul or body,

such as makes life intolerable to the sufferer. Then let what we are saying

concerning these cases be embodied in a law: If any one finds fault with the

established laws respecting testaments, both as to other matters and especially

in what relates to marriage, and asserts that the legislator, if he were alive and

present, would not compel him to obey--that is to say, would not compel

those who are by our law required to marry or be given in marriage, to do

either--and  some  kinsman  or  guardian  dispute  this,  the  reply  is  that  the

legislator left fifteen of the guardians of the law to be arbiters and fathers of

orphans, male or female, and to them let the disputants have recourse, and by

their aid determine any matters of the kind, admitting their decision to be

final. But if any one thinks that too great power is thus given to the guardians

of the law, let him bring his adversaries into the court of the select judges,

and there have the points in dispute determined. And he who loses the cause

shall have censure and blame from the legislator, which, by a man of sense, is

felt to be a penalty far heavier than a great loss of money.


Thus will orphan children have a second birth. After their first birth we spokeof their nurture and education, and after their second birth, when they have

lost  their  parents,  we  ought  to  take  measures  that  the  misfortune  of

orphanhood may be as little sad to them as possible. In the first place, we say

that the guardians of the law are lawgivers and fathers to them, not inferior to

their natural fathers. Moreover, they shall take charge of them year by year as

of their own kindred; and we have given both to them and to the children's

own guardians as suitable admonition concerning the nurture of orphans. And

we seem to have spoken opportunely in our former discourse, when we said

that the souls of the dead have the power after death of taking an interest in

human affairs, about which there are many tales and traditions, long indeed,

but true; and seeing that they are so many and so ancient, we must believe

them, and we must also believe the lawgivers, who tell us that these things

are true, if they are not to be regarded as utter fools. But if these things are

really so, in the first place men should have a fear of the Gods above, who

regard the loneliness of the orphans; and in the second place of the souls of

the departed, who by nature incline to take an especial care of their own

children, and are friendly to those who honour, and unfriendly to those who

dishonour them. Men should also fear the souls of the living who are aged

and high in honour; wherever a city is well ordered and prosperous, their

descendants cherish them, and so live happily; old persons are quick to see

and hear all that relates to them, and are propitious to those who are just in

the fulfilment of such duties, and they punish those who wrong the orphan

and the desolate, considering that they are the greatest and most sacred of

trusts. To all which matters the guardian and magistrate ought to apply his

mind,  if  he  has  any,  and  take  heed  of  the  nurture  and  education  of  the

orphans, seeking in every possible way to do them good, for he is making a

contribution to his own good and that of his children. He who obeys the tale

which  precedes  the  law,  and  does  no  wrong  to  an  orphan,  will  never

experience the wrath of the legislator. But he who is disobedient, and wrongs

any one who is bereft of father or mother, shall pay twice the penalty which

he would have paid if he had wronged one whose parents had been alive. As

touching other legislation concerning guardians in their relation to orphans,

or concerning magistrates and their superintendence of the guardians, if they

did not possess examples of the manner in which children of freemen would

be brought up in the bringing up of their own children, and of the care of their

property in the care of their own, or if they had not just laws fairly stated

about these very things--there would have been reason in making laws forthem, under the idea that they were a peculiar class, and we might distinguish

and make separate rules for the life of those who are orphans and of those

who are not orphans. But as the case stands, the condition of orphans with us

is not different from the case of those who have a father, though in regard to

honour  and  dishonour,  and  the  attention  given  to  them,  the  two  are  not

usually  placed  upon  a  level.  Wherefore,  touching  the  legislation  about

orphans,  the  law  speaks  in  serious  accents,  both  of  persuasion  and

threatening, and such a threat as the following will be by no means out of

place: He who is the guardian of an orphan of either sex, and he among the

guardians of the law to whom the superintendence of this guardian has been

assigned, shall love the unfortunate orphan as though he were his own child,

and he shall be as careful and diligent in the management of his possessions

as he would be if they were his own, or even more careful and diligent. Let

every one who has the care of an orphan observe this law. But any one who

acts contrary to the law on these matters, if he be a guardian of the child, may

be fined by a magistrate, or, if he be himself a magistrate, the guardian may

bring him before the court of select judges, and punish him, if convicted, by

exacting a fine of double the amount of that inflicted by the court. And if a

guardian appears to the relations of the orphan, or to any other citizen, to act

negligently or dishonestly, let them bring him before the same court, and

whatever damages are given against him, let him pay fourfold, and let half

belong to the orphan and half to him who procured the conviction. If any

orphan arrives at years of discretion, and thinks that he has been ill-used by

his guardians, let him within five years of the expiration of the guardianship

be allowed to bring them to trial; and if any of them be convicted, the court

shall determine what he shall pay or suffer. And if a magistrate shall appear

to have wronged the orphan by neglect, and he be convicted, let the court

determine what he shall suffer or pay to the orphan, and if there be dishonesty

in addition to neglect, besides paying the fine, let him be deposed from his

office of guardian of the law, and let the state appoint another guardian of the

law for the city and for the country in his room.


Greater differences than there ought to be sometimes arise between fathers

and  sons,  on  the  part  either  of  fathers  who  will  be  of  opinion  that  the

legislator should enact that they may, if they wish, lawfully renounce their

son by the proclamation of a herald in the face of the world, or of sons who

think that they should be allowed to indict their fathers on the charge ofimbecility when they are disabled by disease or old age. These things only

happen, as a matter of fact, where the natures of men are utterly bad; for

where only half is bad, as, for example, if the father be not bad, but the son be

bad, or conversely, no great calamity is the result of such an amount of hatred

as this. In another state, a son disowned by his father would not of necessity

cease to be a citizen, but in our state, of which these are to be the laws, the

disinherited must necessarily emigrate into another country, for no addition

can be made even of a single family to the 5040 households; and, therefore,

he who deserves to suffer these things must be renounced not only by his

father, who is a single person, but by the whole family, and what is done in

these cases must be regulated by some such law as the following: He who in

the sad disorder of his soul has a mind, justly or unjustly, to expel from his

family a son whom he has begotten and brought up, shall not lightly or at

once execute his purpose; but first of all he shall collect together his own

kinsmen, extending to cousins, and in like manner his son's kinsmen by the

mother's side, and in their presence he shall accuse his son, setting forth that

he deserves at the hands of them all to be dismissed from the family; and the

son shall be allowed to address them in a similar manner, and show that he

does not deserve to suffer any of these things. And if the father persuades

them, and obtains the suffrages of more than half of his kindred, exclusive of

the father and mother and the offender himself-- I say, if he obtains more than

half the suffrages of all the other grown- up members of the family, of both

sexes, the father shall be permitted to put away his son, but not otherwise.

And if any other citizen is willing to adopt the son who is put away, no law

shall  hinder  him;  for  the  characters  of  young  men  are  subject  to  many

changes in the course of their lives. And if he has been put away, and in a

period of ten years no one is willing to adopt him, let those who have the care

of the superabundant population which is sent out into colonies, see to him, in

order that he may be suitably provided for in the colony. And if disease or

age or harshness of temper, or all these together, makes a man to be more out

of his mind than the rest of the world are--but this is not observable, except to

those who live with him--and he, being master of his property, is the ruin of

the house, and his son doubts and hesitates about indicting his father for

insanity, let the law in that case ordain that he shall first of all go to the eldest

guardians of the law and tell them of his father's misfortune, and they shall

duly look into the matter, and take counsel as to whether he shall indict him

or not. And if they advise him to proceed, they shall be both his witnessesand his advocates; and if the father is cast, he shall henceforth be incapable of

ordering the least particular of his life; let him be as a child dwelling in the

house for the remainder of his days. And if a man and his wife have an

unfortunate incompatibility of temper, ten of the guardians of the law, who

are impartial, and ten of the women who regulate marriages, shall look to the

matter,  and  if  they  are  able  to  reconcile  them  they  shall  be  formally

reconciled; but if their souls are too much tossed with passion, they shall

endeavour to find other partners. Now they are not likely to have very gentle

tempers; and, therefore, we must endeavour to associate with them deeper

and softer natures. Those who have no children, or only a few, at the time of

their  separation,  should  choose  their  new  partners  with  a  view  to  the

procreation of children; but those who have a sufficient number of children

should separate and marry again in order that they may have some one to

grow old with and that the pair may take care of one another in age. If a

woman dies, leaving children, male or female, the law will advise rather than

compel the husband to bring up the children without introducing into the

house a stepmother. But if he have no children, then he shall be compelled to

marry until he has begotten a sufficient number of sons to his family and to

the  state.  And  if  a  man  dies  leaving  a  sufficient  number  of  children,  the

mother of his children shall remain with them and bring them up. But if she

appears to be too young to live virtuously without a husband, let her relations

communicate  with  the  women  who  superintend  marriage,  and  let  both

together do what they think best in these matters; if there is a lack of children,

let the choice be made with a view to having them; two children, one of either

sex, shall be deemed sufficient in the eye of the law. When a child is admitted

to be the offspring of certain parents and is acknowledged by them, but there

is need of a decision as to which parent the child is to follow--in case a

female  slave  have  intercourse  with  a  male  slave,  or  with  a  freeman  or

freedman, the offspring shall always belong to the master of the female slave.

Again, if a free woman have intercourse with a male slave, the offspring shall

belong to the master of the slave; but if a child be born either of a slave by

her master, or of his mistress by a slave--and this be proven--the offspring of

the woman and its father shall be sent away by the women who superintend

marriage into another country, and the guardians of the law shall send away

the offspring of the man and its mother.


Neither God, nor a man who has understanding, will ever advise any one toneglect his parents. To a discourse concerning the honour and dishonour of

parents, a prelude such as the following, about the service of the Gods, will

be a suitable introduction: There are ancient customs about the Gods which

are universal, and they are of two kinds: some of the Gods we see with our

eyes and we honour them, of others we honour the images, raising statues of

them which we adore; and though they are lifeless, yet we imagine that the

living Gods have a good will and gratitude to us on this account. Now, if a

man has a father or mother, or their fathers or mothers treasured up in his

house stricken in years, let him consider that no statue can be more potent to

grant his requests than they are, who are sitting at his hearth, if only he knows

how to show true service to them.


CLEINIAS: And what do you call the true mode of service?


ATHENIAN: I will tell you, O my friend, for such things are worth listening

to.


CLEINIAS: Proceed.


ATHENIAN:  Oedipus,  as  tradition  says,  when  dishonoured  by  his  sons,

invoked on them curses which every one declares to have been heard and

ratified by the Gods, and Amyntor in his wrath invoked curses on his son

Phoenix, and Theseus upon Hippolytus, and innumerable others have also

called down wrath upon their children, whence it is clear that the Gods listen

to the imprecations of parents; for the curses of parents are, as they ought to

be, mighty against their children as no others are. And shall we suppose that

the prayers of a father or mother who is specially dishonoured by his or her

children, are heard by the Gods in accordance with nature; and that if a parent

is honoured by them, and in the gladness of his heart earnestly entreats the

Gods in his prayers to do them good, he is not equally heard, and that they do

not minister to his request? If not, they would be very unjust ministers of

good, and that we affirm to be contrary to their nature.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN:  May  we  not  think,  as  I  was  saying  just  now,  that  we  can

possess no image which is more honoured by the Gods, than that of a fatheror grandfather, or of a mother stricken in years? whom when a man honours,

the heart of the God rejoices, and he is ready to answer their prayers. And,

truly, the figure of an ancestor is a wonderful thing, far higher than that of a

lifeless image. For the living, when they are honoured by us, join in our

prayers, and when they are dishonoured, they utter imprecations against us;

but lifeless objects do neither. And therefore, if a man makes a right use of

his  father  and  grandfather  and  other  aged  relations,  he  will  have  images

which above all others will win him the favour of the Gods.


CLEINIAS: Excellent.


ATHENIAN: Every man of any understanding fears and respects the prayers

of parents, knowing well that many times and to many persons they have

been accomplished. Now these things being thus ordered by nature, good

men think it a blessing from heaven if their parents live to old age and reach

the utmost limit of human life, or if taken away before their time they are

deeply regretted by them; but to bad men parents are always a cause of terror.

Wherefore let every man honour with every sort of lawful honour his own

parents,  agreeably  to  what  has  now  been  said.  But  if  this  prelude  be  an

unmeaning sound in the ears of any one, let the law follow, which may be

rightly imposed in these terms: If any one in this city be not sufficiently

careful of his parents, and do not regard and gratify in every respect their

wishes more than those of his sons and of his other offspring or of himself--

let him who experiences this sort of treatment either come himself, or send

some one to inform the three eldest guardians of the law, and three of the

women who have the care of marriages; and let them look to the matter and

punish youthful evil-doers with stripes and bonds if they are under thirty

years of age, that is to say, if they be men, or if they be women, let them

undergo the same punishment up to forty years of age. But if, when they are

still more advanced in years, they continue the same neglect of their parents,

and do any hurt to any of them, let them be brought before a court in which

every single one of the eldest citizens shall be the judges, and if the offender

be convicted, let the court determine what he ought to pay or suffer, and any

penalty may be imposed on him which a man can pay or suffer. If the person

who has been wronged be unable to inform the magistrates, let any freeman

who hears of his case inform, and if he do not, he shall be deemed base, and

shall be liable to have a suit for damage brought against him by any one wholikes. And if a slave inform, he shall receive freedom; and if he be the slave

of the injurer or injured party, he shall be set free by the magistrates, or if he

belong to any other citizen, the public shall pay a price on his behalf to the

owner;  and  let  the  magistrates  take  heed  that  no  one  wrongs  him  out  of

revenge, because he has given information.


Cases in which one man injures another by poisons, and which prove fatal,

have  been  already  discussed;  but  about  other  cases  in  which  a  person

intentionally and of malice harms another with meats, or drinks, or ointments,

nothing has as yet been determined. For there are two kinds of poisons used

among men, which cannot clearly be distinguished. There is the kind just

now explicitly mentioned, which injures bodies by the use of other bodies

according to a natural law; there is also another kind which persuades the

more daring class that they can do injury by sorceries, and incantations, and

magic knots, as they are termed, and makes others believe that they above all

persons are injured by the powers of the magician. Now it is not easy to know

the nature of all these things; nor if a man do know can he readily persuade

others to believe him. And when men are disturbed in their minds at the sight

of waxen images fixed either at their doors, or in a place where three ways

meet, or on the sepulchres of parents, there is no use in trying to persuade

them that they should despise all such things because they have no certain

knowledge about them. But we must have a law in two parts, concerning

poisoning, in whichever of the two ways the attempt is made, and we must

entreat, and exhort, and advise men not to have recourse to such practises, by

which they scare the multitude out of their wits, as if they were children,

compelling the legislator and the judge to heal the fears which the sorcerer

arouses, and to tell them in the first place, that he who attempts to poison or

enchant others knows not what he is doing, either as regards the body (unless

he has a knowledge of medicine), or as regards his enchantments (unless he

happens to be a prophet or diviner). Let the law, then, run as follows about

poisoning or witchcraft: He who employs poison to do any injury, not fatal,

to a man himself, or to his servants, or any injury, whether fatal or not, to his

cattle or his bees, if he be a physician, and be convicted of poisoning, shall be

punished with death; or if he be a private person, the court shall determine

what he is to pay or suffer. But he who seems to be the sort of man who

injures others by magic knots, or enchantments, or incantations, or any of the

like practices, if he be a prophet or diviner, let him die; and if, not being aprophet, he be convicted of witchcraft, as in the previous case, let the court

fix what he ought to pay or suffer.


When a man does another any injury by theft or violence, for the greater

injury  let  him  pay  greater  damages  to  the  injured  man,  and  less  for  the

smaller injury; but in all cases, whatever the injury may have been, as much

as will compensate the loss. And besides the compensation of the wrong, let a

man pay a further penalty for the chastisement of his offence: he who has

done  the  wrong  instigated  by  the  folly  of  another,  through  the

lightheartedness of youth or the like, shall pay a lighter penalty; but he who

has injured another through his own folly, when overcome by pleasure or

pain, in cowardly fear, or lust, or envy, or implacable anger, shall endure a

heavier punishment. Not that he is punished because he did wrong, for that

which is done can never be undone, but in order that in future times, he, and

those who see him corrected, may utterly hate injustice, or at any rate abate

much of their evil-doing. Having an eye to all these things, the law, like a

good archer, should aim at the right measure of punishment, and in all cases

at the deserved punishment. In the attainment of this the judge shall be a

fellow-worker  with  the  legislator,  whenever  the  law  leaves  to  him  to

determine what the offender shall suffer or pay; and the legislator, like a

painter,  shall  give  a  rough  sketch  of  the  cases  in  which  the  law  is  to  be

applied. This is what we must do, Megillus and Cleinias, in the best and

fairest manner that we can, saying what the punishments are to be of all

actions of theft and violence, and giving laws of such a kind as the Gods and

sons of Gods would have us give.


If a man is mad he shall not be at large in the city, but his relations shall keep

him at home in any way which they can; or if not, let them pay a penalty--he

who is of the highest class shall pay a penalty of one hundred drachmas,

whether he be a slave or a freeman whom he neglects; and he of the second

class shall pay four-fifths of a mina; and he of the third class three-fifths; and

he of the fourth class two-fifths. Now there are many sorts of madness, some

arising out of disease, which we have already mentioned; and there are other

kinds,  which  originate  in  an  evil  and  passionate  temperament,  and  are

increased by bad education; out of a slight quarrel this class of madmen will

often raise a storm of abuse against one another, and nothing of that sort

ought to be allowed to occur in a well-ordered state. Let this, then, be the lawabout  abuse,  which  shall  relate  to  all  cases:  No  one  shall  speak  evil  of

another; and when a man disputes with another he shall teach and learn of the

disputant and the company, but he shall abstain from evil-speaking; for out of

the imprecations which men utter against one another, and the feminine habit

of casting aspersions on one another, and using foul names, out of words light

as  air,  in  very  deed  the  greatest  enmities  and  hatreds  spring  up.  For  the

speaker gratifies his anger, which is an ungracious element of his nature; and

nursing up his wrath by the entertainment of evil thoughts, and exacerbating

that part of his soul which was formerly civilised by education, he lives in a

state of savageness and moroseness, and pays a bitter penalty for his anger.

And in such cases almost all men take to saying something ridiculous about

their opponent, and there is no man who is in the habit of laughing at another

who does not miss virtue and earnestness altogether, or lose the better half of

greatness. Wherefore let no one utter any taunting word at a temple, or at the

public sacrifices, or at the games, or in the agora, or in a court of justice, or in

any public assembly. And let the magistrate who presides on these occasions

chastise an offender, and he shall be blameless; but if he fails in doing so, he

shall not claim the prize of virtue; for he is one who heeds not the laws, and

does not do what the legislator commands. And if in any other place any one

indulges in these sort of revilings, whether he has begun the quarrel or is only

retaliating, let any elder who is present support the law, and control with

blows those who indulge in passion, which is another great evil; and if he do

not, let him be liable to pay the appointed penalty. And we say now, that he

who  deals  in  reproaches  against  others  cannot  reproach  them  without

attempting to ridicule them; and this, when done in a moment of anger, is

what we make matter of reproach against him. But then, do we admit into our

state the comic writers who are so fond of making mankind ridiculous, if they

attempt in a good-natured manner to turn the laugh against our citizens? or do

we draw the distinction of jest and earnest, and allow a man to make use of

ridicule in jest and without anger about any thing or person; though as we

were saying, not if he be angry and have a set purpose? We forbid earnest --

that is unalterably fixed; but we have still to say who are to be sanctioned or

not to be sanctioned by the law in the employment of innocent humour. A

comic poet, or maker of iambic or satirical lyric verse, shall not be permitted

to ridicule any of the citizens, either by word or likeness, either in anger or

without anger. And if any one is disobedient, the judges shall either at once

expel him from the country, or he shall pay a fine of three minae, which shallbe dedicated to the God who presides over the contests. Those only who have

received permission shall be allowed to write verses at one another, but they

shall be without anger and in jest; in anger and in serious earnest they shall

not be allowed. The decision of this matter shall be left to the superintendent

of  the  general  education  of  the  young,  and  whatever  he  may  license,  the

writer shall be allowed to produce, and whatever he rejects let not the poet

himself  exhibit,  or  ever  teach  anybody  else,  slave  or  freeman,  under  the

penalty of being dishonoured, and held disobedient to the laws.


Now he is not to be pitied who is hungry, or who suffers any bodily pain, but

he who is temperate, or has some other virtue, or part of a virtue, and at the

same time suffers from misfortune; it would be an extraordinary thing if such

an one, whether slave or freeman, were utterly forsaken and fell into the

extremes  of  poverty  in  any  tolerably  well-ordered  city  or  government.

Wherefore the legislator may safely make a law applicable to such cases in

the following terms: Let there be no beggars in our state; and if anybody

begs, seeking to pick up a livelihood by unavailing prayers, let the wardens of

the agora turn him out of the agora, and the wardens of the city out of the

city, and the wardens of the country send him out of any other parts of the

land across the border, in order that the land may be cleared of this sort of

animal.


If a slave of either sex injure anything, which is not his or her own, through

inexperience, or some improper practice, and the person who suffers damage

be not himself in part to blame, the master of the slave who has done the

harm shall either make full satisfaction, or give up the slave who has done the

injury. But if the master argue that the charge has arisen by collusion between

the injured party and the injurer, with the view of obtaining the slave, let him

sue the person, who says that he has been injured, for malpractices. And if he

gain a conviction, let him receive double the value which the court fixes as

the price of the slave; and if he lose his suit, let him make amends for the

injury, and give up the slave. And if a beast of burden, or horse, or dog, or

any other animal, injure the property of a neighbour, the owner shall in like

manner pay for the injury.


If any man refuses to be a witness, he who wants him shall summon him, and

he who is summoned shall come to the trial; and if he knows and is willing tobear witness, let him bear witness, but if he says he does not know let him

swear by the three divinities Zeus, and Apollo, and Themis, that he does not,

and have no more to do with the cause. And he who is summoned to give

witness and does not answer to his summoner, shall be liable for the harm

which ensues according to law. And if a person calls up as a witness any one

who is acting as a judge, let him give his witness, but he shall not afterwards

vote in the cause. A free woman may give her witness and plead, if she be

more than forty years of age, and may bring an action if she have no husband;

but if her husband be alive she shall only be allowed to bear witness. A slave

of either sex and a child shall be allowed to give evidence and to plead, but

only in cases of murder; and they must produce sufficient sureties that they

will certainly remain until the trial, in case they should be charged with false

witness.  And  either  of  the  parties  in  a  cause  may  bring  an  accusation  of

perjury against witnesses, touching their evidence in whole or in part, if he

asserts that such evidence has been given; but the accusation must be brought

previous to the final decision of the cause. The magistrates shall preserve the

accusations  of  false  witness,  and  have  them  kept  under  the  seal  of  both

parties, and produce them on the day when the trial for false witness takes

place. If a man be twice convicted of false witness, he shall not be required,

and if thrice, he shall not be allowed to bear witness; and if he dare to witness

after  he  has  been  convicted  three  times,  let  any  one  who  pleases  inform

against him to the magistrates, and let the magistrates hand him over to the

court, and if he be convicted he shall be punished with death. And in any case

in which the evidence is rightly found to be false, and yet to have given the

victory  to  him  who  wins  the  suit,  and  more  than  half  the  witnesses  are

condemned,  the  decision  which  was  gained  by  these  means  shall  be

rescinded, and there shall be a discussion and a decision as to whether the suit

was  determined  by  that  false  evidence  or  not;  and  in  whichever  way  the

decision may be given, the previous suit shall be determined accordingly.


There are many noble things in human life, but to most of them attach evils

which are fated to corrupt and spoil them. Is not justice noble, which has

been the civiliser of humanity? How then can the advocate of justice be other

than noble? And yet upon this profession which is presented to us under the

fair name of art has come an evil reputation. In the first place, we are told that

by ingenious pleas and the help of an advocate the law enables a man to win

a particular cause, whether just or unjust; and that both the art, and the powerof speech which is thereby imparted, are at the service of him who is willing

to pay for them. Now in our state this so-called art, whether really an art or

only an experience and practice destitute of any art, ought if possible never to

come into existence, or if existing among us should listen to the request of the

legislator and go away into another land, and not speak contrary to justice. If

the offenders obey we say no more; but for those who disobey, the voice of

the law is as follows: If any one thinks that he will pervert the power of

justice in the minds of the judges, and unseasonably litigate or advocate, let

any one who likes indict him for malpractices of law and dishonest advocacy,

and let him be judged in the court of select judges; and if he be convicted, let

the court determine whether he may be supposed to act from a love of money

or from contentiousness. And if he is supposed to act from contentiousness,

the court shall fix a time during which he shall not be allowed to institute or

plead a cause; and if he is supposed to act as he does from love of money, in

case he be a stranger, he shall leave the country, and never return under

penalty of death; but if he be a citizen, he shall die, because he is a lover of

money, in whatever manner gained; and equally, if he be judged to have

acted more than once from contentiousness, he shall die.BOOK XII.


If a herald or an ambassador carry a false message from our city to any other,

or bring back a false message from the city to which he is sent, or be proved

to have brought back, whether from friends or enemies, in his capacity of

herald or ambassador, what they have never said, let him be indicted for

having violated, contrary to the law, the commands and duties imposed upon

him by Hermes and Zeus, and let there be a penalty fixed, which he shall

suffer or pay if he be convicted.


Theft is a mean, and robbery a shameless thing; and none of the sons of Zeus

delight in fraud and violence, or ever practised either. Wherefore let no one

be deluded by poets or mythologers into a mistaken belief of such things, nor

let him suppose, when he thieves or is guilty of violence, that he is doing

nothing base, but only what the Gods themselves do. For such tales are untrue

and improbable; and he who steals or robs contrary to the law, is never either

a God or the son of a God; of this the legislator ought to be better informed

than all the poets put together. Happy is he and may he be for ever happy,

who is persuaded and listens to our words; but he who disobeys shall have to

contend against the following law: If a man steal anything belonging to the

public, whether that which he steals be much or little, he shall have the same

punishment. For he who steals a little steals with the same wish as he who

steals much, but with less power, and he who takes up a greater amount, not

having deposited it, is wholly unjust. Wherefore the law is not disposed to

inflict a less penalty on the one than on the other because his theft is less, but

on the ground that the thief may possibly be in one case still curable, and may

in another case be incurable. If any one convict in a court of law a stranger or

a slave of a theft of public property, let the court determine what punishment

he  shall  suffer,  or  what  penalty  he  shall  pay,  bearing  in  mind  that  he  is

probably  not  incurable.  But  the  citizen  who  has  been  brought  up  as  our

citizens will have been, if he be found guilty of robbing his country by fraud

or violence, whether he be caught in the act or not, shall be punished with

death; for he is incurable.


Now for expeditions of war much consideration and many laws are required;the great principle of all is that no one of either sex should be without a

commander; nor should the mind of any one be accustomed to do anything,

either in jest or earnest, of his own motion, but in war and in peace he should

look  to  and  follow  his  leader,  even  in  the  least  things  being  under  his

guidance; for example, he should stand or move, or exercise, or wash, or take

his meals, or get up in the night to keep guard and deliver messages when he

is bidden; and in the hour of danger he should not pursue and not retreat

except by order of his superior; and in a word, not teach the soul or accustom

her  to  know  or  understand  how  to  do  anything  apart  from  others.  Of  all

soldiers  the  life  should  be  always  and  in  all  things  as  far  as  possible  in

common and together; there neither is nor ever will be a higher, or better, or

more scientific principle than this for the attainment of salvation and victory

in war. And we ought in time of peace from youth upwards to practise this

habit of commanding others, and of being commanded by others; anarchy

should have no place in the life of man or of the beasts who are subject to

man. I may add that all dances ought to be performed with a view to military

excellence; and agility and ease should be cultivated for the same object, and

also  endurance  of  the  want  of  meats  and  drinks,  and  of  winter  cold  and

summer heat, and of hard couches; and, above all, care should be taken not to

destroy the peculiar qualities of the head and the feet by surrounding them

with extraneous coverings, and so hindering their natural growth of hair and

soles. For these are the extremities, and of all the parts of the body, whether

they are preserved or not is of the greatest consequence; the one is the servant

of the whole body, and the other the master, in whom all the ruling senses are

by nature set. Let the young men imagine that he hears in what has preceded

the praises of the military life; the law shall be as follows: He shall serve in

war who is on the roll or appointed to some special service, and if any one is

absent from cowardice, and without the leave of the generals, he shall be

indicted before the military commanders for failure of service when the army

comes home; and the soldiers shall be his judges; the heavy-armed, and the

cavalry, and the other arms of the service shall form separate courts; and they

shall  bring  the  heavy-armed  before  the  heavy-armed,  and  the  horsemen

before the horsemen, and the others in like manner before their peers; and he

who is found guilty shall never be allowed to compete for any prize of valour,

or indict another for not serving on an expedition, or be an accuser at all in

any  military  matters.  Moreover,  the  court  shall  further  determine  what

punishment he shall suffer, or what penalty he shall pay. When the suits forfailure of service are completed, the leaders of the several kinds of troops

shall again hold an assembly, and they shall adjudge the prizes of valour; and

he who likes searching for judgment in his own branch of the service, saying

nothing about any former expedition, nor producing any proof or witnesses to

confirm his statement, but speaking only of the present occasion. The crown

of victory shall be an olive wreath which the victor shall offer up at the

temple of any war-god whom he likes, adding an inscription for a testimony

to last during life, that such an one has received the first, the second, or the

third prize. If any one goes on an expedition, and returns home before the

appointed time, when the generals have not withdrawn the army, he shall be

indicted for desertion before the same persons who took cognizance of failure

of service, and if he be found guilty, the same punishment shall be inflicted

on him. Now every man who is engaged in any suit ought to be very careful

of  bringing  false  witness  against  any  one,  either  intentionally  or

unintentionally, if he can help; for justice is truly said to be an honourable

maiden, and falsehood is naturally repugnant to honour and justice. A witness

ought to be very careful not to sin against justice, as for example in what

relates to the throwing away of arms--he must distinguish the throwing them

away  when  necessary,  and  not  make  that  a  reproach,  or  bring  an  action

against some innocent person on that account. To make the distinction may

be difficult; but still the law must attempt to define the different kinds in

some way. Let me endeavour to explain my meaning by an ancient tale: If

Patroclus had been brought to the tent still alive but without his arms (and

this has happened to innumerable persons), the original arms, which the poet

says were presented to Peleus by the Gods as a nuptial gift when he married

Thetis, remaining in the hands of Hector, then the base spirits of that day

might have reproached the son of Menoetius with having cast away his arms.

Again, there is the case of those who have been thrown down precipices and

lost their arms; and of those who at sea, and in stormy places, have been

suddenly overwhelmed by floods of water; and there are numberless things of

this kind which one might adduce by way of extenuation, and with the view

of justifying a misfortune which is easily misrepresented. We must, therefore,

endeavour to divide to the best of our power the greater and more serious evil

from  the  lesser.  And  a  distinction  may  be  drawn  in  the  use  of  terms  of

reproach. A man does not always deserve to be called the thrower away of his

shield; he may be only the loser of his arms. For there is a great or rather

absolute difference between him who is deprived of his arms by a sufficientforce, and him who voluntarily lets his shield go. Let the law then be as

follows: If a person having arms is overtaken by the enemy and does not turn

round and defend himself, but lets them go voluntarily or throws them away,

choosing a base life and a swift escape rather than a courageous and noble

and blessed death--in such a case of the throwing away of arms let justice be

done, but the judge need take no note of the case just now mentioned; for the

bad men ought always to be punished, in the hope that he may be improved,

but not the unfortunate, for there is no advantage in that. And what shall be

the punishment suited to him who has thrown away his weapons of defence?

Tradition says that Caeneus, the Thessalian, was changed by a God from a

woman into a man; but the converse miracle cannot now be wrought, or no

punishment would be more proper than that the man who throws away his

shield should be changed into a woman. This however is impossible, and

therefore let us make a law as nearly like this as we can --that he who loves

his life too well shall be in no danger for the remainder of his days, but shall

live  for  ever  under  the  stigma  of  cowardice.  And  let  the  law  be  in  the

following terms: When a man is found guilty of disgracefully throwing away

his arms in war, no general or military officer shall allow him to serve as a

soldier, or give him any place at all in the ranks of soldiers; and the officer

who  gives  the  coward  any  place,  shall  suffer  a  penalty  which  the  public

examiner shall exact of him; and if he be of the highest class, he shall pay a

thousand drachmae; or if he be of the second class, five minae; or if he be of

the third, three minae; or if he be of the fourth class, one mina. And he who is

found guilty of cowardice, shall not only be dismissed from manly dangers,

which is a disgrace appropriate to his nature, but he shall pay a thousand

drachmae, if he be of the highest class, and five minae if he be of the second

class, and three if he be of the third class, and a mina, like the preceding, if he

be of the fourth class.


What regulations will be proper about examiners, seeing that some of our

magistrates are elected by lot, and for a year, and some for a longer time and

from selected persons? Of such magistrates, who will be a sufficient censor

or examiner, if any of them, weighed down by the pressure of office or his

own inability to support the dignity of his office, be guilty of any crooked

practice?  It  is  by  no  means  easy  to  find  a  magistrate  who  excels  other

magistrates in virtue, but still we must endeavour to discover some censor or

examiner  who  is  more  than  man.  For  the  truth  is,  that  there  are  manyelements of dissolution in a state, as there are also in a ship, or in an animal;

they  all  have  their  cords,  and  girders,  and  sinews--one  nature  diffused  in

many places, and called by many names; and the office of examiner is a most

important element in the preservation and dissolution of states. For if the

examiners are better than the magistrates, and their duty is fulfilled justly and

without blame, then the whole state and country flourishes and is happy; but

if the examination of the magistrates is carried on in a wrong way, then, by

the relaxation of that justice which is the uniting principle of all constitutions,

every power in the state is rent asunder from every other; they no longer

incline in the same direction, but fill the city with faction, and make many

cities out of one, and soon bring all to destruction. Wherefore the examiners

ought to be admirable in every sort of virtue. Let us invent a mode of creating

them, which shall be as follows: Every year, after the summer solstice, the

whole city shall meet in the common precincts of Helios and Apollo, and

shall present to the God three men out of their own number in the manner

following: Each citizen shall select, not himself, but some other citizen whom

he deems in every way the best, and who is not less than fifty years of age.

And out of the selected persons who have the greatest number of votes, they

shall make a further selection until they reduce them to one-half, if they are

an even number; but if they are not an even number, they shall subtract the

one who has the smallest number of votes, and make them an even number,

and then leave the half which have the greater number of votes. And if two

persons have an equal number of votes, and thus increase the number beyond

one-half, they shall withdraw the younger of the two and do away the excess;

and then including all the rest they shall again vote, until there are left three

having an unequal number of votes. But if all the three, or two out of the

three, have equal votes, let them commit the election to good fate and fortune,

and separate off by lot the first, and the second, and the third; these they shall

crown with an olive wreath and give them the prize of excellence, at the same

time  proclaiming  to  all  the  world  that  the  city  of  the  Magnetes,  by  the

providence of the Gods, is again preserved, and presents to the Sun and to

Apollo her three best men as first-fruits, to be a common offering to them,

according to the ancient law, as long as their lives answer to the judgment

formed of them. And these shall appoint in their first year twelve examiners,

to continue until each has completed seventy-five years, to whom three shall

afterwards  be  added  yearly;  and  let  these  divide  all  the  magistracies  into

twelve parts, and prove the holders of them by every sort of test to which afreeman may be subjected; and let them live while they hold office in the

precinct of Helios and Apollo, in which they were chosen, and let each one

form a judgment of some things individually, and of others in company with

his  colleagues;  and  let  him  place  a  writing  in  the  agora  about  each

magistracy, and what the magistrate ought to suffer or pay, according to the

decision of the examiners. And if a magistrate does not admit that he has

been justly judged, let him bring the examiners before the select judges, and

if he be acquitted by their decision, let him, if he will, accuse the examiners

themselves; if, however, he be convicted, and have been condemned to death

by the examiners, let him die (and of course he can only die once): but any

other penalties which admit of being doubled let him suffer twice over.


And now let us pass under review the examiners themselves; what will their

examination be, and how conducted? During the life of these men, whom the

whole state counts worthy of the rewards of virtue, they shall have the first

seat  at  all  public  assemblies,  and  at  all  Hellenic  sacrifices  and  sacred

missions, and other public and holy ceremonies in which they share. The

chiefs of each sacred mission shall be selected from them, and they only of

all the citizens shall be adorned with a crown of laurel; they shall all be

priests of Apollo and Helios; and one of them, who is judged first of the

priests created in that year, shall be high priest; and they shall write up his

name in each year to be a measure of time as long as the city lasts; and after

their death they shall be laid out and carried to the grave and entombed in a

manner different from the other citizens. They shall be decked in a robe all of

white, and there shall be no crying or lamentation over them; but a chorus of

fifteen maidens, and another of boys, shall stand around the bier on either

side,  hymning  the  praises  of  the  departed  priests  in  alternate  responses,

declaring their blessedness in song all day long; and at dawn a hundred of the

youths  who  practise  gymnastic  exercises,  and  whom  the  relations  of  the

departed shall choose, shall carry the bier to the sepulchre, the young men

marching first, dressed in the garb of warriors--the cavalry with their horses,

the heavy- armed with their arms, and the others in like manner. And boys

near the bier and in front of it shall sing their national hymn, and maidens

shall follow behind, and with them the women who have passed the age of

child-  bearing;  next,  although  they  are  interdicted  from  other  burials,  let

priests and priestesses follow, unless the Pythian oracle forbid them; for this

burial is free from pollution. The place of burial shall be an oblong vaultedchamber underground, constructed of tufa, which will last for ever, having

stone couches placed side by side. And here they will lay the blessed person,

and cover the sepulchre with a circular mound of earth and plant a grove of

trees around on every side but one; and on that side the sepulchre shall be

allowed to extend for ever, and a new mound will not be required. Every year

they shall have contests in music and gymnastics, and in horsemanship, in

honour of the dead. These are the honours which shall be given to those who

at the examination are found blameless; but if any of them, trusting to the

scrutiny being over, should, after the judgment has been given, manifest the

wickedness of human nature, let the law ordain that he who pleases shall

indict him, and let the cause be tried in the following manner. In the first

place, the court shall be composed of the guardians of the law, and to them

the surviving examiners shall be added, as well as the court of select judges;

and let the pursuer lay his indictment in this form--he shall say that so-and-so

is unworthy of the prize of virtue and of his office; and if the defendant be

convicted let him be deprived of his office, and of the burial, and of the other

honours given him. But if the prosecutor do not obtain the fifth part of the

votes, let him, if he be of the first-class, pay twelve minae, and eight if he be

of the second class, and six if he be of the third class, and two minae if he be

of the fourth class.


The  so-called  decision  of  Rhadamanthus  is  worthy  of  all  admiration.  He

knew that the men of his own time believed and had no doubt that there were

Gods, which was a reasonable belief in those days, because most men were

the sons of Gods, and according to tradition he was one himself. He appears

to have thought that he ought to commit judgment to no man, but to the Gods

only, and in this way suits were simply and speedily decided by him. For he

made the two parties take an oath respecting the points in dispute, and so got

rid  of  the  matter  speedily  and  safely.  But  now  that  a  certain  portion  of

mankind do not believe at all in the existence of the Gods, and others imagine

that they have no care of us, and the opinion of most men, and of the worst

men, is that in return for a small sacrifice and a few flattering words they will

be  their  accomplices  in  purloining  large  sums  and  save  them  from  many

terrible punishments, the way of Rhadamanthus is no longer suited to the

needs of justice; for as the opinions of men about the Gods are changed, the

laws should also be changed--in the granting of suits a rational legislation

ought to do away with the oaths of the parties on either side--he who obtainsleave to bring an action should write down the charges, but should not add an

oath;  and  the  defendant  in  like  manner  should  give  his  denial  to  the

magistrates in writing, and not swear; for it is a dreadful thing to know, when

many lawsuits are going on in a state, that almost half the people who meet

one another quite unconcernedly at the public meals and in other companies

and relations of private life are perjured. Let the law, then, be as follows: A

judge  who  is  about  to  give  judgment  shall  take  an  oath,  and  he  who  is

choosing magistrates for the state shall either vote on oath or with a voting

tablet which he brings from a temple; so too the judge of dances and of all

music,  and  the  superintendents  and  umpires  of  gymnastic  and  equestrian

contests, and any matters in which, as far as men can judge, there is nothing

to be gained by a false oath; but all cases in which a denial confirmed by an

oath clearly results in a great advantage to the taker of the oath, shall be

decided without the oath of the parties to the suit, and the presiding judges

shall not permit either of them to use an oath for the sake of persuading, nor

to  call  down  curses  on  himself  and  his  race,  nor  to  use  unseemly

supplications  or  womanish  laments.  But  they  shall  ever  be  teaching  and

learning what is just in auspicious words; and he who does otherwise shall be

supposed to speak beside the point, and the judges shall again bring him back

to the question at issue. On the other hand, strangers in their dealings with

strangers shall as at present have power to give and receive oaths, for they

will  not  often  grow  old  in  the  city  or  leave  a  fry  of  young  ones  like

themselves to be the sons and heirs of the land.


As to the initiation of private suits, let the manner of deciding causes between

all citizens be the same as in cases in which any freeman is disobedient to the

state in minor matters, of which the penalty is not stripes, imprisonment, or

death. But as regards attendance at choruses or processions or other shows,

and as regards public services, whether the celebration of sacrifice in peace,

or the payment of contributions in war --in all these cases, first comes the

necessity of providing a remedy for the loss; and by those who will not obey,

there  shall  be  security  given  to  the  officers  whom  the  city  and  the  law

empower to exact the sum due; and if they forfeit their security, let the goods

which they have pledged be sold and the money given to the city; but if they

ought to pay a larger sum, the several magistrates shall impose upon the

disobedient a suitable penalty, and bring them before the court, until they are

willing to do what they are ordered.Now a state which makes money from the cultivation of the soil only, and has

no foreign trade, must consider what it will do about the emigration of its

own people to other countries, and the reception of strangers from elsewhere.

About these matters the legislator has to consider, and he will begin by trying

to persuade men as far as he can. The intercourse of cities with one another is

apt  to  create  a  confusion  of  manners;  strangers  are  always  suggesting

novelties  to  strangers.  When  states  are  well  governed  by  good  laws  the

mixture causes the greatest possible injury; but seeing that most cities are the

reverse  of  well-ordered,  the  confusion  which  arises  in  them  from  the

reception of strangers, and from the citizens themselves rushing off into other

cities, when any one either young or old desires to travel anywhere abroad at

whatever time, is of no consequence. On the other hand, the refusal of states

to receive others, and for their own citizens never to go to other places, is an

utter impossibility, and to the rest of the world is likely to appear ruthless and

uncivilised; it is a practice adopted by people who use harsh words, such as

xenelasia or banishment of strangers, and who have harsh and morose ways,

as men think. And to be thought or not to be thought well of by the rest of the

world is no light matter; for the many are not so far wrong in their judgment

of who are bad and who are good, as they are removed from the nature of

virtue in themselves. Even bad men have a divine instinct which guesses

rightly, and very many who are utterly depraved form correct notions and

judgments of the differences between the good and bad. And the generality of

cities are quite right in exhorting us to value a good reputation in the world,

for there is no truth greater and more important than this--that he who is

really  good  (I  am  speaking  of  the  men  who  would  be  perfect)  seeks  for

reputation with, but not without, the reality of goodness. And our Cretan

colony ought also to acquire the fairest and noblest reputation for virtue from

other men; and there is every reason to expect that, if the reality answers to

the idea, she will be one of the few well-ordered cities which the sun and the

other Gods behold. Wherefore, in the matter of journeys to other countries

and the reception of strangers, we enact as follows: In the first place, let no

one be allowed to go anywhere at all into a foreign country who is less than

forty years of age; and no one shall go in a private capacity, but only in some

public one, as a herald, or on an embassy, or on a sacred mission. Going

abroad on an expedition or in war is not to be included among travels of the

class authorised by the state. To Apollo at Delphi and to Zeus at Olympia and

to  Nemea  and  to  the  Isthmus,  citizens  should  be  sent  to  take  part  in  thesacrifices and games there dedicated to the Gods; and they should send as

many as possible, and the best and fairest that can be found, and they will

make the city renowned at holy meetings in time of peace, procuring a glory

which shall be the converse of that which is gained in war; and when they

come home they shall teach the young that the institutions of other states are

inferior to their own. And they shall send spectators of another sort, if they

have the consent of the guardians, being such citizens as desire to look a little

more at leisure at the doings of other men; and these no law shall hinder. For

a city which has no experience of good and bad men or intercourse with

them, can never be thoroughly and perfectly civilised, nor, again, can the

citizens of a city properly observe the laws by habit only, and without an

intelligent understanding of them. And there always are in the world a few

inspired men whose acquaintance is beyond price, and who spring up quite as

much  in  ill-ordered  as  in  well-ordered  cities.  These  are  they  whom  the

citizens of a well-ordered city should be ever seeking out, going forth over

sea and over land to find him who is incorruptible--that he may establish

more firmly institutions in his own state which are good already, and amend

what is deficient; for without this examination and enquiry a city will never

continue perfect any more than if the examination is ill-conducted.


CLEINIAS: How can we have an examination and also a good one?


ATHENIAN: In this way: In the first place, our spectator shall be of not less

than fifty years of age; he must be a man of reputation, especially in war, if

he is to exhibit to other cities a model of the guardians of the law, but when

he is more than sixty years of age he shall no longer continue in his office of

spectator. And when he has carried on his inspection during as many out of

the ten years of his office as he pleases, on his return home let him go to the

assembly of those who review the laws. This shall be a mixed body of young

and old men, who shall be required to meet daily between the hour of dawn

and the rising of the sun. They shall consist, in the first place, of the priests

who  have  obtained  the  rewards  of  virtue;  and,  in  the  second  place,  of

guardians of the law, the ten eldest being chosen; the general superintendent

of education shall also be a member, as well as the last appointed as those

who have been released from the office; and each of them shall take with him

as his companion a young man, whomsoever he chooses, between the ages of

thirty and forty. These shall be always holding conversation and discourseabout the laws of their own city or about any specially good ones which they

may hear to be existing elsewhere; also about kinds of knowledge which may

appear to be of use and will throw light upon the examination, or of which

the  want  will  make  the  subject  of  laws  dark  and  uncertain  to  them.  Any

knowledge of this sort which the elders approve, the younger men shall learn

with all diligence; and if any one of those who have been invited appear to be

unworthy, the whole assembly shall blame him who invited him. The rest of

the  city  shall  watch  over  those  among  the  young  men  who  distinguish

themselves, having an eye upon them, and especially honouring them if they

succeed, but dishonouring them above the rest if they turn out to be inferior.

This is the assembly to which he who has visited the institutions of other

men, on his return home shall straightway go, and if he have discovered any

one who has anything to say about the enactment of laws or education or

nurture, or if he have himself made any observations, let him communicate

his discoveries to the whole assembly. And if he be seen to have come home

neither better nor worse, let him be praised at any rate for his enthusiasm; and

if he be much better, let him be praised so much the more; and not only while

he lives but after his death let the assembly honour him with fitting honours.

But if on his return home he appear to have been corrupted, pretending to be

wise when he is not, let him hold no communication with any one, whether

young or old; and if he will hearken to the rulers, then he shall be permitted

to  live  as  a  private  individual;  but  if  he  will  not,  let  him  die,  if  he  be

convicted in a court of law of interfering about education and the laws. And if

he deserve to be indicted, and none of the magistrates indict him, let that be

counted as a disgrace to them when the rewards of virtue are decided.


Let such be the character of the person who goes abroad, and let him go

abroad under these conditions. In the next place, the stranger who comes

from abroad should be received in a friendly spirit. Now there are four kinds

of  strangers,  of  whom  we  must  make  some  mention--the  first  is  he  who

comes and stays throughout the summer; this class are like birds of passage,

taking wing in pursuit of commerce, and flying over the sea to other cities,

while the season lasts; he shall be received in market- places and harbours

and public buildings, near the city but outside, by those magistrates who are

appointed  to  superintend  these  matters;  and  they  shall  take  care  that  a

stranger, whoever he be, duly receives justice; but he shall not be allowed to

make  any  innovation.  They  shall  hold  the  intercourse  with  him  which  isnecessary, and this shall be as little as possible. The second kind is just a

spectator who comes to see with his eyes and hear with his ears the festivals

of the Muses; such ought to have entertainment provided them at the temples

by hospitable persons, and the priests and ministers of the temples should see

and attend to them. But they should not remain more than a reasonable time;

let them see and hear that for the sake of which they came, and then go away,

neither having suffered nor done any harm. The priests shall be their judges,

if any of them receive or do any wrong up to the sum of fifty drachmae, but if

any greater charge be brought, in such cases the suit shall come before the

wardens of the agora. The third kind of stranger is he who comes on some

public business from another land, and is to be received with public honours.

He is to be received only by the generals and commanders of horse and foot,

and the host by whom he is entertained, in conjunction with the Prytanes,

shall have the sole charge of what concerns him. There is a fourth class of

persons answering to our spectators, who come from another land to look at

ours. In the first place, such visits will be rare, and the visitor should be at

least fifty years of age; he may possibly be wanting to see something that is

rich and rare in other states, or himself to show something in like manner to

another city. Let such an one, then, go unbidden to the doors of the wise and

rich, being one of them himself: let him go, for example, to the house of the

superintendent of education, confident that he is a fitting guest of such a host,

or let him go to the house of some of those who have gained the prize of

virtue  and  hold  discourse  with  them,  both  learning  from  them,  and  also

teaching them; and when he has seen and heard all, he shall depart, as a

friend  taking  leave  of  friends,  and  be  honoured  by  them  with  gifts  and

suitable tributes of respect. These are the customs, according to which our

city should receive all strangers of either sex who come from other countries,

and should send forth her own citizens, showing respect to Zeus, the God of

hospitality, not forbidding strangers at meals and sacrifices, as is the manner

which prevails among the children of the Nile, nor driving them away by

savage proclamations.


When a man becomes surety, let him give the security in a distinct form,

acknowledging  the  whole  transaction  in  a  written  document,  and  in  the

presence of not less than three witnesses if the sum be under a thousand

drachmae, and of not less than five witnesses if the sum be above a thousand

drachmae. The agent of a dishonest or untrustworthy seller shall himself beresponsible;  both  the  agent  and  the  principal  shall  be  equally  liable.  If  a

person wishes to find anything in the house of another, he shall enter naked,

or wearing only a short tunic and without a girdle, having first taken an oath

by the customary Gods that he expects to find it there; he shall then make his

search, and the other shall throw open his house and allow him to search

things both sealed and unsealed. And if a person will not allow the searcher

to make his search, he who is prevented shall go to law with him, estimating

the  value  of  the  goods  after  which  he  is  searching,  and  if  the  other  be

convicted he shall pay twice the value of the article. If the master be absent

from  home,  the  dwellers  in  the  house  shall  let  him  search  the  unsealed

property, and on the sealed property the searcher shall set another seal, and

shall appoint any one whom he likes to guard them during five days; and if

the master of the house be absent during a longer time, he shall take with him

the wardens of the city, and so make his search, opening the sealed property

as well as the unsealed, and then, together with the members of the family

and the wardens of the city, he shall seal them up again as they were before.

There shall be a limit of time in the case of disputed things, and he who has

had possession of them during a certain time shall no longer be liable to be

disturbed. As to houses and lands there can be no dispute in this state of ours;

but if a man has any other possessions which he has used and openly shown

in the city and in the agora and in the temples, and no one has put in a claim

to them, and some one says that he was looking for them during this time,

and  the  possessor  is  proved  to  have  made  no  concealment,  if  they  have

continued for a year, the one having the goods and the other looking for

them, the claim of the seeker shall not be allowed after the expiration of the

year; or if he does not use or show the lost property in the market or in the

city, but only in the country, and no one offers himself as the owner during

five years, at the expiration of the five years the claim shall be barred for ever

after; or if he uses them in the city but within the house, then the appointed

time of claiming the goods shall be three years, or ten years if he has them in

the country in private. And if he has them in another land, there shall be no

limit of time or prescription, but whenever the owner finds them he may

claim them.


If any one prevents another by force from being present at a trial, whether a

principal party or his witnesses; if the person prevented be a slave, whether

his own or belonging to another, the suit shall be incomplete and invalid; butif he who is prevented be a freeman, besides the suit being incomplete, the

other who has prevented him shall be imprisoned for a year, and shall be

prosecuted for kidnapping by any one who pleases. And if any one hinders by

force a rival competitor in gymnastic or music, or any other sort of contest,

from  being  present  at  the  contest,  let  him  who  has  a  mind  inform  the

presiding judges, and they shall liberate him who is desirous of competing;

and if they are not able, and he who hinders the other from competing wins

the prize, then they shall give the prize of victory to him who is prevented,

and inscribe him as the conqueror in any temples which he pleases; and he

who  hinders  the  other  shall  not  be  permitted  to  make  any  offering  or

inscription having reference to that contest, and in any case he shall be liable

for damages, whether he be defeated or whether he conquer.


If  any  one  knowingly  receives  anything  which  has  been  stolen,  he  shall

undergo the same punishment as the thief, and if a man receives an exile he

shall be punished with death. Every man should regard the friend and enemy

of the state as his own friend and enemy; and if any one makes peace or war

with another on his own account, and without the authority of the state, he,

like the receiver of the exile, shall undergo the penalty of death. And if any

fraction of the city declare war or peace against any, the generals shall indict

the authors of this proceeding, and if they are convicted death shall be the

penalty. Those who serve their country ought to serve without receiving gifts,

and  there  ought  to  be  no  excusing  or  approving  the  saying,  'Men  should

receive gifts as the reward of good, but not of evil deeds'; for to know which

we are doing, and to stand fast by our knowledge, is no easy matter. The

safest course is to obey the law which says, 'Do no service for a bribe,' and let

him who disobeys, if he be convicted, simply die. With a view to taxation, for

various reasons, every man ought to have had his property valued: and the

tribesmen  should  likewise  bring  a  register  of  the  yearly  produce  to  the

wardens of the country, that in this way there may be two valuations; and the

public officers may use annually whichever on consideration they deem the

best, whether they prefer to take a certain portion of the whole value, or of

the annual revenue, after subtracting what is paid to the common tables.


Touching offerings to the Gods, a moderate man should observe moderation

in what he offers. Now the land and the hearth of the house of all men is

sacred to all Gods; wherefore let no man dedicate them a second time to theGods. Gold and silver, whether possessed by private persons or in temples,

are in other cities provocative of envy, and ivory, the product of a dead body,

is not a proper offering; brass and iron, again, are instruments of war; but of

wood let a man bring what offering he likes, provided it be a single block,

and in like manner of stone, to the public temples; of woven work let him not

offer  more  than  one  woman  can  execute  in  a  month.  White  is  a  colour

suitable to the Gods, especially in woven works, but dyes should only be used

for the adornments of war. The most divine of gifts are birds and images, and

they should be such as one painter can execute in a single day. And let all

other offerings follow a similar rule.


Now that the whole city has been divided into parts of which the nature and

number have been described, and laws have been given about all the most

important contracts as far as this was possible, the next thing will be to have

justice done. The first of the courts shall consist of elected judges, who shall

be chosen by the plaintiff and the defendant in common: these shall be called

arbiters rather than judges. And in the second court there shall be judges of

the villages and tribes corresponding to the twelvefold division of the land,

and before these the litigants shall go to contend for greater damages, if the

suit be not decided before the first judges; the defendant, if he be defeated the

second  time,  shall  pay  a  fifth  more  than  the  damages  mentioned  in  the

indictment; and if he find fault with his judges and would try a third time, let

him carry the suit before the select judges, and if he be again defeated, let

him pay the whole of the damages and half as much again. And the plaintiff,

if when defeated before the first judges he persist in going on to the second,

shall if he wins receive in addition to the damages a fifth part more, and if

defeated he shall pay a like sum; but if he is not satisfied with the previous

decision, and will insist on proceeding to a third court, then if he win he shall

receive from the defendant the amount of the damages and, as I said before,

half as much again, and the plaintiff, if he lose, shall pay half of the damages

claimed. Now the assignment by lot of judges to courts and the completion of

the  number  of  them,  and  the  appointment  of  servants  to  the  different

magistrates, and the times at which the several causes should be heard, and

the votings and delays, and all the things that necessarily concern suits, and

the order of causes, and the time in which answers have to be put in and

parties are to appear--of these and other things akin to these we have indeed

already spoken, but there is no harm in repeating what is right twice or thrice:All lesser and easier matters which the elder legislator has omitted may be

supplied by the younger one. Private courts will be sufficiently regulated in

this way, and the public and state courts, and those which the magistrates

must use in the administration of their several offices, exist in many other

states. Many very respectable institutions of this sort have been framed by

good men, and from them the guardians of the law may by reflection derive

what is necessary for the order of our new state, considering and correcting

them, and bringing them to the test of experience, until every detail appears

to be satisfactorily determined; and then putting the final seal upon them, and

making them irreversible, they shall use them for ever afterwards. As to what

relates to the silence of judges and the abstinence from words of evil omen

and the reverse, and the different notions of the just and good and honourable

which exist in our own as compared with other states, they have been partly

mentioned already, and another part of them will be mentioned hereafter as

we draw near the end. To all these matters he who would be an equal judge

shall justly look, and he shall possess writings about them that he may learn

them. For of all kinds of knowledge the knowledge of good laws has the

greatest  power  of  improving  the  learner;  otherwise  there  would  be  no

meaning in the divine and admirable law possessing a name akin to mind

(nous, nomos). And of all other words, such as the praises and censures of

individuals which occur in poetry and also in prose, whether written down or

uttered in daily conversation, whether men dispute about them in the spirit of

contention or weakly assent to them, as is often the case--of all these the one

sure test is the writings of the legislator, which the righteous judge ought to

have in his mind as the antidote of all other words, and thus make himself

and  the  city  stand  upright,  procuring  for  the  good  the  continuance  and

increase of justice, and for the bad, on the other hand, a conversion from

ignorance and intemperance, and in general from all unrighteousness, as far

as their evil minds can be healed, but to those whose web of life is in reality

finished, giving death, which is the only remedy for souls in their condition,

as I may say truly again and again. And such judges and chiefs of judges will

be worthy of receiving praise from the whole city.


When the suits of the year are completed the following laws shall regulate

their execution: In the first place, the judge shall assign to the party who wins

the suit the whole property of him who loses, with the exception of mere

necessaries,  and  the  assignment  shall  be  made  through  the  heraldimmediately after each decision in the hearing of the judges; and when the

month arrives following the month in which the courts are sitting, (unless the

gainer of the suit has been previously satisfied) the court shall follow up the

case, and hand over to the winner the goods of the loser; but if they find that

he has not the means of paying, and the sum deficient is not less than a

drachma, the insolvent person shall not have any right of going to law with

any other man until he have satisfied the debt of the winning party; but other

persons shall still have the right of bringing suits against him. And if any one

after  he  is  condemned  refuses  to  acknowledge  the  authority  which

condemned him, let the magistrates who are thus deprived of their authority

bring him before the court of the guardians of the law, and if he be cast, let

him be punished with death, as a subverter of the whole state and of the laws.


Thus a man is born and brought up, and after this manner he begets and

brings up his own children, and has his share of dealings with other men, and

suffers if he has done wrong to any one, and receives satisfaction if he has

been wronged, and so at length in due time he grows old under the protection

of the laws, and his end comes in the order of nature. Concerning the dead of

either  sex,  the  religious  ceremonies  which  may  fittingly  be  performed,

whether appertaining to the Gods of the under- world or of this, shall be

decided by the interpreters with absolute authority. Their sepulchres are not

to be in places which are fit for cultivation, and there shall be no monuments

in such spots, either large or small, but they shall occupy that part of the

country which is naturally adapted for receiving and concealing the bodies of

the dead with as little hurt as possible to the living. No man, living or dead,

shall deprive the living of the sustenance which the earth, their foster-parent,

is naturally inclined to provide for them. And let not the mound be piled

higher than would be the work of five men completed in five days; nor shall

the stone which is placed over the spot be larger than would be sufficient to

receive the praises of the dead included in four heroic lines. Nor shall the

laying  out  of  the  dead  in  the  house  continue  for  a  longer  time  than  is

sufficient to distinguish between him who is in a trance only and him who is

really dead, and speaking generally, the third day after death will be a fair

time for carrying out the body to the sepulchre. Now we must believe the

legislator when he tells us that the soul is in all respects superior to the body,

and that even in life what makes each one of us to be what we are is only the

soul; and that the body follows us about in the likeness of each of us, andtherefore, when we are dead, the bodies of the dead are quite rightly said to

be our shades or images; for the true and immortal being of each one of us

which is called the soul goes on her way to other Gods, before them to give

an account-- which is an inspiring hope to the good, but very terrible to the

bad, as the laws of our fathers tell us; and they also say that not much can be

done in the way of helping a man after he is dead. But the living--he should

be helped by all his kindred, that while in life he may be the holiest and

justest of men, and after death may have no great sins to be punished in the

world below. If this be true, a man ought not to waste his substance under the

idea  that  all  this  lifeless  mass  of  flesh  which  is  in  process  of  burial  is

connected  with  him;  he  should  consider  that  the  son,  or  brother,  or  the

beloved one, whoever he may be, whom he thinks he is laying in the earth,

has gone away to complete and fulfil his own destiny, and that his duty is

rightly to order the present, and to spend moderately on the lifeless altar of

the Gods below. But the legislator does not intend moderation to be taken in

the sense of meanness. Let the law, then, be as follows: The expenditure on

the entire funeral of him who is of the highest class, shall not exceed five

minae; and for him who is of the second class, three minae, and for him who

is of the third class, two minae, and for him who is of the fourth class, one

mina, will be a fair limit of expense. The guardians of the law ought to take

especial care of the different ages of life, whether childhood, or manhood, or

any other age. And at the end of all, let there be some one guardian of the law

presiding, who shall be chosen by the friends of the deceased to superintend,

and  let  it  be  glory  to  him  to  manage  with  fairness  and  moderation  what

relates to the dead, and a discredit to him if they are not well managed. Let

the laying out and other ceremonies be in accordance with custom, but to the

statesman  who  adopts  custom  as  his  law  we  must  give  way  in  certain

particulars. It would be monstrous for example that he should command any

man to weep or abstain from weeping over the dead; but he may forbid cries

of lamentation, and not allow the voice of the mourner to be heard outside the

house; also, he may forbid the bringing of the dead body into the open streets,

or the processions of mourners in the streets, and may require that before

daybreak they should be outside the city. Let these, then, be our laws relating

to such matters, and let him who obeys be free from penalty; but he who

disobeys even a single guardian of the law shall be punished by them all with

a fitting penalty. Other modes of burial, or again the denial of burial, which is

to be refused in the case of robbers of temples and parricides and the like,have been devised and are embodied in the preceding laws, so that now our

work of legislation is pretty nearly at an end; but in all cases the end does not

consist in doing something or acquiring something or establishing something-

-the end will be attained and finally accomplished, when we have provided

for  the  perfect  and  lasting  continuance  of  our  institutions;  until  then  our

creation is incomplete.


CLEINIAS: That is very good, Stranger; but I wish you would tell me more

clearly what you mean.


ATHENIAN: O Cleinias, many things of old time were well said and sung;

and the saying about the Fates was one of them.


CLEINIAS: What is it?


ATHENIAN: The saying that Lachesis or the giver of the lots is the first of

them, and that Clotho or the spinster is the second of them, and that Atropos

or the unchanging one is the third of them; and that she is the preserver of the

things which we have spoken, and which have been compared in a figure to

things  woven  by  fire,  they  both  (i.e.  Atropos  and  the  fire)  producing  the

quality of unchangeableness. I am speaking of the things which in a state and

government give not only health and salvation to the body, but law, or rather

preservation of the law, in the soul; and, if I am not mistaken, this seems to

be still wanting in our laws: we have still to see how we can implant in them

this irreversible nature.


CLEINIAS: It will be no small matter if we can only discover how such a

nature can be implanted in anything.


ATHENIAN: But it certainly can be; so much I clearly see.


CLEINIAS: Then let us not think of desisting until we have imparted this

quality to our laws; for it is ridiculous, after a great deal of labour has been

spent, to place a thing at last on an insecure foundation.


ATHENIAN: I approve of your suggestion, and am quite of the same mind

with you.CLEINIAS:  Very  good:  And  now  what,  according  to  you,  is  to  be  the

salvation of our government and of our laws, and how is it to be effected?


ATHENIAN: Were we not saying that there must be in our city a council

which was to be of this sort: The ten oldest guardians of the law, and all those

who have obtained prizes of virtue, were to meet in the same assembly, and

the council was also to include those who had visited foreign countries in the

hope of hearing something that might be of use in the preservation of the

laws, and who, having come safely home, and having been tested in these

same  matters,  had  proved  themselves  to  be  worthy  to  take  part  in  the

assembly--each of the members was to select some young man of not less

than thirty years of age, he himself judging in the first instance whether the

young man was worthy by nature and education, and then suggesting him to

the others, and if he seemed to them also to be worthy they were to adopt

him; but if not, the decision at which they arrived was to be kept a secret

from the citizens at large, and, more especially, from the rejected candidate.

The  meeting  of  the  council  was  to  be  held  early  in  the  morning,  when

everybody was most at leisure from all other business, whether public or

private--was not something of this sort said by us before?


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: Then, returning to the council, I would say further, that if we

let it down to be the anchor of the state, our city, having everything which is

suitable to her, will preserve all that we wish to preserve.


CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN: Now is the time for me to speak the truth in all earnestness.


CLEINIAS: Well said, and I hope that you will fulfil your intention.


ATHENIAN: Know, Cleinias, that everything, in all that it does, has a natural

saviour, as of an animal the soul and the head are the chief saviours.


CLEINIAS: Once more, what do you mean?ATHENIAN: The well-being of those two is obviously the preservation of

every living thing.


CLEINIAS: How is that?


ATHENIAN: The soul, besides other things, contains mind, and the head,

besides other things, contains sight and hearing; and the mind, mingling with

the noblest of the senses, and becoming one with them, may be truly called

the salvation of all.


CLEINIAS: Yes, quite so.


ATHENIAN: Yes, indeed; but with what is that intellect concerned which,

mingling with the senses, is the salvation of ships in storms as well as in fair

weather? In a ship, when the pilot and the sailors unite their perceptions with

the piloting mind, do they not save both themselves and their craft?


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: We do not want many illustrations about such matters: What

aim would the general of an army, or what aim would a physician propose to

himself, if he were seeking to attain salvation?


CLEINIAS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: Does not the general aim at victory and superiority in war, and

do not the physician and his assistants aim at producing health in the body?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And a physician who is ignorant about the body, that is to say,

who knows not that which we just now called health, or a general who knows

not victory, or any others who are ignorant of the particulars of the arts which

we  mentioned,  cannot  be  said  to  have  understanding  about  any  of  these

matters.


CLEINIAS: They cannot.ATHENIAN: And what would you say of the state? If a person proves to be

ignorant of the aim to which the statesman should look, ought he, in the first

place, to be called a ruler at all; and further, will he ever be able to preserve

that of which he does not even know the aim?


CLEINIAS: Impossible.


ATHENIAN: And therefore, if our settlement of the country is to be perfect,

we ought to have some institution, which, as I was saying, will tell what is

the aim of the state, and will inform us how we are to attain this, and what

law or what man will advise us to that end. Any state which has no such

institution is likely to be devoid of mind and sense, and in all her actions will

proceed by mere chance.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: In which, then, of the parts or institutions of the state is any

such guardian power to be found? Can we say?


CLEINIAS: I am not quite certain, Stranger; but I have a suspicion that you

are referring to the assembly which you just now said was to meet at night.


ATHENIAN: You understand me perfectly, Cleinias; and we must assume,

as  the  argument  implies,  that  this  council  possesses  all  virtue;  and  the

beginning of virtue is not to make mistakes by guessing many things, but to

look steadily at one thing, and on this to fix all our aims.


CLEINIAS: Quite true.


ATHENIAN: Then now we shall see why there is nothing wonderful in states

going astray--the reason is that their legislators have such different aims; nor

is there anything wonderful in some laying down as their rule of justice, that

certain individuals should bear rule in the state, whether they be good or bad,

and others that the citizens should be rich, not caring whether they are the

slaves  of  other  men  or  not.  The  tendency  of  others,  again,  is  towards

freedom; and some legislate with a view to two things at once--they want to

be at the same time free and the lords of other states; but the wisest men, asthey deem themselves to be, look to all these and similar aims, and there is no

one of them which they exclusively honour, and to which they would have all

things look.


CLEINIAS:  Then,  Stranger,  our  former  assertion  will  hold;  for  we  were

saying that laws generally should look to one thing only; and this, as we

admitted, was rightly said to be virtue.


ATHENIAN: Yes.


CLEINIAS: And we said that virtue was of four kinds?


ATHENIAN: Quite true.


CLEINIAS: And that mind was the leader of the four, and that to her the

three other virtues and all other things ought to have regard?


ATHENIAN:  You  follow  me  capitally,  Cleinias,  and  I  would  ask  you  to

follow me to the end, for we have already said that the mind of the pilot, the

mind of the physician and of the general look to that one thing to which they

ought to look; and now we may turn to mind political, of which, as of a

human creature, we will ask a question: O wonderful being, and to what are

you looking? The physician is able to tell his single aim in life, but you, the

superior, as you declare yourself to be, of all intelligent beings, when you are

asked are not able to tell. Can you, Megillus, and you, Cleinias, say distinctly

what is the aim of mind political, in return for the many explanations of

things which I have given you?


CLEINIAS: We cannot, Stranger.


ATHENIAN: Well, but ought we not to desire to see it, and to see where it is

to be found?


CLEINIAS: For example, where?


ATHENIAN: For example, we were saying that there are four kinds of virtue,

and as there are four of them, each of them must be one.CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN:  And  further,  all  four  of  them  we  call  one;  for  we  say  that

courage is virtue, and that prudence is virtue, and the same of the two others,

as if they were in reality not many but one, that is, virtue.


CLEINIAS: Quite so.


ATHENIAN: There is no difficulty in seeing in what way the two differ from

one another, and have received two names, and so of the rest. But there is

more difficulty in explaining why we call these two and the rest of them by

the single name of virtue.


CLEINIAS: How do you mean?


ATHENIAN: I have no difficulty in explaining what I mean. Let us distribute

the subject into questions and answers.


CLEINIAS: Once more, what do you mean?


ATHENIAN: Ask me what is that one thing which I call virtue, and then

again speak of as two, one part being courage and the other wisdom. I will

tell you how that occurs: One of them has to do with fear; in this the beasts

also participate, and quite young children--I mean courage; for a courageous

temper is a gift of nature and not of reason. But without reason there never

has been, or is, or will be a wise and understanding soul; it is of a different

nature.


CLEINIAS: That is true.


ATHENIAN: I have now told you in what way the two are different, and do

you in return tell me in what way they are one and the same. Suppose that I

ask you in what way the four are one, and when you have answered me, you

will have a right to ask of me in return in what way they are four; and then let

us proceed to enquire whether in the case of things which have a name and

also a definition to them, true knowledge consists in knowing the name only

and not the definition. Can he who is good for anything be ignorant of all thiswithout discredit where great and glorious truths are concerned?


CLEINIAS: I suppose not.


ATHENIAN: And is there anything greater to the legislator and the guardian

of the law, and to him who thinks that he excels all other men in virtue, and

has won the palm of excellence, than these very qualities of which we are

now speaking--courage, temperance, wisdom, justice?


CLEINIAS: How can there be anything greater?


ATHENIAN: And ought not the interpreters, the teachers, the lawgivers, the

guardians of the other citizens, to excel the rest of mankind, and perfectly to

show him who desires to learn and know or whose evil actions require to be

punished and reproved, what is the nature of virtue and vice? Or shall some

poet  who  has  found  his  way  into  the  city,  or  some  chance  person  who

pretends to be an instructor of youth, show himself to be better than him who

has  won  the  prize  for  every  virtue?  And  can  we  wonder  that  when  the

guardians  are  not  adequate  in  speech  or  action,  and  have  no  adequate

knowledge of virtue, the city being unguarded should experience the common

fate of cities in our day?


CLEINIAS: Wonder! no.


ATHENIAN:  Well,  then,  must  we  do  as  we  said?  Or  can  we  give  our

guardians a more precise knowledge of virtue in speech and action than the

many have? or is there any way in which our city can be made to resemble

the head and senses of rational beings because possessing such a guardian

power?


CLEINIAS: What, Stranger, is the drift of your comparison?


ATHENIAN: Do we not see that the city is the trunk, and are not the younger

guardians, who are chosen for their natural gifts, placed in the head of the

state, having their souls all full of eyes, with which they look about the whole

city? They keep watch and hand over their perceptions to the memory, and

inform  the  elders  of  all  that  happens  in  the  city;  and  those  whom  wecompared to the mind, because they have many wise thoughts-- that is to say,

the  old  men--take  counsel,  and  making  use  of  the  younger  men  as  their

ministers, and advising with them--in this way both together truly preserve

the whole state: Shall this or some other be the order of our state? Are all our

citizens to be equal in acquirements, or shall there be special persons among

them who have received a more careful training and education?


CLEINIAS: That they should be equal, my good sir, is impossible.


ATHENIAN: Then we ought to proceed to some more exact training than

any which has preceded.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And must not that of which we are in need be the one to which

we were just now alluding?


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: Did we not say that the workman or guardian, if he be perfect

in every respect, ought not only to be able to see the many aims, but he

should press onward to the one? This he should know, and knowing, order all

things with a view to it.


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: And can any one have a more exact way of considering or

contemplating anything, than the being able to look at one idea gathered from

many different things?


CLEINIAS: Perhaps not.


ATHENIAN: Not 'Perhaps not,' but 'Certainly not,' my good sir, is the right

answer. There never has been a truer method than this discovered by any

man.


CLEINIAS:  I  bow  to  your  authority,  Stranger;  let  us  proceed  in  the  way

which you propose.ATHENIAN: Then, as would appear, we must compel the guardians of our

divine state to perceive, in the first place, what that principle is which is the

same in all the four--the same, as we affirm, in courage and in temperance,

and in justice and in prudence, and which, being one, we call as we ought, by

the single name of virtue. To this, my friends, we will, if you please, hold

fast, and not let go until we have sufficiently explained what that is to which

we are to look, whether to be regarded as one, or as a whole, or as both, or in

whatever way. Are we likely ever to be in a virtuous condition, if we cannot

tell whether virtue is many, or four, or one? Certainly, if we take counsel

among ourselves, we shall in some way contrive that this principle has a

place amongst us; but if you have made up your mind that we should let the

matter alone, we will.


CLEINIAS: We must not, Stranger, by the God of strangers I swear that we

must not, for in our opinion you speak most truly; but we should like to know

how you will accomplish your purpose.


ATHENIAN: Wait a little before you ask; and let us, first of all, be quite

agreed with one another that the purpose has to be accomplished.


CLEINIAS: Certainly, it ought to be, if it can be.


ATHENIAN: Well, and about the good and the honourable, are we to take

the same view? Are our guardians only to know that each of them is many, or

also how and in what way they are one?


CLEINIAS: They must consider also in what sense they are one.


ATHENIAN: And are they to consider only, and to be unable to set forth

what they think?


CLEINIAS: Certainly not; that would be the state of a slave.


ATHENIAN: And may not the same be said of all good things--that the true

guardians of the laws ought to know the truth about them, and to be able to

interpret them in words, and carry them out in action, judging of what is and

of what is not well, according to nature?CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Is not the knowledge of the Gods which we have set forth with

so much zeal one of the noblest sorts of knowledge--to know that they are,

and know how great is their power, as far as in man lies? We do indeed

excuse the mass of the citizens, who only follow the voice of the laws, but we

refuse to admit as guardians any who do not labour to obtain every possible

evidence  that  there  is  respecting  the  Gods;  our  city  is  forbidden  and  not

allowed to choose as a guardian of the law, or to place in the select order of

virtue, him who is not an inspired man, and has not laboured at these things.


CLEINIAS: It is certainly just, as you say, that he who is indolent about such

matters or incapable should be rejected, and that things honourable should be

put away from him.


ATHENIAN: Are we assured that there are two things which lead men to

believe in the Gods, as we have already stated?


CLEINIAS: What are they?


ATHENIAN: One is the argument about the soul, which has been already

mentioned--that it is the eldest and most divine of all things, to which motion

attaining  generation  gives  perpetual  existence;  the  other  was  an  argument

from the order of the motion of the stars, and of all things under the dominion

of the mind which ordered the universe. If a man look upon the world not

lightly  or  ignorantly,  there  was  never  any  one  so  godless  who  did  not

experience an effect opposite to that which the many imagine. For they think

that  those  who  handle  these  matters  by  the  help  of  astronomy,  and  the

accompanying arts of demonstration, may become godless, because they see,

as far as they can see, things happening by necessity, and not by an intelligent

will accomplishing good.


CLEINIAS: But what is the fact?


ATHENIAN: Just the opposite, as I said, of the opinion which once prevailed

among men, that the sun and stars are without soul. Even in those days men

wondered  about  them,  and  that  which  is  now  ascertained  was  thenconjectured by some who had a more exact knowledge of them--that if they

had been things without soul, and had no mind, they could never have moved

with numerical exactness so wonderful; and even at that time some ventured

to hazard the conjecture that mind was the orderer of the universe. But these

same persons again mistaking the nature of the soul, which they conceived to

be younger and not older than the body, once more overturned the world, or

rather, I should say, themselves; for the bodies which they saw moving in

heaven all appeared to be full of stones, and earth, and many other lifeless

substances, and to these they assigned the causes of all things. Such studies

gave rise to much atheism and perplexity, and the poets took occasion to be

abusive--comparing the philosophers to she-dogs uttering vain howlings, and

talking  other  nonsense  of  the  same  sort.  But  now,  as  I  said,  the  case  is

reversed.


CLEINIAS: How so?


ATHENIAN: No man can be a true worshipper of the Gods who does not

know these two principles--that the soul is the eldest of all things which are

born, and is immortal and rules over all bodies; moreover, as I have now said

several times, he who has not contemplated the mind of nature which is said

to exist in the stars, and gone through the previous training, and seen the

connexion of music with these things, and harmonized them all with laws and

institutions, is not able to give a reason of such things as have a reason. And

he  who  is  unable  to  acquire  this  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  virtues  of  a

citizen, can hardly be a good ruler of a whole state; but he should be the

subordinate of other rulers. Wherefore, Cleinias and Megillus, let us consider

whether we may not add to all the other laws which we have discussed this

further one--that the nocturnal assembly of the magistrates, which has also

shared in the whole scheme of education proposed by us, shall be a guard set

according to law for the salvation of the state. Shall we propose this?


CLEINIAS: Certainly, my good friend, we will if the thing is in any degree

possible.


ATHENIAN: Let us make a common effort to gain such an object; for I too

will gladly share in the attempt. Of these matters I have had much experience,

and have often considered them, and I dare say that I shall be able to findothers who will also help.


CLEINIAS: I agree, Stranger, that we should proceed along the road in which

God  is  guiding  us;  and  how  we  can  proceed  rightly  has  now  to  be

investigated and explained.


ATHENIAN:  O  Megillus  and  Cleinias,  about  these  matters  we  cannot

legislate further until the council is constituted; when that is done, then we

will  determine  what  authority  they  shall  have  of  their  own;  but  the

explanation of how this is all to be ordered would only be given rightly in a

long discourse.


CLEINIAS: What do you mean, and what new thing is this?


ATHENIAN: In the first place, a list would have to be made out of those who

by their ages and studies and dispositions and habits are well fitted for the

duty of a guardian. In the next place, it will not be easy for them to discover

themselves what they ought to learn, or become the disciple of one who has

already made the discovery. Furthermore, to write down the times at which,

and  during  which,  they  ought  to  receive  the  several  kinds  of  instruction,

would  be  a  vain  thing;  for  the  learners  themselves  do  not  know  what  is

learned to advantage until the knowledge which is the result of learning has

found a place in the soul of each. And so these details, although they could

not be truly said to be secret, might be said to be incapable of being stated

beforehand, because when stated they would have no meaning.


CLEINIAS: What then are we to do, Stranger, under these circumstances?


ATHENIAN: As the proverb says, the answer is no secret, but open to all of

us: We must risk the whole on the chance of throwing, as they say, thrice six

or thrice ace, and I am willing to share with you the danger by stating and

explaining  to  you  my  views  about  education  and  nurture,  which  is  the

question coming to the surface again. The danger is not a slight or ordinary

one, and I would advise you, Cleinias, in particular, to see to the matter; for if

you order rightly the city of the Magnetes, or whatever name God may give

it, you will obtain the greatest glory; or at any rate you will be thought the

most courageous of men in the estimation of posterity. Dear companions, ifthis our divine assembly can only be established, to them we will hand over

the city; none of the present company of legislators, as I may call them,

would  hesitate  about  that.  And  the  state  will  be  perfected  and  become  a

waking reality, which a little while ago we attempted to create as a dream and

in idea only, mingling together reason and mind in one image, in the hope

that  our  citizens  might  be  duly  mingled  and  rightly  educated;  and  being

educated,  and  dwelling  in  the  citadel  of  the  land,  might  become  perfect

guardians, such as we have never seen in all our previous life, by reason of

the saving virtue which is in them.


MEGILLUS: Dear Cleinias, after all that has been said, either we must detain

the Stranger, and by supplications and in all manner of ways make him share

in the foundation of the city, or we must give up the undertaking.


CLEINIAS: Very true, Megillus; and you must join with me in detaining

him.


MEGILLUS: I will.


THE END                    Lesser Hippias Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    Beginning of Lesser HippiasAPPENDIX I. (Lesser Hippias)


  It seems impossible to separate by any exact line the genuine writings of

Plato from the spurious. The only external evidence to them which is of much

value is that of Aristotle; for the Alexandrian catalogues of a century later

include manifest forgeries. Even the value of the Aristotelian authority is a

good deal impaired by the uncertainty concerning the date and authorship of

the  writings  which  are  ascribed  to  him.  And  several  of  the  citations  of

Aristotle omit the name of Plato, and some of them omit the name of the

dialogue from which they are taken. Prior, however, to the enquiry about the

writings of a particular author, general considerations which equally affect all

evidence to the genuineness of ancient writings are the following: Shorter

works are more likely to have been forged, or to have received an erroneous

designation,  than  longer  ones;  and  some  kinds  of  composition,  such  as

epistles  or  panegyrical  orations,  are  more  liable  to  suspicion  than  others;

those, again, which have a taste of sophistry in them, or the ring of a later

age, or the slighter character of a rhetorical exercise, or in which a motive or

some affinity to spurious writings can be detected, or which seem to have

originated in a name or statement really occurring in some classical author,

are also of doubtful credit; while there is no instance of any ancient writing

proved to be a forgery, which combines excellence with length. A really great

and original writer would have no object in fathering his works on Plato; and

to the forger or imitator, the 'literary hack' of Alexandria and Athens, the

Gods did not grant originality or genius. Further, in attempting to balance the

evidence for and against a Platonic dialogue, we must not forget that the form

of  the  Platonic  writing  was  common  to  several  of  his  contemporaries.

Aeschines, Euclid, Phaedo, Antisthenes, and in the next generation Aristotle,

are all said to have composed dialogues; and mistakes of names are very

likely to have occurred. Greek literature in the third century before Christ was

almost  as  voluminous  as  our  own,  and  without  the  safeguards  of  regular

publication, or printing, or binding, or even of distinct titles. An unknown

writing  was  naturally  attributed  to  a  known  writer  whose  works  bore  the

same character; and the name once appended easily obtained authority. A

tendency may also be observed to blend the works and opinions of the master

with those of his scholars. To a later Platonist, the difference between Platoand his imitators was not so perceptible as to ourselves. The Memorabilia of

Xenophon and the Dialogues of Plato are but a part of a considerable Socratic

literature  which  has  passed  away.  And  we  must  consider  how  we  should

regard the question of the genuineness of a particular writing, if this lost

literature had been preserved to us.


  These  considerations  lead  us  to  adopt  the  following  criteria  of

genuineness: (1) That is most certainly Plato's which Aristotle attributes to

him by name, which (2) is of considerable length, of (3) great excellence, and

also (4) in harmony with the general spirit of the Platonic writings. But the

testimony of Aristotle cannot always be distinguished from that of a later age

(see above); and has various degrees of importance. Those writings which he

cites without mentioning Plato, under their own names, e.g. the Hippias, the

Funeral Oration, the Phaedo, etc., have an inferior degree of evidence in their

favour. They may have been supposed by him to be the writings of another,

although  in  the  case  of  really  great  works,  e.g.  the  Phaedo,  this  is  not

credible; those again which are quoted but not named, are still more defective

in their external credentials. There may be also a possibility that Aristotle was

mistaken, or may have confused the master and his scholars in the case of a

short writing; but this is inconceivable about a more important work, e.g. the

Laws, especially when we remember that he was living at Athens, and a

frequenter of the groves of the Academy, during the last twenty years of

Plato's life. Nor must we forget that in all his numerous citations from the

Platonic  writings  he  never  attributes  any  passage  found  in  the  extant

dialogues to any one but Plato. And lastly, we may remark that one or two

great writings, such as the Parmenides and the Politicus, which are wholly

devoid of Aristotelian (1) credentials may be fairly attributed to Plato, on the

ground of (2) length, (3) excellence, and (4) accordance with the general

spirit  of  his  writings.  Indeed  the  greater  part  of  the  evidence  for  the

genuineness of ancient Greek authors may be summed up under two heads

only:  (1)  excellence;  and  (2)  uniformity  of  tradition--a  kind  of  evidence,

which though in many cases sufficient, is of inferior value.


    Proceeding upon these principles we appear to arrive at the conclusion

that nineteen-twentieths of all the writings which have ever been ascribed to

Plato, are undoubtedly genuine. There is another portion of them, including

the Epistles, the Epinomis, the dialogues rejected by the ancients themselves,namely, the Axiochus, De justo, De virtute, Demodocus, Sisyphus, Eryxias,

which on grounds, both of internal and external evidence, we are able with

equal certainty to reject. But there still remains a small portion of which we

are unable to affirm either that they are genuine or spurious. They may have

been written in youth, or possibly like the works of some painters, may be

partly  or  wholly  the  compositions  of  pupils;  or  they  may  have  been  the

writings of some contemporary transferred by accident to the more celebrated

name of Plato, or of some Platonist in the next generation who aspired to

imitate his master. Not that on grounds either of language or philosophy we

should  lightly  reject  them.  Some  difference  of  style,  or  inferiority  of

execution, or inconsistency of thought, can hardly be considered decisive of

their  spurious  character.  For  who  always  does  justice  to  himself,  or  who

writes with equal care at all times? Certainly not Plato, who exhibits the

greatest differences in dramatic power, in the formation of sentences, and in

the use of words, if his earlier writings are compared with his later ones, say

the Protagoras or Phaedrus with the Laws. Or who can be expected to think in

the same manner during a period of authorship extending over above fifty

years,  in  an  age  of  great  intellectual  activity,  as  well  as  of  political  and

literary transition? Certainly not Plato, whose earlier writings are separated

from his later ones by as wide an interval of philosophical speculation as that

which separates his later writings from Aristotle.


  The  dialogues  which  have  been  translated  in  the  first  Appendix,  and

which  appear  to  have  the  next  claim  to  genuineness  among  the  Platonic

writings, are the Lesser Hippias, the Menexenus or Funeral Oration, the First

Alcibiades. Of these, the Lesser Hippias and the Funeral Oration are cited by

Aristotle; the first in the Metaphysics, the latter in the Rhetoric. Neither of

them are expressly attributed to Plato, but in his citation of both of them he

seems to be referring to passages in the extant dialogues. From the mention

of 'Hippias' in the singular by Aristotle, we may perhaps infer that he was

unacquainted with a second dialogue bearing the same name. Moreover, the

mere existence of a Greater and Lesser Hippias, and of a First and Second

Alcibiades, does to a certain extent throw a doubt upon both of them. Though

a very clever and ingenious work, the Lesser Hippias does not appear to

contain anything beyond the power of an imitator, who was also a careful

student  of  the  earlier  Platonic  writings,  to  invent.  The  motive  or  leading

thought  of  the  dialogue  may  be  detected  in  Xen.  Mem.,  and  there  is  nosimilar instance of a 'motive' which is taken from Xenophon in an undoubted

dialogue of Plato. On the other hand, the upholders of the genuineness of the

dialogue will find in the Hippias a true Socratic spirit; they will compare the

Ion as being akin both in subject and treatment; they will urge the authority

of  Aristotle;  and  they  will  detect  in  the  treatment  of  the  Sophist,  in  the

satirical reasoning upon Homer, in the reductio ad absurdum of the doctrine

that vice is ignorance, traces of a Platonic authorship. In reference to the last

point we are doubtful, as in some of the other dialogues, whether the author is

asserting or overthrowing the paradox of Socrates, or merely following the

argument 'whither the wind blows.' That no conclusion is arrived at is also in

accordance with the character of the earlier dialogues. The resemblances or

imitations  of  the  Gorgias,  Protagoras,  and  Euthydemus,  which  have  been

observed in the Hippias, cannot with certainty be adduced on either side of

the argument. On the whole, more may be said in favour of the genuineness

of the Hippias than against it.


  The Menexenus or Funeral Oration is cited by Aristotle, and is interesting

as  supplying  an  example  of  the  manner  in  which  the  orators  praised  'the

Athenians among the Athenians,' falsifying persons and dates, and casting a

veil over the gloomier events of Athenian history. It exhibits an acquaintance

with the funeral oration of Thucydides, and was, perhaps, intended to rival

that great work. If genuine, the proper place of the Menexenus would be at

the end of the Phaedrus. The satirical opening and the concluding words bear

a great resemblance to the earlier dialogues; the oration itself is professedly a

mimetic work, like the speeches in the Phaedrus, and cannot therefore be

tested by a comparison of the other writings of Plato. The funeral oration of

Pericles is expressly mentioned in the Phaedrus, and this may have suggested

the subject, in the same manner that the Cleitophon appears to be suggested

by the slight mention of Cleitophon and his attachment to Thrasymachus in

the Republic; and the Theages by the mention of Theages in the Apology and

Republic; or as the Second Alcibiades seems to be founded upon the text of

Xenophon, Mem. A similar taste for parody appears not only in the Phaedrus,

but  in  the  Protagoras,  in  the  Symposium,  and  to  a  certain  extent  in  the

Parmenides.


  To these two doubtful writings of Plato I have added the First Alcibiades,

which, of all the disputed dialogues of Plato, has the greatest merit, and issomewhat longer than any of them, though not verified by the testimony of

Aristotle,  and  in  many  respects  at  variance  with  the  Symposium  in  the

description  of  the  relations  of  Socrates  and  Alcibiades.  Like  the  Lesser

Hippias and the Menexenus, it is to be compared to the earlier writings of

Plato. The motive of the piece may, perhaps, be found in that passage of the

Symposium in which Alcibiades describes himself as self-convicted by the

words of Socrates. For the disparaging manner in which Schleiermacher has

spoken of this dialogue there seems to be no sufficient foundation. At the

same time, the lesson imparted is simple, and the irony more transparent than

in the undoubted dialogues of Plato. We know, too, that Alcibiades was a

favourite  thesis,  and  that  at  least  five  or  six  dialogues  bearing  this  name

passed current in antiquity, and are attributed to contemporaries of Socrates

and  Plato.  (1)  In  the  entire  absence  of  real  external  evidence  (for  the

catalogues of the Alexandrian librarians cannot be regarded as trustworthy);

and (2) in the absence of the highest marks either of poetical or philosophical

excellence;  and  (3)  considering  that  we  have  express  testimony  to  the

existence of contemporary writings bearing the name of Alcibiades, we are

compelled  to  suspend  our  judgment  on  the  genuineness  of  the  extant

dialogue.


  Neither at this point, nor at any other, do we propose to draw an absolute

line of demarcation between genuine and spurious writings of Plato. They

fade  off  imperceptibly  from  one  class  to  another.  There  may  have  been

degrees of genuineness in the dialogues themselves, as there are certainly

degrees of evidence by which they are supported. The traditions of the oral

discourses both of Socrates and Plato may have formed the basis of semi-

Platonic writings; some of them may be of the same mixed character which is

apparent in Aristotle and Hippocrates, although the form of them is different.

But the writings of Plato, unlike the writings of Aristotle, seem never to have

been confused with the writings of his disciples: this was probably due to

their definite form, and to their inimitable excellence. The three dialogues

which we have offered in the Appendix to the criticism of the reader may be

partly spurious and partly genuine; they may be altogether spurious;--that is

an alternative which must be frankly admitted. Nor can we maintain of some

other dialogues, such as the Parmenides, and the Sophist, and Politicus, that

no  considerable  objection  can  be  urged  against  them,  though  greatly

overbalanced by the weight (chiefly) of internal evidence in their favour. Nor,on the other hand, can we exclude a bare possibility that some dialogues

which are usually rejected, such as the Greater Hippias and the Cleitophon,

may  be  genuine.  The  nature  and  object  of  these  semi-Platonic  writings

require more careful study and more comparison of them with one another,

and with forged writings in general, than they have yet received, before we

can finally decide on their character. We do not consider them all as genuine

until they can be proved to be spurious, as is often maintained and still more

often implied in this and similar discussions; but should say of some of them,

that their genuineness is neither proven nor disproven until further evidence

about them can be adduced. And we are as confident that the Epistles are

spurious, as that the Republic, the Timaeus, and the Laws are genuine.


  On the whole, not a twentieth part of the writings which pass under the

name of Plato, if we exclude the works rejected by the ancients themselves

and two or three other plausible inventions, can be fairly doubted by those

who are willing to allow that a considerable change and growth may have

taken place in his philosophy (see above). That twentieth debatable portion

scarcely in any degree affects our judgment of Plato, either as a thinker or a

writer, and though suggesting some interesting questions to the scholar and

critic, is of little importance to the general reader.



INTRODUCTION


  The Lesser Hippias may be compared with the earlier dialogues of Plato,

in which the contrast of Socrates and the Sophists is most strongly exhibited.

Hippias, like Protagoras and Gorgias, though civil, is vain and boastful:Â  he

knows all things; he can make anything, including his own clothes; he is a

manufacturer  of  poems  and  declamations,  and  also  of  seal-rings,  shoes,

strigils; his girdle, which he has woven himself, is of a finer than Persian

quality. He is a vainer, lighter nature than the two great Sophists (compare

Protag.), but of the same character with them, and equally impatient of the

short cut-and-thrust method of Socrates, whom he endeavours to draw into a

long  oration.  At  last,  he  gets  tired  of  being  defeated  at  every  point  by

Socrates, and is with difficulty induced to proceed (compare Thrasymachus,

Protagoras, Callicles, and others, to whom the same reluctance is ascribed).  Hippias like Protagoras has common sense on his side, when he argues,

citing  passages  of  the  Iliad  in  support  of  his  view,  that  Homer  intended

Achilles to be the bravest, Odysseus the wisest of the Greeks. But he is easily

overthrown by the superior dialectics of Socrates, who pretends to show that

Achilles is not true to his word, and that no similar inconsistency is to be

found  in  Odysseus.  Hippias  replies  that  Achilles  unintentionally,  but

Odysseus  intentionally,  speaks  falsehood.  But  is  it  better  to  do  wrong

intentionally or unintentionally? Socrates, relying on the analogy of the arts,

maintains the former, Hippias the latter of the two alternatives...All this is

quite conceived in the spirit of Plato, who is very far from making Socrates

always argue on the side of truth. The over-reasoning on Homer, which is of

course satirical, is also in the spirit of Plato. Poetry turned logic is even more

ridiculous  than  'rhetoric  turned  logic,'  and  equally  fallacious.  There  were

reasoners in ancient as well as in modern times, who could never receive the

natural impression of Homer, or of any other book which they read. The

argument of Socrates, in which he picks out the apparent inconsistencies and

discrepancies in the speech and actions of Achilles, and the final paradox,

'that he who is true is also false,' remind us of the interpretation by Socrates

of Simonides in the Protagoras, and of similar reasonings in the first book of

the Republic. The discrepancies which Socrates discovers in the words of

Achilles are perhaps as great as those discovered by some of the modern

separatists of the Homeric poems...


  At last, Socrates having caught Hippias in the toils of the voluntary and

involuntary, is obliged to confess that he is wandering about in the same

labyrinth; he makes the reflection on himself which others would make upon

him  (compare  Protagoras).  He  does  not  wonder  that  he  should  be  in  a

difficulty, but he wonders at Hippias, and he becomes sensible of the gravity

of the situation, when ordinary men like himself can no longer go to the wise

and be taught by them.


  It may be remarked as bearing on the genuineness of this dialogue: (1)

that the manners of the speakers are less subtle and refined than in the other

dialogues of Plato; (2) that the sophistry of Socrates is more palpable and

unblushing, and also more unmeaning; (3) that many turns of thought and

style  are  found  in  it  which  appear  also  in  the  other  dialogues:--whether

resemblances of this kind tell in favour of or against the genuineness of anancient writing, is an important question which will have to be answered

differently in different cases. For that a writer may repeat himself is as true as

that a forger may imitate; and Plato elsewhere, either of set purpose or from

forgetfulness, is full of repetitions. The parallelisms of the Lesser Hippias, as

already  remarked,  are  not  of  the  kind  which  necessarily  imply  that  the

dialogue is the work of a forger. The parallelisms of the Greater Hippias with

the other dialogues, and the allusion to the Lesser (where Hippias sketches

the programme of his next lecture, and invites Socrates to attend and bring

any  friends  with  him  who  may  be  competent  judges),  are  more  than

suspicious:-- they are of a very poor sort, such as we cannot suppose to have

been  due  to  Plato  himself.  The  Greater  Hippias  more  resembles  the

Euthydemus than any other dialogue; but is immeasurably inferior to it. The

Lesser Hippias seems to have more merit than the Greater, and to be more

Platonic in spirit. The character of Hippias is the same in both dialogues, but

his vanity and boasting are even more exaggerated in the Greater Hippias.

His art of memory is specially mentioned in both. He is an inferior type of the

same  species  as  Hippodamus  of  Miletus  (Arist.  Pol.).  Some  passages  in

which  the  Lesser  Hippias  may  be  advantageously  compared  with  the

undoubtedly genuine dialogues of Plato are the following:--Less. Hipp.:Â 

compare  Republic  (Socrates'  cunning  in  argument):  compare  Laches

(Socrates'  feeling  about  arguments):  compare  Republic  (Socrates  not

unthankful): compare Republic (Socrates dishonest in argument).


  The  Lesser  Hippias,  though  inferior  to  the  other  dialogues,  may  be

reasonably  believed  to  have  been  written  by  Plato,  on  the  ground  (1)  of

considerable excellence; (2) of uniform tradition beginning with Aristotle and

his school. That the dialogue falls below the standard of Plato's other works,

or that he has attributed to Socrates an unmeaning paradox (perhaps with the

view of showing that he could beat the Sophists at their own weapons; or that

he could 'make the worse appear the better cause'; or merely as a dialectical

experiment)--are not sufficient reasons for doubting the genuineness of the

work.Lesser Hippias


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettPERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: Eudicus, Socrates, Hippias.


EUDICUS: Why are you silent, Socrates, after the magnificent display which

Hippias has been making? Why do you not either refute his words, if he

seems to you to have been wrong in any point, or join with us in commending

him? There is the more reason why you should speak, because we are now

alone, and the audience is confined to those who may fairly claim to take part

in a philosophical discussion.


SOCRATES: I should greatly like, Eudicus, to ask Hippias the meaning of

what  he  was  saying  just  now  about  Homer.  I  have  heard  your  father,

Apemantus, declare that the Iliad of Homer is a finer poem than the Odyssey

in the same degree that Achilles was a better man than Odysseus; Odysseus,

he would say, is the central figure of the one poem and Achilles of the other.

Now, I should like to know, if Hippias has no objection to tell me, what he

thinks about these two heroes, and which of them he maintains to be the

better; he has already told us in the course of his exhibition many things of

various kinds about Homer and divers other poets.


EUDICUS:  I  am  sure  that  Hippias  will  be  delighted  to  answer  anything

which  you  would  like  to  ask;  tell  me,  Hippias,  if  Socrates  asks  you  a

question, will you answer him?


HIPPIAS: Indeed, Eudicus, I should be strangely inconsistent if I refused to

answer Socrates, when at each Olympic festival, as I went up from my house

at Elis to the temple of Olympia, where all the Hellenes were assembled, I

continually professed my willingness to perform any of the exhibitions which

I had prepared, and to answer any questions which any one had to ask.


SOCRATES: Truly, Hippias, you are to be congratulated, if at every Olympic

festival you have such an encouraging opinion of your own wisdom when

you go up to the temple. I doubt whether any muscular hero would be so

fearless and confident in offering his body to the combat at Olympia, as you

are in offering your mind.


HIPPIAS: And with good reason, Socrates; for since the day when I firstentered  the  lists  at  Olympia  I  have  never  found  any  man  who  was  my

superior in anything. (Compare Gorgias.)


SOCRATES: What an ornament, Hippias, will the reputation of your wisdom

be to the city of Elis and to your parents! But to return: what say you of

Odysseus and Achilles? Which is the better of the two? and in what particular

does either surpass the other? For when you were exhibiting and there was

company in the room, though I could not follow you, I did not like to ask

what you meant, because a crowd of people were present, and I was afraid

that the question might interrupt your exhibition. But now that there are not

so many of us, and my friend Eudicus bids me ask, I wish you would tell me

what  you  were  saying  about  these  two  heroes,  so  that  I  may  clearly

understand; how did you distinguish them?


HIPPIAS: I shall have much pleasure, Socrates, in explaining to you more

clearly than I could in public my views about these and also about other

heroes. I say that Homer intended Achilles to be the bravest of the men who

went to Troy, Nestor the wisest, and Odysseus the wiliest.


SOCRATES: O rare Hippias, will you be so good as not to laugh, if I find a

difficulty  in  following  you,  and  repeat  my  questions  several  times  over?

Please to answer me kindly and gently.


HIPPIAS: I should be greatly ashamed of myself, Socrates, if I, who teach

others and take money of them, could not, when I was asked by you, answer

in a civil and agreeable manner.


SOCRATES: Thank you: the fact is, that I seemed to understand what you

meant when you said that the poet intended Achilles to be the bravest of men,

and also that he intended Nestor to be the wisest; but when you said that he

meant Odysseus to be the wiliest, I must confess that I could not understand

what you were saying. Will you tell me, and then I shall perhaps understand

you better; has not Homer made Achilles wily?


HIPPIAS:  Certainly  not,  Socrates;  he  is  the  most  straight-forward  of

mankind, and when Homer introduces them talking with one another in the

passage  called  the  Prayers,  Achilles  is  supposed  by  the  poet  to  say  toOdysseus:--


'Son of Laertes, sprung from heaven, crafty Odysseus, I will speak out plainly

the word which I intend to carry out in act, and which will, I believe, be

accomplished. For I hate him like the gates of death who thinks one thing and

says another. But I will speak that which shall be accomplished.'


Now, in these verses he clearly indicates the character of the two men; he

shows Achilles to be true and simple, and Odysseus to be wily and false; for

he supposes Achilles to be addressing Odysseus in these lines.


SOCRATES: Now, Hippias, I think that I understand your meaning; when

you say that Odysseus is wily, you clearly mean that he is false?


HIPPIAS:  Exactly  so,  Socrates;  it  is  the  character  of  Odysseus,  as  he  is

represented by Homer in many passages both of the Iliad and Odyssey.


SOCRATES: And Homer must be presumed to have meant that the true man

is not the same as the false?


HIPPIAS: Of course, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And is that your own opinion, Hippias?


HIPPIAS: Certainly; how can I have any other?


SOCRATES: Well, then, as there is no possibility of asking Homer what he

meant in these verses of his, let us leave him; but as you show a willingness

to take up his cause, and your opinion agrees with what you declare to be his,

will you answer on behalf of yourself and him?


HIPPIAS: I will; ask shortly anything which you like.


SOCRATES: Do you say that the false, like the sick, have no power to do

things, or that they have the power to do things?


HIPPIAS:  I  should  say  that  they  have  power  to  do  many  things,  and  in

particular to deceive mankind.SOCRATES: Then, according to you, they are both powerful and wily, are

they not?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  And  are  they  wily,  and  do  they  deceive  by  reason  of  their

simplicity  and  folly,  or  by  reason  of  their  cunning  and  a  certain  sort  of

prudence?


HIPPIAS: By reason of their cunning and prudence, most certainly.


SOCRATES: Then they are prudent, I suppose?


HIPPIAS: So they are--very.


SOCRATES: And if they are prudent, do they know or do they not know

what they do?


HIPPIAS: Of course, they know very well; and that is why they do mischief

to others.


SOCRATES:  And  having  this  knowledge,  are  they  ignorant,  or  are  they

wise?


HIPPIAS: Wise, certainly; at least, in so far as they can deceive.


SOCRATES: Stop, and let us recall to mind what you are saying; are you not

saying that the false are powerful and prudent and knowing and wise in those

things about which they are false?


HIPPIAS: To be sure.


SOCRATES: And the true differ from the false--the true and the false are the

very opposite of each other?


HIPPIAS: That is my view.


SOCRATES: Then, according to your view, it would seem that the false areto be ranked in the class of the powerful and wise?


HIPPIAS: Assuredly.


SOCRATES: And when you say that the false are powerful and wise in so far

as  they  are  false,  do  you  mean  that  they  have  or  have  not  the  power  of

uttering their falsehoods if they like?


HIPPIAS: I mean to say that they have the power.


SOCRATES: In a word, then, the false are they who are wise and have the

power to speak falsely?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then a man who has not the power of speaking falsely and is

ignorant cannot be false?


HIPPIAS: You are right.


SOCRATES: And every man has power who does that which he wishes at

the time when he wishes. I am not speaking of any special case in which he is

prevented by disease or something of that sort, but I am speaking generally,

as I might say of you, that you are able to write my name when you like.

Would you not call a man able who could do that?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  And  tell  me,  Hippias,  are  you  not  a  skilful  calculator  and

arithmetician?


HIPPIAS: Yes, Socrates, assuredly I am.


SOCRATES:  And  if  some  one  were  to  ask  you  what  is  the  sum  of  3

multiplied by 700, you would tell him the true answer in a moment, if you

pleased?


HIPPIAS: certainly I should.SOCRATES: Is not that because you are the wisest and ablest of men in these

matters?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And being as you are the wisest and ablest of men in these

matters of calculation, are you not also the best?


HIPPIAS: To be sure, Socrates, I am the best.


SOCRATES: And therefore you would be the most able to tell the truth about

these matters, would you not?


HIPPIAS: Yes, I should.


SOCRATES: And could you speak falsehoods about them equally well? I

must beg, Hippias, that you will answer me with the same frankness and

magnanimity which has hitherto characterized you. If a person were to ask

you what is the sum of 3 multiplied by 700, would not you be the best and

most consistent teller of a falsehood, having always the power of speaking

falsely as you have of speaking truly, about these same matters, if you wanted

to tell a falsehood, and not to answer truly? Would the ignorant man be better

able to tell a falsehood in matters of calculation than you would be, if you

chose? Might he not sometimes stumble upon the truth, when he wanted to

tell a lie, because he did not know, whereas you who are the wise man, if you

wanted to tell a lie would always and consistently lie?


HIPPIAS: Yes, there you are quite right.


SOCRATES: Does the false man tell lies about other things, but not about

number, or when he is making a calculation?


HIPPIAS: To be sure; he would tell as many lies about number as about other

things.


SOCRATES: Then may we further assume, Hippias, that there are men who

are false about calculation and number?HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Who can they be? For you have already admitted that he who is

false must have the ability to be false: you said, as you will remember, that he

who is unable to be false will not be false?


HIPPIAS: Yes, I remember; it was so said.


SOCRATES: And were you not yourself just now shown to be best able to

speak falsely about calculation?


HIPPIAS: Yes; that was another thing which was said.


SOCRATES: And are you not likewise said to speak truly about calculation?


HIPPIAS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Then the same person is able to speak both falsely and truly

about  calculation?  And  that  person  is  he  who  is  good  at  calculation--the

arithmetician?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Who, then, Hippias, is discovered to be false at calculation? Is

he not the good man? For the good man is the able man, and he is the true

man.


HIPPIAS: That is evident.


SOCRATES: Do you not see, then, that the same man is false and also true

about the same matters? And the true man is not a whit better than the false;

for indeed he is the same with him and not the very opposite, as you were just

now imagining.


HIPPIAS: Not in that instance, clearly.


SOCRATES: Shall we examine other instances?HIPPIAS: Certainly, if you are disposed.


SOCRATES: Are you not also skilled in geometry?


HIPPIAS: I am.


SOCRATES: Well, and does not the same hold in that science also? Is not the

same person best able to speak falsely or to speak truly about diagrams; and

he is--the geometrician?


HIPPIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: He and no one else is good at it?


HIPPIAS: Yes, he and no one else.


SOCRATES: Then the good and wise geometer has this double power in the

highest degree; and if there be a man who is false about diagrams the good

man will be he, for he is able to be false; whereas the bad is unable, and for

this reason is not false, as has been admitted.


HIPPIAS: True.


SOCRATES: Once more--let us examine a third case; that of the astronomer,

in whose art, again, you, Hippias, profess to be a still greater proficient than

in the preceding--do you not?


HIPPIAS: Yes, I am.


SOCRATES: And does not the same hold of astronomy?


HIPPIAS: True, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And in astronomy, too, if any man be able to speak falsely he

will be the good astronomer, but he who is not able will not speak falsely, for

he has no knowledge.


HIPPIAS: Clearly not.