ATHENIAN: And yet the son often prays to obtain things which the father

prays that he may not obtain.


MEGILLUS: When the son is young and foolish, you mean?


ATHENIAN: Yes; or when the father, in the dotage of age or the heat of

youth, having no sense of right and justice, prays with fervour, under the

influence of feelings akin to those of Theseus when he cursed the unfortunate

Hippolytus, do you imagine that the son, having a sense of right and justice,

will join in his father's prayers?


MEGILLUS: I understand you to mean that a man should not desire or be in

a  hurry  to  have  all  things  according  to  his  wish,  for  his  wish  may  be  at

variance with his reason. But every state and every individual ought to pray

and strive for wisdom.


ATHENIAN: Yes; and I remember, and you will remember, what I said at

first,  that  a  statesman  and  legislator  ought  to  ordain  laws  with  a  view  to

wisdom; while you were arguing that the good lawgiver ought to order all

with a view to war. And to this I replied that there were four virtues, but that

upon your view one of them only was the aim of legislation; whereas you

ought to regard all virtue, and especially that which comes first, and is the

leader of all the rest--I mean wisdom and mind and opinion, having affection

and desire in their train. And now the argument returns to the same point, and

I say once more, in jest if you like, or in earnest if you like, that the prayer of

a fool is full of danger, being likely to end in the opposite of what he desires.

And if you would rather receive my words in earnest, I am willing that you

should; and you will find, I suspect, as I have said already, that not cowardice

was the cause of the ruin of the Dorian kings and of their whole design, nor

ignorance  of  military  matters,  either  on  the  part  of  the  rulers  or  of  their

subjects;  but  their  misfortunes  were  due  to  their  general  degeneracy,  and

especially to their ignorance of the most important human affairs. That was

then, and is still, and always will be the case, as I will endeavour, if you will

allow me, to make out and demonstrate as well as I am able to you who are

my friends, in the course of the argument.


CLEINIAS: Pray go on, Stranger;--compliments are troublesome, but we willshow, not in word but in deed, how greatly we prize your words, for we will

give them our best attention; and that is the way in which a freeman best

shows his approval or disapproval.


MEGILLUS: Excellent, Cleinias; let us do as you say.


CLEINIAS: By all means, if Heaven wills. Go on.


ATHENIAN: Well, then, proceeding in the same train of thought, I say that

the greatest ignorance was the ruin of the Dorian power, and that now, as

then, ignorance is ruin. And if this be true, the legislator must endeavour to

implant wisdom in states, and banish ignorance to the utmost of his power.


CLEINIAS: That is evident.


ATHENIAN:  Then  now  consider  what  is  really  the  greatest  ignorance.  I

should like to know whether you and Megillus would agree with me in what I

am about to say; for my opinion is--


CLEINIAS: What?


ATHENIAN: That the greatest ignorance is when a man hates that which he

nevertheless thinks to be good and noble, and loves and embraces that which

he knows to be unrighteous and evil. This disagreement between the sense of

pleasure and the judgment of reason in the soul is, in my opinion, the worst

ignorance;  and  also  the  greatest,  because  affecting  the  great  mass  of  the

human soul; for the principle which feels pleasure and pain in the individual

is like the mass or populace in a state. And when the soul is opposed to

knowledge, or opinion, or reason, which are her natural lords, that I call folly,

just as in the state, when the multitude refuses to obey their rulers and the

laws; or, again, in the individual, when fair reasonings have their habitation

in the soul and yet do no good, but rather the reverse of good. All these cases

I  term  the  worst  ignorance,  whether  in  individuals  or  in  states.  You  will

understand, Stranger, that I am speaking of something which is very different

from the ignorance of handicraftsmen.


CLEINIAS: Yes, my friend, we understand and agree.ATHENIAN: Let us, then, in the first place declare and affirm that the citizen

who does not know these things ought never to have any kind of authority

entrusted  to  him:  he  must  be  stigmatized  as  ignorant,  even  though  he  be

versed in calculation and skilled in all sorts of accomplishments, and feats of

mental dexterity; and the opposite are to be called wise, even although, in the

words of the proverb, they know neither how to read nor how to swim; and to

them, as to men of sense, authority is to be committed. For, O my friends,

how can there be the least shadow of wisdom when there is no harmony?

There is none; but the noblest and greatest of harmonies may be truly said to

be the greatest wisdom; and of this he is a partaker who lives according to

reason; whereas he who is devoid of reason is the destroyer of his house and

the very opposite of a saviour of the state: he is utterly ignorant of political

wisdom. Let this, then, as I was saying, be laid down by us.


CLEINIAS: Let it be so laid down.


ATHENIAN: I suppose that there must be rulers and subjects in states?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And what are the principles on which men rule and obey in

cities, whether great or small; and similarly in families? What are they, and

how many in number? Is there not one claim of authority which is always

just,--that of fathers and mothers and in general of progenitors to rule over

their offspring?


CLEINIAS: There is.


ATHENIAN: Next follows the principle that the noble should rule over the

ignoble; and, thirdly, that the elder should rule and the younger obey?


CLEINIAS: To be sure.


ATHENIAN: And, fourthly, that slaves should be ruled, and their masters

rule?


CLEINIAS: Of course.ATHENIAN:  Fifthly,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  comes  the  principle  that  the

stronger shall rule, and the weaker be ruled?


CLEINIAS: That is a rule not to be disobeyed.


ATHENIAN: Yes, and a rule which prevails very widely among all creatures,

and is according to nature, as the Theban poet Pindar once said; and the sixth

principle, and the greatest of all, is, that the wise should lead and command,

and the ignorant follow and obey; and yet, O thou most wise Pindar, as I

should  reply  him,  this  surely  is  not  contrary  to  nature,  but  according  to

nature,  being  the  rule  of  law  over  willing  subjects,  and  not  a  rule  of

compulsion.


CLEINIAS: Most true.


ATHENIAN: There is a seventh kind of rule which is awarded by lot, and is

dear to the Gods and a token of good fortune: he on whom the lot falls is a

ruler, and he who fails in obtaining the lot goes away and is the subject; and

this we affirm to be quite just.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: 'Then now,' as we say playfully to any of those who lightly

undertake  the  making  of  laws,  'you  see,  legislator,  the  principles  of

government, how many they are, and that they are naturally opposed to each

other. There we have discovered a fountain-head of seditions, to which you

must attend. And, first, we will ask you to consider with us, how and in what

respect  the  kings  of  Argos  and  Messene  violated  these  our  maxims,  and

ruined themselves and the great and famous Hellenic power of the olden

time. Was it because they did not know how wisely Hesiod spoke when he

said that the half is often more than the whole? His meaning was, that when

to take the whole would be dangerous, and to take the half would be the safe

and  moderate  course,  then  the  moderate  or  better  was  more  than  the

immoderate or worse.'


CLEINIAS: Very true.ATHENIAN: And may we suppose this immoderate spirit to be more fatal

when found among kings than when among peoples?


CLEINIAS: The probability is that ignorance will be a disorder especially

prevalent among kings, because they lead a proud and luxurious life.


ATHENIAN: Is it not palpable that the chief aim of the kings of that time

was  to  get  the  better  of  the  established  laws,  and  that  they  were  not  in

harmony with the principles which they had agreed to observe by word and

oath? This want of harmony may have had the appearance of wisdom, but

was really, as we assert, the greatest ignorance, and utterly overthrew the

whole empire by dissonance and harsh discord.


CLEINIAS: Very likely.


ATHENIAN:  Good;  and  what  measures  ought  the  legislator  to  have  then

taken  in  order  to  avert  this  calamity?  Truly  there  is  no  great  wisdom  in

knowing, and no great difficulty in telling, after the evil has happened; but to

have foreseen the remedy at the time would have taken a much wiser head

than ours.


MEGILLUS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN:  Any  one  who  looks  at  what  has  occurred  with  you

Lacedaemonians, Megillus, may easily know and may easily say what ought

to have been done at that time.


MEGILLUS: Speak a little more clearly.


ATHENIAN: Nothing can be clearer than the observation which I am about

to make.


MEGILLUS: What is it?


ATHENIAN: That if any one gives too great a power to anything, too large a

sail to a vessel, too much food to the body, too much authority to the mind,

and  does  not  observe  the  mean,  everything  is  overthrown,  and,  in  the

wantonness of excess, runs in the one case to disorders, and in the other toinjustice, which is the child of excess. I mean to say, my dear friends, that

there is no soul of man, young and irresponsible, who will be able to sustain

the  temptation  of  arbitrary  power--no  one  who  will  not,  under  such

circumstances, become filled with folly, that worst of diseases, and be hated

by  his  nearest  and  dearest  friends:  when  this  happens  his  kingdom  is

undermined, and all his power vanishes from him. And great legislators who

know the mean should take heed of the danger. As far as we can guess at this

distance of time, what happened was as follows:--


MEGILLUS: What?


ATHENIAN: A God, who watched over Sparta, seeing into the future, gave

you two families of kings instead of one; and thus brought you more within

the limits of moderation. In the next place, some human wisdom mingled

with divine power, observing that the constitution of your government was

still feverish and excited, tempered your inborn strength and pride of birth

with the moderation which comes of age, making the power of your twenty-

eight elders equal with that of the kings in the most important matters. But

your third saviour, perceiving that your government was still swelling and

foaming, and desirous to impose a curb upon it, instituted the Ephors, whose

power he made to resemble that of magistrates elected by lot; and by this

arrangement the kingly office, being compounded of the right elements and

duly moderated, was preserved, and was the means of preserving all the rest.

Since, if there had been only the original legislators, Temenus, Cresphontes,

and their contemporaries, as far as they were concerned not even the portion

of  Aristodemus  would  have  been  preserved;  for  they  had  no  proper

experience in legislation, or they would surely not have imagined that oaths

would  moderate  a  youthful  spirit  invested  with  a  power  which  might  be

converted  into  a  tyranny.  Now  that  God  has  instructed  us  what  sort  of

government would have been or will be lasting, there is no wisdom, as I have

already said, in judging after the event; there is no difficulty in learning from

an example which has already occurred. But if any one could have foreseen

all this at the time, and had been able to moderate the government of the three

kingdoms and unite them into one, he might have saved all the excellent

institutions  which  were  then  conceived;  and  no  Persian  or  any  other

armament would have dared to attack us, or would have regarded Hellas as a

power to be despised.CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: There was small credit to us, Cleinias, in defeating them; and

the discredit was, not that the conquerors did not win glorious victories both

by land and sea, but what, in my opinion, brought discredit was, first of all,

the circumstance that of the three cities one only fought on behalf of Hellas,

and the two others were so utterly good for nothing that the one was waging a

mighty war against Lacedaemon, and was thus preventing her from rendering

assistance, while the city of Argos, which had the precedence at the time of

the  distribution,  when  asked  to  aid  in  repelling  the  barbarian,  would  not

answer to the call, or give aid. Many things might be told about Hellas in

connexion with that war which are far from honourable; nor, indeed, can we

rightly say that Hellas repelled the invader; for the truth is, that unless the

Athenians  and  Lacedaemonians,  acting  in  concert,  had  warded  off  the

impending yoke, all the tribes of Hellas would have been fused in a chaos of

Hellenes mingling with one another, of barbarians mingling with Hellenes,

and Hellenes with barbarians; just as nations who are now subject to the

Persian power, owing to unnatural separations and combinations of them, are

dispersed and scattered, and live miserably. These, Cleinias and Megillus, are

the reproaches which we have to make against statesmen and legislators, as

they are called, past and present, if we would analyse the causes of their

failure, and find out what else might have been done. We said, for instance,

just now, that there ought to be no great and unmixed powers; and this was

under the idea that a state ought to be free and wise and harmonious, and that

a legislator ought to legislate with a view to this end. Nor is there any reason

to be surprised at our continually proposing aims for the legislator which

appear not to be always the same; but we should consider when we say that

temperance is to be the aim, or wisdom is to be the aim, or friendship is to be

the aim, that all these aims are really the same; and if so, a variety in the

modes of expression ought not to disturb us.


CLEINIAS: Let us resume the argument in that spirit. And now, speaking of

friendship and wisdom and freedom, I wish that you would tell me at what, in

your opinion, the legislator should aim.


ATHENIAN: Hear me, then: there are two mother forms of states from which

the rest may be truly said to be derived; and one of them may be calledmonarchy and the other democracy: the Persians have the highest form of the

one, and we of the other; almost all the rest, as I was saying, are variations of

these. Now, if you are to have liberty and the combination of friendship with

wisdom, you must have both these forms of government in a measure; the

argument emphatically declares that no city can be well governed which is

not made up of both.


CLEINIAS: Impossible.


ATHENIAN: Neither the one, if it be exclusively and excessively attached to

monarchy,  nor  the  other,  if  it  be  similarly  attached  to  freedom,  observes

moderation; but your states, the Laconian and Cretan, have more of it; and

the same was the case with the Athenians and Persians of old time, but now

they have less. Shall I tell you why?


CLEINIAS: By all means, if it will tend to elucidate our subject.


ATHENIAN: Hear, then:--There was a time when the Persians had more of

the state which is a mean between slavery and freedom. In the reign of Cyrus

they were freemen and also lords of many others: the rulers gave a share of

freedom to the subjects, and being treated as equals, the soldiers were on

better terms with their generals, and showed themselves more ready in the

hour of danger. And if there was any wise man among them, who was able to

give good counsel, he imparted his wisdom to the public; for the king was not

jealous, but allowed him full liberty of speech, and gave honour to those who

could advise him in any matter. And the nation waxed in all respects, because

there was freedom and friendship and communion of mind among them.


CLEINIAS: That certainly appears to have been the case.


ATHENIAN: How, then, was this advantage lost under Cambyses, and again

recovered under Darius? Shall I try to divine?


CLEINIAS: The enquiry, no doubt, has a bearing upon our subject.


ATHENIAN: I imagine that Cyrus, though a great and patriotic general, had

never given his mind to education, and never attended to the order of hishousehold.


CLEINIAS: What makes you say so?


ATHENIAN:  I  think  that  from  his  youth  upwards  he  was  a  soldier,  and

entrusted the education of his children to the women; and they brought them

up  from  their  childhood  as  the  favourites  of  fortune,  who  were  blessed

already, and needed no more blessings. They thought that they were happy

enough, and that no one should be allowed to oppose them in any way, and

they compelled every one to praise all that they said or did. This was how

they brought them up.


CLEINIAS: A splendid education truly!


ATHENIAN: Such an one as women were likely to give them, and especially

princesses who had recently grown rich, and in the absence of the men, too,

who were occupied in wars and dangers, and had no time to look after them.


CLEINIAS: What would you expect?


ATHENIAN: Their father had possessions of cattle and sheep, and many

herds of men and other animals, but he did not consider that those to whom

he was about to make them over were not trained in his own calling, which

was Persian; for the Persians are shepherds--sons of a rugged land, which is a

stern mother, and well fitted to produce a sturdy race able to live in the open

air and go without sleep, and also to fight, if fighting is required (compare

Arist. Pol.). He did not observe that his sons were trained differently; through

the  so-called  blessing  of  being  royal  they  were  educated  in  the  Median

fashion by women and eunuchs, which led to their becoming such as people

do become when they are brought up unreproved. And so, after the death of

Cyrus, his sons, in the fulness of luxury and licence, took the kingdom, and

first one slew the other because he could not endure a rival; and, afterwards,

the slayer himself, mad with wine and brutality, lost his kingdom through the

Medes  and  the  Eunuch,  as  they  called  him,  who  despised  the  folly  of

Cambyses.


CLEINIAS: So runs the tale, and such probably were the facts.ATHENIAN: Yes; and the tradition says, that the empire came back to the

Persians, through Darius and the seven chiefs.


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: Let us note the rest of the story. Observe, that Darius was not

the son of a king, and had not received a luxurious education. When he came

to  the  throne,  being  one  of  the  seven,  he  divided  the  country  into  seven

portions,  and  of  this  arrangement  there  are  some  shadowy  traces  still

remaining; he made laws upon the principle of introducing universal equality

in the order of the state, and he embodied in his laws the settlement of the

tribute  which  Cyrus  promised,--thus  creating  a  feeling  of  friendship  and

community  among  all  the  Persians,  and  attaching  the  people  to  him  with

money and gifts. Hence his armies cheerfully acquired for him countries as

large as those which Cyrus had left behind him. Darius was succeeded by his

son Xerxes; and he again was brought up in the royal and luxurious fashion.

Might we not most justly say: 'O Darius, how came you to bring up Xerxes in

the same way in which Cyrus brought up Cambyses, and not to see his fatal

mistake?' For Xerxes, being the creation of the same education, met with

much the same fortune as Cambyses; and from that time until now there has

never been a really great king among the Persians, although they are all called

Great. And their degeneracy is not to be attributed to chance, as I maintain;

the reason is rather the evil life which is generally led by the sons of very rich

and royal persons; for never will boy or man, young or old, excel in virtue,

who has been thus educated. And this, I say, is what the legislator has to

consider, and what at the present moment has to be considered by us. Justly

may you, O Lacedaemonians, be praised, in that you do not give special

honour or a special education to wealth rather than to poverty, or to a royal

rather than to a private station, where the divine and inspired lawgiver has not

originally  commanded  them  to  be  given.  For  no  man  ought  to  have  pre-

eminent honour in a state because he surpasses others in wealth, any more

than because he is swift of foot or fair or strong, unless he have some virtue

in him; nor even if he have virtue, unless he have this particular virtue of

temperance.


MEGILLUS: What do you mean, Stranger?ATHENIAN: I suppose that courage is a part of virtue?


MEGILLUS: To be sure.


ATHENIAN: Then, now hear and judge for yourself:--Would you like to

have for a fellow-lodger or neighbour a very courageous man, who had no

control over himself?


MEGILLUS: Heaven forbid!


ATHENIAN: Or an artist, who was clever in his profession, but a rogue?


MEGILLUS: Certainly not.


ATHENIAN: And surely justice does not grow apart from temperance?


MEGILLUS: Impossible.


ATHENIAN: Any more than our pattern wise man, whom we exhibited as

having his pleasures and pains in accordance with and corresponding to true

reason, can be intemperate?


MEGILLUS: No.


ATHENIAN: There is a further consideration relating to the due and undue

award of honours in states.


MEGILLUS: What is it?


ATHENIAN: I should like to know whether temperance without the other

virtues, existing alone in the soul of man, is rightly to be praised or blamed?


MEGILLUS: I cannot tell.


ATHENIAN: And that is the best answer; for whichever alternative you had

chosen, I think that you would have gone wrong.


MEGILLUS: I am fortunate.ATHENIAN: Very good; a quality, which is a mere appendage of things

which can be praised or blamed, does not deserve an expression of opinion,

but is best passed over in silence.


MEGILLUS: You are speaking of temperance?


ATHENIAN: Yes; but of the other virtues, that which having this appendage

is also most beneficial, will be most deserving of honour, and next that which

is beneficial in the next degree; and so each of them will be rightly honoured

according to a regular order.


MEGILLUS: True.


ATHENIAN: And ought not the legislator to determine these classes?


MEGILLUS: Certainly he should.


ATHENIAN: Suppose that we leave to him the arrangement of details. But

the general division of laws according to their importance into a first and

second and third class, we who are lovers of law may make ourselves.


MEGILLUS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: We maintain, then, that a State which would be safe and happy,

as far as the nature of man allows, must and ought to distribute honour and

dishonour in the right way. And the right way is to place the goods of the soul

first and highest in the scale, always assuming temperance to be the condition

of them; and to assign the second place to the goods of the body; and the

third place to money and property. And if any legislator or state departs from

this rule by giving money the place of honour, or in any way preferring that

which is really last, may we not say, that he or the state is doing an unholy

and unpatriotic thing?


MEGILLUS: Yes; let that be plainly declared.


ATHENIAN: The consideration of the Persian governments led us thus far to

enlarge.  We  remarked  that  the  Persians  grew  worse  and  worse.  And  we

affirm the reason of this to have been, that they too much diminished thefreedom  of  the  people,  and  introduced  too  much  of  despotism,  and  so

destroyed friendship and community of feeling. And when there is an end of

these, no longer do the governors govern on behalf of their subjects or of the

people, but on behalf of themselves; and if they think that they can gain ever

so small an advantage for themselves, they devastate cities, and send fire and

desolation among friendly races. And as they hate ruthlessly and horribly, so

are they hated; and when they want the people to fight for them, they find no

community of feeling or willingness to risk their lives on their behalf; their

untold myriads are useless to them on the field of battle, and they think that

their  salvation  depends  on  the  employment  of  mercenaries  and  strangers

whom they hire, as if they were in want of more men. And they cannot help

being  stupid,  since  they  proclaim  by  their  actions  that  the  ordinary

distinctions of right and wrong which are made in a state are a trifle, when

compared with gold and silver.


MEGILLUS: Quite true.


ATHENIAN:  And  now  enough  of  the  Persians,  and  their  present  mal-

administration of their government, which is owing to the excess of slavery

and despotism among them.


MEGILLUS: Good.


ATHENIAN: Next, we must pass in review the government of Attica in like

manner,  and  from  this  show  that  entire  freedom  and  the  absence  of  all

superior authority is not by any means so good as government by others when

properly limited, which was our ancient Athenian constitution at the time

when the Persians made their attack on Hellas, or, speaking more correctly,

on  the  whole  continent  of  Europe.  There  were  four  classes,  arranged

according to a property census, and reverence was our queen and mistress,

and made us willing to live in obedience to the laws which then prevailed.

Also the vastness of the Persian armament, both by sea and on land, caused a

helpless terror, which made us more and more the servants of our rulers and

of the laws; and for all these reasons an exceeding harmony prevailed among

us. About ten years before the naval engagement at Salamis, Datis came,

leading a Persian host by command of Darius, which was expressly directed

against  the  Athenians  and  Eretrians,  having  orders  to  carry  them  awaycaptive; and these orders he was to execute under pain of death. Now Datis

and  his  myriads  soon  became  complete  masters  of  Eretria,  and  he  sent  a

fearful report to Athens that no Eretrian had escaped him; for the soldiers of

Datis  had  joined  hands  and  netted  the  whole  of  Eretria.  And  this  report,

whether well or ill founded, was terrible to all the Hellenes, and above all to

the Athenians, and they dispatched embassies in all directions, but no one

was  willing  to  come  to  their  relief,  with  the  exception  of  the

Lacedaemonians;  and  they,  either  because  they  were  detained  by  the

Messenian war, which was then going on, or for some other reason of which

we are not told, came a day too late for the battle of Marathon. After a while,

the news arrived of mighty preparations being made, and innumerable threats

came from the king. Then, as time went on, a rumour reached us that Darius

had died, and that his son, who was young and hot-headed, had come to the

throne  and  was  persisting  in  his  design.  The  Athenians  were  under  the

impression  that  the  whole  expedition  was  directed  against  them,  in

consequence of the battle of Marathon; and hearing of the bridge over the

Hellespont, and the canal of Athos, and the host of ships, considering that

there was no salvation for them either by land or by sea, for there was no one

to help them, and remembering that in the first expedition, when the Persians

destroyed Eretria, no one came to their help, or would risk the danger of an

alliance with them, they thought that this would happen again, at least on

land;  nor,  when  they  looked  to  the  sea,  could  they  descry  any  hope  of

salvation; for they were attacked by a thousand vessels and more. One chance

of safety remained, slight indeed and desperate, but their only one. They saw

that on the former occasion they had gained a seemingly impossible victory,

and  borne  up  by  this  hope,  they  found  that  their  only  refuge  was  in

themselves and in the Gods. All these things created in them the spirit of

friendship; there was the fear of the moment, and there was that higher fear,

which they had acquired by obedience to their ancient laws, and which I have

several times in the preceding discourse called reverence, of which the good

man ought to be a willing servant, and of which the coward is independent

and fearless. If this fear had not possessed them, they would never have met

the enemy, or defended their temples and sepulchres and their country, and

everything that was near and dear to them, as they did; but little by little they

would have been all scattered and dispersed.


MEGILLUS: Your words, Athenian, are quite true, and worthy of yourselfand of your country.


ATHENIAN: They are true, Megillus; and to you, who have inherited the

virtues of your ancestors, I may properly speak of the actions of that day.

And I would wish you and Cleinias to consider whether my words have not

also a bearing on legislation; for I am not discoursing only for the pleasure of

talking, but for the argument's sake. Please to remark that the experience both

of ourselves and the Persians was, in a certain sense, the same; for as they led

their people into utter servitude, so we too led ours into all freedom. And

now, how shall we proceed? for I would like you to observe that our previous

arguments have good deal to say for themselves.


MEGILLUS: True; but I wish that you would give us a fuller explanation.


ATHENIAN: I will. Under the ancient laws, my friends, the people was not

as now the master, but rather the willing servant of the laws.


MEGILLUS: What laws do you mean?


ATHENIAN: In the first place, let us speak of the laws about music,--that is

to say, such music as then existed--in order that we may trace the growth of

the excess of freedom from the beginning. Now music was early divided

among us into certain kinds and manners. One sort consisted of prayers to the

Gods, which were called hymns; and there was another and opposite sort

called lamentations, and another termed paeans, and another, celebrating the

birth of Dionysus, called, I believe, 'dithyrambs.' And they used the actual

word 'laws,' or nomoi, for another kind of song; and to this they added the

term 'citharoedic.' All these and others were duly distinguished, nor were the

performers  allowed  to  confuse  one  style  of  music  with  another.  And  the

authority  which  determined  and  gave  judgment,  and  punished  the

disobedient, was not expressed in a hiss, nor in the most unmusical shouts of

the multitude, as in our days, nor in applause and clapping of hands. But the

directors  of  public  instruction  insisted  that  the  spectators  should  listen  in

silence to the end; and boys and their tutors, and the multitude in general,

were kept quiet by a hint from a stick. Such was the good order which the

multitude  were  willing  to  observe;  they  would  never  have  dared  to  give

judgment by noisy cries. And then, as time went on, the poets themselvesintroduced the reign of vulgar and lawless innovation. They were men of

genius, but they had no perception of what is just and lawful in music; raging

like  Bacchanals  and  possessed  with  inordinate  delights--mingling

lamentations with hymns, and paeans with dithyrambs; imitating the sounds

of  the  flute  on  the  lyre,  and  making  one  general  confusion;  ignorantly

affirming that music has no truth, and, whether good or bad, can only be

judged of rightly by the pleasure of the hearer (compare Republic). And by

composing such licentious works, and adding to them words as licentious,

they have inspired the multitude with lawlessness and boldness, and made

them fancy that they can judge for themselves about melody and song. And

in this way the theatres from being mute have become vocal, as though they

had understanding of good and bad in music and poetry; and instead of an

aristocracy, an evil sort of theatrocracy has grown up (compare Arist. Pol.).

For if the democracy which judged had only consisted of educated persons,

no  fatal  harm  would  have  been  done;  but  in  music  there  first  arose  the

universal conceit of omniscience and general lawlessness;-- freedom came

following afterwards, and men, fancying that they knew what they did not

know, had no longer any fear, and the absence of fear begets shamelessness.

For what is this shamelessness, which is so evil a thing, but the insolent

refusal to regard the opinion of the better by reason of an over-daring sort of

liberty?


MEGILLUS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: Consequent upon this freedom comes the other freedom, of

disobedience to rulers (compare Republic); and then the attempt to escape the

control and exhortation of father, mother, elders, and when near the end, the

control of the laws also; and at the very end there is the contempt of oaths

and  pledges,  and  no  regard  at  all  for  the  Gods,--herein  they  exhibit  and

imitate the old so-called Titanic nature, and come to the same point as the

Titans when they rebelled against God, leading a life of endless evils. But

why have I said all this? I ask, because the argument ought to be pulled up

from time to time, and not be allowed to run away, but held with bit and

bridle, and then we shall not, as the proverb says, fall off our ass. Let us then

once more ask the question, To what end has all this been said?


MEGILLUS: Very good.ATHENIAN: This, then, has been said for the sake--


MEGILLUS: Of what?


ATHENIAN: We were maintaining that the lawgiver ought to have three

things in view: first, that the city for which he legislates should be free; and

secondly, be at unity with herself; and thirdly, should have understanding;--

these were our principles, were they not?


MEGILLUS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: With a view to this we selected two kinds of government, the

one  the  most  despotic,  and  the  other  the  most  free;  and  now  we  are

considering which of them is the right form: we took a mean in both cases, of

despotism in the one, and of liberty in the other, and we saw that in a mean

they attained their perfection; but that when they were carried to the extreme

of either, slavery or licence, neither party were the gainers.


MEGILLUS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: And that was our reason for considering the settlement of the

Dorian army, and of the city built by Dardanus at the foot of the mountains,

and the removal of cities to the seashore, and of our mention of the first men,

who were the survivors of the deluge. And all that was previously said about

music and drinking, and what preceded, was said with the view of seeing how

a state might be best administered, and how an individual might best order

his own life. And now, Megillus and Cleinias, how can we put to the proof

the value of our words?


CLEINIAS: Stranger, I think that I see how a proof of their value may be

obtained.  This  discussion  of  ours  appears  to  me  to  have  been  singularly

fortunate, and just what I at this moment want; most auspiciously have you

and  my  friend  Megillus  come  in  my  way.  For  I  will  tell  you  what  has

happened to me; and I regard the coincidence as a sort of omen. The greater

part  of  Crete  is  going  to  send  out  a  colony,  and  they  have  entrusted  the

management of the affair to the Cnosians; and the Cnosian government to me

and nine others. And they desire us to give them any laws which we please,whether taken from the Cretan model or from any other; and they do not

mind about their being foreign if they are better. Grant me then this favour,

which will also be a gain to yourselves:--Let us make a selection from what

has been said, and then let us imagine a State of which we will suppose

ourselves  to  be  the  original  founders.  Thus  we  shall  proceed  with  our

enquiry, and, at the same time, I may have the use of the framework which

you are constructing, for the city which is in contemplation.


ATHENIAN: Good news, Cleinias; if Megillus has no objection, you may be

sure that I will do all in my power to please you.


CLEINIAS: Thank you.


MEGILLUS: And so will I.


CLEINIAS: Excellent; and now let us begin to frame the State.BOOK IV.


ATHENIAN: And now, what will this city be? I do not mean to ask what is

or will hereafter be the name of the place; that may be determined by the

accident of locality or of the original settlement--a river or fountain, or some

local deity may give the sanction of a name to the newly-founded city; but I

do want to know what the situation is, whether maritime or inland.


CLEINIAS:  I  should  imagine,  Stranger,  that  the  city  of  which  we  are

speaking is about eighty stadia distant from the sea.


ATHENIAN: And are there harbours on the seaboard?


CLEINIAS: Excellent harbours, Stranger; there could not be better.


ATHENIAN:  Alas!  what  a  prospect!  And  is  the  surrounding  country

productive, or in need of importations?


CLEINIAS: Hardly in need of anything.


ATHENIAN: And is there any neighbouring State?


CLEINIAS: None whatever, and that is the reason for selecting the place; in

days of old, there was a migration of the inhabitants, and the region has been

deserted from time immemorial.


ATHENIAN:  And  has  the  place  a  fair  proportion  of  hill,  and  plain,  and

wood?


CLEINIAS: Like the rest of Crete in that.


ATHENIAN: You mean to say that there is more rock than plain?


CLEINIAS: Exactly.


ATHENIAN: Then there is some hope that your citizens may be virtuous:had you been on the sea, and well provided with harbours, and an importing

rather  than  a  producing  country,  some  mighty  saviour  would  have  been

needed, and lawgivers more than mortal, if you were ever to have a chance of

preserving your state from degeneracy and discordance of manners (compare

Ar. Pol.). But there is comfort in the eighty stadia; although the sea is too

near, especially if, as you say, the harbours are so good. Still we may be

content. The sea is pleasant enough as a daily companion, but has indeed also

a  bitter  and  brackish  quality;  filling  the  streets  with  merchants  and

shopkeepers,  and  begetting  in  the  souls  of  men  uncertain  and  unfaithful

ways--making the state unfriendly and unfaithful both to her own citizens,

and also to other nations. There is a consolation, therefore, in the country

producing all things at home; and yet, owing to the ruggedness of the soil, not

providing  anything  in  great  abundance.  Had  there  been  abundance,  there

might have been a great export trade, and a great return of gold and silver;

which, as we may safely affirm, has the most fatal results on a State whose

aim is the attainment of just and noble sentiments: this was said by us, if you

remember, in the previous discussion.


CLEINIAS: I remember, and am of opinion that we both were and are in the

right.


ATHENIAN: Well, but let me ask, how is the country supplied with timber

for ship-building?


CLEINIAS:  There  is  no  fir  of  any  consequence,  nor  pine,  and  not  much

cypress;  and  you  will  find  very  little  stone-pine  or  plane-wood,  which

shipwrights always require for the interior of ships.


ATHENIAN: These are also natural advantages.


CLEINIAS: Why so?


ATHENIAN: Because no city ought to be easily able to imitate its enemies in

what is mischievous.


CLEINIAS: How does that bear upon any of the matters of which we have

been speaking?ATHENIAN:  Remember,  my  good  friend,  what  I  said  at  first  about  the

Cretan laws, that they looked to one thing only, and this, as you both agreed,

was war; and I replied that such laws, in so far as they tended to promote

virtue, were good; but in that they regarded a part only, and not the whole of

virtue, I disapproved of them. And now I hope that you in your turn will

follow and watch me if I legislate with a view to anything but virtue, or with

a view to a part of virtue only. For I consider that the true lawgiver, like an

archer, aims only at that on which some eternal beauty is always attending,

and dismisses everything else, whether wealth or any other benefit, when

separated from virtue. I was saying that the imitation of enemies was a bad

thing; and I was thinking of a case in which a maritime people are harassed

by enemies, as the Athenians were by Minos (I do not speak from any desire

to recall past grievances); but he, as we know, was a great naval potentate,

who compelled the inhabitants of Attica to pay him a cruel tribute; and in

those days they had no ships of war as they now have, nor was the country

filled  with  ship-timber,  and  therefore  they  could  not  readily  build  them.

Hence they could not learn how to imitate their enemy at sea, and in this way,

becoming sailors themselves, directly repel their enemies. Better for them to

have  lost  many  times  over  the  seven  youths,  than  that  heavy-armed  and

stationary troops should have been turned into sailors, and accustomed to be

often leaping on shore, and again to come running back to their ships; or

should have fancied that there was no disgrace in not awaiting the attack of

an enemy and dying boldly; and that there were good reasons, and plenty of

them, for a man throwing away his arms, and betaking himself to flight,--

which  is  not  dishonourable,  as  people  say,  at  certain  times.  This  is  the

language  of  naval  warfare,  and  is  anything  but  worthy  of  extraordinary

praise. For we should not teach bad habits, least of all to the best part of the

citizens. You may learn the evil of such a practice from Homer, by whom

Odysseus is introduced, rebuking Agamemnon, because he desires to draw

down the ships to the sea at a time when the Achaeans are hard pressed by

the Trojans,--he gets angry with him, and says:


'Who,  at  a  time  when  the  battle  is  in  full  cry,  biddest  to  drag  the  well-

benched  ships  into  the  sea,  that  the  prayers  of  the  Trojans  may  be

accomplished yet more, and high ruin fall upon us. For the Achaeans will not

maintain the battle, when the ships are drawn into the sea, but they will look

behind and will cease from strife; in that the counsel which you give willprove injurious.'


You see that he quite knew triremes on the sea, in the neighbourhood of

fighting men, to be an evil;--lions might be trained in that way to fly from a

herd of deer. Moreover, naval powers which owe their safety to ships, do not

give honour to that sort of warlike excellence which is most deserving of it.

For he who owes his safety to the pilot and the captain, and the oarsman, and

all  sorts  of  rather  inferior  persons,  cannot  rightly  give  honour  to  whom

honour is due. But how can a state be in a right condition which cannot justly

award honour?


CLEINIAS: It is hardly possible, I admit; and yet, Stranger, we Cretans are in

the habit of saying that the battle of Salamis was the salvation of Hellas.


ATHENIAN: Why, yes; and that is an opinion which is widely spread both

among Hellenes and barbarians. But Megillus and I say rather, that the battle

of Marathon was the beginning, and the battle of Plataea the completion, of

the great deliverance, and that these battles by land made the Hellenes better;

whereas the sea-fights of Salamis and Artemisium--for I may as well put

them both together--made them no better, if I may say so without offence

about the battles which helped to save us. And in estimating the goodness of

a state, we regard both the situation of the country and the order of the laws,

considering that the mere preservation and continuance of life is not the most

honourable thing for men, as the vulgar think, but the continuance of the best

life, while we live; and that again, if I am not mistaken, is a remark which has

been made already.


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: Then we have only to ask, whether we are taking the course

which we acknowledge to be the best for the settlement and legislation of

states.


CLEINIAS: The best by far.


ATHENIAN: And now let me proceed to another question: Who are to be the

colonists?  May  any  one  come  out  of  all  Crete;  and  is  the  idea  that  thepopulation in the several states is too numerous for the means of subsistence?

For I suppose that you are not going to send out a general invitation to any

Hellene who likes to come. And yet I observe that to your country settlers

have come from Argos and Aegina and other parts of Hellas. Tell me, then,

whence do you draw your recruits in the present enterprise?


CLEINIAS:  They  will  come  from  all  Crete;  and  of  other  Hellenes,

Peloponnesians will be most acceptable. For, as you truly observe, there are

Cretans of Argive descent; and the race of Cretans which has the highest

character at the present day is the Gortynian, and this has come from Gortys

in the Peloponnesus.


ATHENIAN: Cities find colonization in some respects easier if the colonists

are one race, which like a swarm of bees is sent out from a single country,

either when friends leave friends, owing to some pressure of population or

other similar necessity, or when a portion of a state is driven by factions to

emigrate. And there have been whole cities which have taken flight when

utterly conquered by a superior power in war. This, however, which is in one

way  an  advantage  to  the  colonist  or  legislator,  in  another  point  of  view

creates a difficulty. There is an element of friendship in the community of

race, and language, and laws, and in common temples and rites of worship;

but colonies which are of this homogeneous sort are apt to kick against any

laws or any form of constitution differing from that which they had at home;

and although the badness of their own laws may have been the cause of the

factions which prevailed among them, yet from the force of habit they would

fain preserve the very customs which were their ruin, and the leader of the

colony, who is their legislator, finds them troublesome and rebellious. On the

other hand, the conflux of several populations might be more disposed to

listen to new laws; but then, to make them combine and pull together, as they

say of horses, is a most difficult task, and the work of years. And yet there is

nothing which tends more to the improvement of mankind than legislation

and colonization.


CLEINIAS: No doubt; but I should like to know why you say so.


ATHENIAN: My good friend, I am afraid that the course of my speculations

is leading me to say something depreciatory of legislators; but if the word beto the purpose, there can be no harm. And yet, why am I disquieted, for I

believe that the same principle applies equally to all human things?


CLEINIAS: To what are you referring?


ATHENIAN: I was going to say that man never legislates, but accidents of

all sorts, which legislate for us in all sorts of ways. The violence of war and

the hard necessity of poverty are constantly overturning governments and

changing laws. And the power of disease has often caused innovations in the

state, when there have been pestilences, or when there has been a succession

of bad seasons continuing during many years. Any one who sees all this,

naturally rushes to the conclusion of which I was speaking, that no mortal

legislates in anything, but that in human affairs chance is almost everything.

And this may be said of the arts of the sailor, and the pilot, and the physician,

and the general, and may seem to be well said; and yet there is another thing

which may be said with equal truth of all of them.


CLEINIAS: What is it?


ATHENIAN: That God governs all things, and that chance and opportunity

co- operate with Him in the government of human affairs. There is, however,

a third and less extreme view, that art should be there also; for I should say

that in a storm there must surely be a great advantage in having the aid of the

pilot's art. You would agree?


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: And does not a like principle apply to legislation as well as to

other things: even supposing all the conditions to be favourable which are

needed for the happiness of the state, yet the true legislator must from time to

time appear on the scene?


CLEINIAS: Most true.


ATHENIAN: In each case the artist would be able to pray rightly for certain

conditions, and if these were granted by fortune, he would then only require

to exercise his art?CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN:  And  all  the  other  artists  just  now  mentioned,  if  they  were

bidden to offer up each their special prayer, would do so?


CLEINIAS: Of course.


ATHENIAN: And the legislator would do likewise?


CLEINIAS: I believe that he would.


ATHENIAN: 'Come, legislator,' we will say to him; 'what are the conditions

which you require in a state before you can organize it?' How ought he to

answer this question? Shall I give his answer?


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: He will say--'Give me a state which is governed by a tyrant,

and let the tyrant be young and have a good memory; let him be quick at

learning, and of a courageous and noble nature; let him have that quality

which, as I said before, is the inseparable companion of all the other parts of

virtue, if there is to be any good in them.'


CLEINIAS:  I  suppose,  Megillus,  that  this  companion  virtue  of  which  the

Stranger speaks, must be temperance?


ATHENIAN: Yes, Cleinias, temperance in the vulgar sense; not that which in

the forced and exaggerated language of some philosophers is called prudence,

but that which is the natural gift of children and animals, of whom some live

continently  and  others  incontinently,  but  when  isolated,  was,  as  we  said,

hardly  worth  reckoning  in  the  catalogue  of  goods.  I  think  that  you  must

understand my meaning.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Then our tyrant must have this as well as the other qualities, if

the state is to acquire in the best manner and in the shortest time the form of

government which is most conducive to happiness; for there neither is norever  will  be  a  better  or  speedier  way  of  establishing  a  polity  than  by  a

tyranny.


CLEINIAS: By what possible arguments, Stranger, can any man persuade

himself of such a monstrous doctrine?


ATHENIAN:  There  is  surely  no  difficulty  in  seeing,  Cleinias,  what  is  in

accordance with the order of nature?


CLEINIAS:  You  would  assume,  as  you  say,  a  tyrant  who  was  young,

temperate, quick at learning, having a good memory, courageous, of a noble

nature?


ATHENIAN: Yes; and you must add fortunate; and his good fortune must be

that he is the contemporary of a great legislator, and that some happy chance

brings them together. When this has been accomplished, God has done all

that he ever does for a state which he desires to be eminently prosperous; He

has done second best for a state in which there are two such rulers, and third

best for a state in which there are three. The difficulty increases with the

increase, and diminishes with the diminution of the number.


CLEINIAS:  You  mean  to  say,  I  suppose,  that  the  best  government  is

produced from a tyranny, and originates in a good lawgiver and an orderly

tyrant,  and  that  the  change  from  such  a  tyranny  into  a  perfect  form  of

government takes place most easily; less easily when from an oligarchy; and,

in the third degree, from a democracy: is not that your meaning?


ATHENIAN: Not so; I mean rather to say that the change is best made out of

a tyranny; and secondly, out of a monarchy; and thirdly, out of some sort of

democracy: fourth, in the capacity for improvement, comes oligarchy, which

has  the  greatest  difficulty  in  admitting  of  such  a  change,  because  the

government is in the hands of a number of potentates. I am supposing that the

legislator is by nature of the true sort, and that his strength is united with that

of the chief men of the state; and when the ruling element is numerically

small, and at the same time very strong, as in a tyranny, there the change is

likely to be easiest and most rapid.CLEINIAS: How? I do not understand.


ATHENIAN: And yet I have repeated what I am saying a good many times;

but I suppose that you have never seen a city which is under a tyranny?


CLEINIAS: No, and I cannot say that I have any great desire to see one.


ATHENIAN: And yet, where there is a tyranny, you might certainly see that

of which I am now speaking.


CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN: I mean that you might see how, without trouble and in no very

long period of time, the tyrant, if he wishes, can change the manners of a

state: he has only to go in the direction of virtue or of vice, whichever he

prefers, he himself indicating by his example the lines of conduct, praising

and rewarding some actions and reproving others, and degrading those who

disobey.


CLEINIAS: But how can we imagine that the citizens in general will at once

follow the example set to them; and how can he have this power both of

persuading and of compelling them?


ATHENIAN: Let no one, my friends, persuade us that there is any quicker

and easier way in which states change their laws than when the rulers lead:

such changes never have, nor ever will, come to pass in any other way. The

real impossibility or difficulty is of another sort, and is rarely surmounted in

the course of ages; but when once it is surmounted, ten thousand or rather all

blessings follow.


CLEINIAS: Of what are you speaking?


ATHENIAN: The difficulty is to find the divine love of temperate and just

institutions  existing  in  any  powerful  forms  of  government,  whether  in  a

monarchy  or  oligarchy  of  wealth  or  of  birth.  You  might  as  well  hope  to

reproduce the character of Nestor, who is said to have excelled all men in the

power of speech, and yet more in his temperance. This, however, accordingto the tradition, was in the times of Troy; in our own days there is nothing of

the sort; but if such an one either has or ever shall come into being, or is now

among us, blessed is he and blessed are they who hear the wise words that

flow from his lips. And this may be said of power in general: When the

supreme power in man coincides with the greatest wisdom and temperance,

then the best laws and the best constitution come into being; but in no other

way. And let what I have been saying be regarded as a kind of sacred legend

or oracle, and let this be our proof that, in one point of view, there may be a

difficulty for a city to have good laws, but that there is another point of view

in which nothing can be easier or sooner effected, granting our supposition.


CLEINIAS: How do you mean?


ATHENIAN: Let us try to amuse ourselves, old boys as we are, by moulding

in words the laws which are suitable to your state.


CLEINIAS: Let us proceed without delay.


ATHENIAN: Then let us invoke God at the settlement of our state; may He

hear and be propitious to us, and come and set in order the State and the laws!


CLEINIAS: May He come!


ATHENIAN: But what form of polity are we going to give the city?


CLEINIAS: Tell us what you mean a little more clearly. Do you mean some

form of democracy, or oligarchy, or aristocracy, or monarchy? For we cannot

suppose that you would include tyranny.


ATHENIAN: Which of you will first tell me to which of these classes his

own government is to be referred?


MEGILLUS: Ought I to answer first, since I am the elder?


CLEINIAS: Perhaps you should.


MEGILLUS: And yet, Stranger, I perceive that I cannot say, without more

thought, what I should call the government of Lacedaemon, for it seems tome to be like a tyranny,--the power of our Ephors is marvellously tyrannical;

and sometimes it appears to me to be of all cities the most democratical; and

who can reasonably deny that it is an aristocracy (compare Ar. Pol.)? We

have also a monarchy which is held for life, and is said by all mankind, and

not  by  ourselves  only,  to  be  the  most  ancient  of  all  monarchies;  and,

therefore, when asked on a sudden, I cannot precisely say which form of

government the Spartan is.


CLEINIAS: I am in the same difficulty, Megillus; for I do not feel confident

that the polity of Cnosus is any of these.


ATHENIAN:  The  reason  is,  my  excellent  friends,  that  you  really  have

polities,  but  the  states  of  which  we  were  just  now  speaking  are  merely

aggregations of men dwelling in cities who are the subjects and servants of a

part of their own state, and each of them is named after the dominant power;

they are not polities at all. But if states are to be named after their rulers, the

true state ought to be called by the name of the God who rules over wise men.


CLEINIAS: And who is this God?


ATHENIAN: May I still make use of fable to some extent, in the hope that I

may be better able to answer your question: shall I?


CLEINIAS: By all means.


ATHENIAN: In the primeval world, and a long while before the cities came

into being whose settlements we have described, there is said to have been in

the  time  of  Cronos  a  blessed  rule  and  life,  of  which  the  best-ordered  of

existing states is a copy (compare Statesman).


CLEINIAS: It will be very necessary to hear about that.


ATHENIAN: I quite agree with you; and therefore I have introduced the

subject.


CLEINIAS: Most appropriately; and since the tale is to the point, you will do

well in giving us the whole story.ATHENIAN: I will do as you suggest. There is a tradition of the happy life of

mankind in days when all things were spontaneous and abundant. And of this

the reason is said to have been as follows:--Cronos knew what we ourselves

were declaring, that no human nature invested with supreme power is able to

order  human  affairs  and  not  overflow  with  insolence  and  wrong.  Which

reflection led him to appoint not men but demigods, who are of a higher and

more divine race, to be the kings and rulers of our cities; he did as we do with

flocks of sheep and other tame animals. For we do not appoint oxen to be the

lords of oxen, or goats of goats; but we ourselves are a superior race, and rule

over them. In like manner God, in His love of mankind, placed over us the

demons, who are a superior race, and they with great ease and pleasure to

themselves, and no less to us, taking care of us and giving us peace and

reverence and order and justice never failing, made the tribes of men happy

and united. And this tradition, which is true, declares that cities of which

some mortal man and not God is the ruler, have no escape from evils and

toils. Still we must do all that we can to imitate the life which is said to have

existed in the days of Cronos, and, as far as the principle of immortality

dwells in us, to that we must hearken, both in private and public life, and

regulate our cities and houses according to law, meaning by the very term

'law,' the distribution of mind. But if either a single person or an oligarchy or

a democracy has a soul eager after pleasures and desires--wanting to be filled

with  them,  yet  retaining  none  of  them,  and  perpetually  afflicted  with  an

endless and insatiable disorder; and this evil spirit, having first trampled the

laws under foot, becomes the master either of a state or of an individual,--

then, as I was saying, salvation is hopeless. And now, Cleinias, we have to

consider whether you will or will not accept this tale of mine.


CLEINIAS: Certainly we will.


ATHENIAN: You are aware,--are you not?--that there are often said to be as

many forms of laws as there are of governments, and of the latter we have

already mentioned all those which are commonly recognized. Now you must

regard this as a matter of first-rate importance. For what is to be the standard

of just and unjust, is once more the point at issue. Men say that the law ought

not to regard either military virtue, or virtue in general, but only the interests

and power and preservation of the established form of government; this is

thought by them to be the best way of expressing the natural definition ofjustice.


CLEINIAS: How?


ATHENIAN:  Justice  is  said  by  them  to  be  the  interest  of  the  stronger

(Republic).


CLEINIAS: Speak plainer.


ATHENIAN:  I  will:--'Surely,'  they  say,  'the  governing  power  makes

whatever laws have authority in any state'?


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: 'Well,' they would add, 'and do you suppose that tyranny or

democracy, or any other conquering power, does not make the continuance of

the power which is possessed by them the first or principal object of their

laws'?


CLEINIAS: How can they have any other?


ATHENIAN: 'And whoever transgresses these laws is punished as an evil-

doer by the legislator, who calls the laws just'?


CLEINIAS: Naturally.


ATHENIAN: 'This, then, is always the mode and fashion in which justice

exists.'


CLEINIAS: Certainly, if they are correct in their view.


ATHENIAN: Why, yes, this is one of those false principles of government to

which we were referring.


CLEINIAS: Which do you mean?


ATHENIAN: Those which we were examining when we spoke of who ought

to govern whom. Did we not arrive at the conclusion that parents ought togovern their children, and the elder the younger, and the noble the ignoble?

And there were many other principles, if you remember, and they were not

always consistent. One principle was this very principle of might, and we

said that Pindar considered violence natural and justified it.


CLEINIAS: Yes; I remember.


ATHENIAN: Consider, then, to whom our state is to be entrusted. For there

is a thing which has occurred times without number in states--


CLEINIAS: What thing?


ATHENIAN: That when there has been a contest for power, those who gain

the upper hand so entirely monopolize the government, as to refuse all share

to the defeated party and their descendants--they live watching one another,

the ruling class being in perpetual fear that some one who has a recollection

of  former  wrongs  will  come  into  power  and  rise  up  against  them.  Now,

according to our view, such governments are not polities at all, nor are laws

right which are passed for the good of particular classes and not for the good

of the whole state. States which have such laws are not polities but parties,

and their notions of justice are simply unmeaning. I say this, because I am

going to assert that we must not entrust the government in your state to any

one because he is rich, or because he possesses any other advantage, such as

strength, or stature, or again birth: but he who is most obedient to the laws of

the state, he shall win the palm; and to him who is victorious in the first

degree shall be given the highest office and chief ministry of the gods; and

the second to him who bears the second palm; and on a similar principle shall

all the other offices be assigned to those who come next in order. And when I

call the rulers servants or ministers of the law, I give them this name not for

the sake of novelty, but because I certainly believe that upon such service or

ministry depends the well- or ill-being of the state. For that state in which the

law is subject and has no authority, I perceive to be on the highway to ruin;

but I see that the state in which the law is above the rulers, and the rulers are

the inferiors of the law, has salvation, and every blessing which the Gods can

confer.


CLEINIAS: Truly, Stranger, you see with the keen vision of age.ATHENIAN: Why, yes; every man when he is young has that sort of vision

dullest, and when he is old keenest.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: And now, what is to be the next step? May we not suppose the

colonists to have arrived, and proceed to make our speech to them?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: 'Friends,' we say to them,--'God, as the old tradition declares,

holding  in  his  hand  the  beginning,  middle,  and  end  of  all  that  is,  travels

according to His nature in a straight line towards the accomplishment of His

end. Justice always accompanies Him, and is the punisher of those who fall

short of the divine law. To justice, he who would be happy holds fast, and

follows in her company with all humility and order; but he who is lifted up

with pride, or elated by wealth or rank, or beauty, who is young and foolish,

and has a soul hot with insolence, and thinks that he has no need of any guide

or ruler, but is able himself to be the guide of others, he, I say, is left deserted

of God; and being thus deserted, he takes to him others who are like himself,

and dances about, throwing all things into confusion, and many think that he

is a great man, but in a short time he pays a penalty which justice cannot but

approve,  and  is  utterly  destroyed,  and  his  family  and  city  with  him.

Wherefore, seeing that human things are thus ordered, what should a wise

man do or think, or not do or think'?


CLEINIAS: Every man ought to make up his mind that he will be one of the

followers of God; there can be no doubt of that.


ATHENIAN:  Then  what  life  is  agreeable  to  God,  and  becoming  in  His

followers? One only, expressed once for all in the old saying that 'like agrees

with like, with measure measure,' but things which have no measure agree

neither with themselves nor with the things which have. Now God ought to

be to us the measure of all things, and not man (compare Crat.; Theaet.), as

men commonly say (Protagoras): the words are far more true of Him. And he

who would be dear to God must, as far as is possible, be like Him and such as

He is. Wherefore the temperate man is the friend of God, for he is like Him;and the intemperate man is unlike Him, and different from Him, and unjust.

And the same applies to other things; and this is the conclusion, which is also

the noblest and truest of all sayings,--that for the good man to offer sacrifice

to the Gods, and hold converse with them by means of prayers and offerings

and every kind of service, is the noblest and best of all things, and also the

most conducive to a happy life, and very fit and meet. But with the bad man,

the opposite of this is true: for the bad man has an impure soul, whereas the

good is pure; and from one who is polluted, neither a good man nor God can

without impropriety receive gifts. Wherefore the unholy do only waste their

much service upon the Gods, but when offered by any holy man, such service

is most acceptable to them. This is the mark at which we ought to aim. But

what weapons shall we use, and how shall we direct them? In the first place,

we  affirm  that  next  after  the  Olympian  Gods  and  the  Gods  of  the  State,

honour should be given to the Gods below; they should receive everything in

even  numbers,  and  of  the  second  choice,  and  ill  omen,  while  the  odd

numbers, and the first choice, and the things of lucky omen, are given to the

Gods above, by him who would rightly hit the mark of piety. Next to these

Gods, a wise man will do service to the demons or spirits, and then to the

heroes, and after them will follow the private and ancestral Gods, who are

worshipped as the law prescribes in the places which are sacred to them. Next

comes the honour of living parents, to whom, as is meet, we have to pay the

first and greatest and oldest of all debts, considering that all which a man has

belongs to those who gave him birth and brought him up, and that he must do

all that he can to minister to them, first, in his property, secondly, in his

person,  and  thirdly,  in  his  soul,  in  return  for  the  endless  care  and  travail

which they bestowed upon him of old, in the days of his infancy, and which

he is now to pay back to them when they are old and in the extremity of their

need. And all his life long he ought never to utter, or to have uttered, an

unbecoming word to them; for of light and fleeting words the penalty is most

severe; Nemesis, the messenger of justice, is appointed to watch over all such

matters. When they are angry and want to satisfy their feelings in word or

deed, he should give way to them; for a father who thinks that he has been

wronged by his son may be reasonably expected to be very angry. At their

death, the most moderate funeral is best, neither exceeding the customary

expense, nor yet falling short of the honour which has been usually shown by

the former generation to their parents. And let a man not forget to pay the

yearly  tribute  of  respect  to  the  dead,  honouring  them  chiefly  by  omittingnothing  that  conduces  to  a  perpetual  remembrance  of  them,  and  giving  a

reasonable portion of his fortune to the dead. Doing this, and living after this

manner, we shall receive our reward from the Gods and those who are above

us (i.e. the demons); and we shall spend our days for the most part in good

hope. And how a man ought to order what relates to his descendants and his

kindred and friends and fellow-citizens, and the rites of hospitality taught by

Heaven, and the intercourse which arises out of all these duties, with a view

to the embellishment and orderly regulation of his own life--these things, I

say, the laws, as we proceed with them, will accomplish, partly persuading,

and partly when natures do not yield to the persuasion of custom, chastising

them  by  might  and  right,  and  will  thus  render  our  state,  if  the  Gods  co-

operate with us, prosperous and happy. But of what has to be said, and must

be said by the legislator who is of my way of thinking, and yet, if said in the

form of law, would be out of place--of this I think that he may give a sample

for the instruction of himself and of those for whom he is legislating; and

then when, as far as he is able, he has gone through all the preliminaries, he

may proceed to the work of legislation. Now, what will be the form of such

prefaces? There may be a difficulty in including or describing them all under

a single form, but I think that we may get some notion of them if we can

guarantee one thing.


CLEINIAS: What is that?


ATHENIAN: I should wish the citizens to be as readily persuaded to virtue as

possible; this will surely be the aim of the legislator in all his laws.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: The proposal appears to me to be of some value; and I think

that a person will listen with more gentleness and good-will to the precepts

addressed to him by the legislator, when his soul is not altogether unprepared

to receive them. Even a little done in the way of conciliation gains his ear,

and is always worth having. For there is no great inclination or readiness on

the part of mankind to be made as good, or as quickly good, as possible. The

case of the many proves the wisdom of Hesiod, who says that the road to

wickedness is smooth and can be travelled without perspiring, because it is so

very short:'But before virtue the immortal Gods have placed the sweat of labour, and

long and steep is the way thither, and rugged at first; but when you have

reached the top, although difficult before, it is then easy.' (Works and Days.)


CLEINIAS: Yes; and he certainly speaks well.


ATHENIAN:  Very  true:  and  now  let  me  tell  you  the  effect  which  the

preceding discourse has had upon me.


CLEINIAS: Proceed.


ATHENIAN: Suppose that we have a little conversation with the legislator,

and say to him--'O, legislator, speak; if you know what we ought to say and

do, you can surely tell.'


CLEINIAS: Of course he can.


ATHENIAN: 'Did we not hear you just now saying, that the legislator ought

not to allow the poets to do what they liked? For that they would not know in

which of their words they went against the laws, to the hurt of the state.'


CLEINIAS: That is true.


ATHENIAN: May we not fairly make answer to him on behalf of the poets?


CLEINIAS: What answer shall we make to him?


ATHENIAN:  That  the  poet,  according  to  the  tradition  which  has  ever

prevailed among us, and is accepted of all men, when he sits down on the

tripod of the muse, is not in his right mind; like a fountain, he allows to flow

out  freely  whatever  comes  in,  and  his  art  being  imitative,  he  is  often

compelled to represent men of opposite dispositions, and thus to contradict

himself; neither can he tell whether there is more truth in one thing that he

has said than in another. This is not the case in a law; the legislator must give

not two rules about the same thing, but one only. Take an example from what

you have just been saying. Of three kinds of funerals, there is one which is

too extravagant, another is too niggardly, the third in a mean; and you choose

and  approve  and  order  the  last  without  qualification.  But  if  I  had  anextremely rich wife, and she bade me bury her and describe her burial in a

poem, I should praise the extravagant sort; and a poor miserly man, who had

not much money to spend, would approve of the niggardly; and the man of

moderate  means,  who  was  himself  moderate,  would  praise  a  moderate

funeral. Now you in the capacity of legislator must not barely say 'a moderate

funeral,' but you must define what moderation is, and how much; unless you

are definite, you must not suppose that you are speaking a language that can

become law.


CLEINIAS: Certainly not.


ATHENIAN: And is our legislator to have no preface to his laws, but to say

at once Do this, avoid that--and then holding the penalty in terrorem, to go on

to another law; offering never a word of advice or exhortation to those for

whom he is legislating, after the manner of some doctors? For of doctors, as I

may remind you, some have a gentler, others a ruder method of cure; and as

children ask the doctor to be gentle with them, so we will ask the legislator to

cure our disorders with the gentlest remedies. What I mean to say is, that

besides doctors there are doctors' servants, who are also styled doctors.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: And whether they are slaves or freemen makes no difference;

they acquire their knowledge of medicine by obeying and observing their

masters; empirically and not according to the natural way of learning, as the

manner  of  freemen  is,  who  have  learned  scientifically  themselves  the  art

which they impart scientifically to their pupils. You are aware that there are

these two classes of doctors?


CLEINIAS: To be sure.


ATHENIAN: And did you ever observe that there are two classes of patients

in states, slaves and freemen; and the slave doctors run about and cure the

slaves, or wait for them in the dispensaries--practitioners of this sort never

talk to their patients individually, or let them talk about their own individual

complaints? The slave doctor prescribes what mere experience suggests, as if

he had exact knowledge; and when he has given his orders, like a tyrant, herushes off with equal assurance to some other servant who is ill; and so he

relieves the master of the house of the care of his invalid slaves. But the other

doctor, who is a freeman, attends and practices upon freemen; and he carries

his enquiries far back, and goes into the nature of the disorder; he enters into

discourse  with  the  patient  and  with  his  friends,  and  is  at  once  getting

information from the sick man, and also instructing him as far as he is able,

and he will not prescribe for him until he has first convinced him; at last,

when  he  has  brought  the  patient  more  and  more  under  his  persuasive

influences and set him on the road to health, he attempts to effect a cure. Now

which is the better way of proceeding in a physician and in a trainer? Is he

the better who accomplishes his ends in a double way, or he who works in

one way, and that the ruder and inferior?


CLEINIAS: I should say, Stranger, that the double way is far better.


ATHENIAN: Should you like to see an example of the double and single

method in legislation?


CLEINIAS: Certainly I should.


ATHENIAN: What will be our first law? Will not the legislator, observing

the order of nature, begin by making regulations for states about births?


CLEINIAS: He will.


ATHENIAN: In all states the birth of children goes back to the connexion of

marriage?


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: And, according to the true order, the laws relating to marriage

should be those which are first determined in every state?


CLEINIAS: Quite so.


ATHENIAN: Then let me first give the law of marriage in a simple form; it

may run as follows:--A man shall marry between the ages of thirty and thirty-

five, or, if he does not, he shall pay such and such a fine, or shall suffer theloss  of  such  and  such  privileges.  This  would  be  the  simple  law  about

marriage. The double law would run thus:--A man shall marry between the

ages of thirty and thirty-five, considering that in a manner the human race

naturally partakes of immortality, which every man is by nature inclined to

desire to the utmost; for the desire of every man that he may become famous,

and not lie in the grave without a name, is only the love of continuance. Now

mankind  are  coeval  with  all  time,  and  are  ever  following,  and  will  ever

follow, the course of time; and so they are immortal, because they leave

children's children behind them, and partake of immortality in the unity of

generation. And for a man voluntarily to deprive himself of this gift, as he

deliberately does who will not have a wife or children, is impiety. He who

obeys the law shall be free, and shall pay no fine; but he who is disobedient,

and does not marry, when he has arrived at the age of thirty-five, shall pay a

yearly fine of a certain amount, in order that he may not imagine his celibacy

to bring ease and profit to him; and he shall not share in the honours which

the young men in the state give to the aged. Comparing now the two forms of

the law, you will be able to arrive at a judgment about any other laws --

whether they should be double in length even when shortest, because they

have to persuade as well as threaten, or whether they shall only threaten and

be of half the length.


MEGILLUS: The shorter form, Stranger, would be more in accordance with

Lacedaemonian custom; although, for my own part, if any one were to ask

me which I myself prefer in the state, I should certainly determine in favour

of the longer; and I would have every law made after the same pattern, if I

had to choose. But I think that Cleinias is the person to be consulted, for his

is the state which is going to use these laws.


CLEINIAS: Thank you, Megillus.


ATHENIAN: Whether, in the abstract, words are to be many or few, is a very

foolish question; the best form, and not the shortest, is to be approved; nor is

length at all to be regarded. Of the two forms of law which have been recited,

the one is not only twice as good in practical usefulness as the other, but the

case is like that of the two kinds of doctors, which I was just now mentioning.

And  yet  legislators  never  appear  to  have  considered  that  they  have  two

instruments which they might use in legislation--persuasion and force; for indealing with the rude and uneducated multitude, they use the one only as far

as they can; they do not mingle persuasion with coercion, but employ force

pure and simple. Moreover, there is a third point, sweet friends, which ought

to be, and never is, regarded in our existing laws.


CLEINIAS: What is it?


ATHENIAN: A point arising out of our previous discussion, which comes

into my mind in some mysterious way. All this time, from early dawn until

noon, have we been talking about laws in this charming retreat: now we are

going to promulgate our laws, and what has preceded was only the prelude of

them. Why do I mention this? For this reason:--Because all discourses and

vocal  exercises  have  preludes  and  overtures,  which  are  a  sort  of  artistic

beginnings  intended  to  help  the  strain  which  is  to  be  performed;  lyric

measures and music of every other kind have preludes framed with wonderful

care. But of the truer and higher strain of law and politics, no one has ever yet

uttered any prelude, or composed or published any, as though there was no

such thing in nature. Whereas our present discussion seems to me to imply

that there is;--these double laws, of which we were speaking, are not exactly

double, but they are in two parts, the law and the prelude of the law. The

arbitrary command, which was compared to the commands of doctors, whom

we described as of the meaner sort, was the law pure and simple; and that

which preceded, and was described by our friend here as being hortatory

only,  was,  although  in  fact,  an  exhortation,  likewise  analogous  to  the

preamble of a discourse. For I imagine that all this language of conciliation,

which the legislator has been uttering in the preface of the law, was intended

to create good-will in the person whom he addressed, in order that, by reason

of this good-will, he might more intelligently receive his command, that is to

say,  the  law.  And  therefore,  in  my  way  of  speaking,  this  is  more  rightly

described as the preamble than as the matter of the law. And I must further

proceed to observe, that to all his laws, and to each separately, the legislator

should  prefix  a  preamble;  he  should  remember  how  great  will  be  the

difference  between  them,  according  as  they  have,  or  have  not,  such

preambles, as in the case already given.


CLEINIAS: The lawgiver, if he asks my opinion, will certainly legislate in

the form which you advise.ATHENIAN: I think that you are right, Cleinias, in affirming that all laws

have preambles, and that throughout the whole of this work of legislation

every single law should have a suitable preamble at the beginning; for that

which is to follow is most important, and it makes all the difference whether

we  clearly  remember  the  preambles  or  not.  Yet  we  should  be  wrong  in

requiring that all laws, small and great alike, should have preambles of the

same kind, any more than all songs or speeches; although they may be natural

to all, they are not always necessary, and whether they are to be employed or

not has in each case to be left to the judgment of the speaker or the musician,

or, in the present instance, of the lawgiver.


CLEINIAS: That I think is most true. And now, Stranger, without delay let us

return to the argument, and, as people say in play, make a second and better

beginning,  if  you  please,  with  the  principles  which  we  have  been  laying

down, which we never thought of regarding as a preamble before, but of

which we may now make a preamble, and not merely consider them to be

chance  topics  of  discourse.  Let  us  acknowledge,  then,  that  we  have  a

preamble. About the honour of the Gods and the respect of parents, enough

has been already said; and we may proceed to the topics which follow next in

order, until the preamble is deemed by you to be complete; and after that you

shall go through the laws themselves.


ATHENIAN:  I  understand  you  to  mean  that  we  have  made  a  sufficient

preamble about Gods and demigods, and about parents living or dead; and

now you would have us bring the rest of the subject into the light of day?


CLEINIAS: Exactly.


ATHENIAN: After this, as is meet and for the interest of us all, I the speaker,

and you the listeners, will try to estimate all that relates to the souls and

bodies and properties of the citizens, as regards both their occupations and

amusements, and thus arrive, as far as in us lies, at the nature of education.

These then are the topics which follow next in order.


CLEINIAS: Very good.BOOK V.


ATHENIAN: Listen, all ye who have just now heard the laws about Gods,

and about our dear forefathers:--Of all the things which a man has, next to the

Gods, his soul is the most divine and most truly his own. Now in every man

there are two parts: the better and superior, which rules, and the worse and

inferior, which serves; and the ruling part of him is always to be preferred to

the subject. Wherefore I am right in bidding every one next to the Gods, who

are our masters, and those who in order follow them (i.e. the demons), to

honour his own soul, which every one seems to honour, but no one honours

as he ought; for honour is a divine good, and no evil thing is honourable; and

he who thinks that he can honour the soul by word or gift, or any sort of

compliance, without making her in any way better, seems to honour her, but

honours  her  not  at  all.  For  example,  every  man,  from  his  very  boyhood,

fancies that he is able to know everything, and thinks that he honours his soul

by praising her, and he is very ready to let her do whatever she may like. But

I mean to say that in acting thus he injures his soul, and is far from honouring

her; whereas, in our opinion, he ought to honour her as second only to the

Gods.  Again,  when  a  man  thinks  that  others  are  to  be  blamed,  and  not

himself, for the errors which he has committed from time to time, and the

many  and  great  evils  which  befell  him  in  consequence,  and  is  always

fancying himself to be exempt and innocent, he is under the idea that he is

honouring  his  soul;  whereas  the  very  reverse  is  the  fact,  for  he  is  really

injuring her. And when, disregarding the word and approval of the legislator,

he indulges in pleasure, then again he is far from honouring her; he only

dishonours her, and fills her full of evil and remorse; or when he does not

endure to the end the labours and fears and sorrows and pains which the

legislator approves, but gives way before them, then, by yielding, he does not

honour the soul, but by all such conduct he makes her to be dishonourable;

nor when he thinks that life at any price is a good, does he honour her, but yet

once more he dishonours her; for the soul having a notion that the world

below is all evil, he yields to her, and does not resist and teach or convince

her that, for aught she knows, the world of the Gods below, instead of being

evil, may be the greatest of all goods. Again, when any one prefers beauty to

virtue, what is this but the real and utter dishonour of the soul? For such apreference implies that the body is more honourable than the soul; and this is

false, for there is nothing of earthly birth which is more honourable than the

heavenly, and he who thinks otherwise of the soul has no idea how greatly he

undervalues this wonderful possession; nor, again, when a person is willing,

or not unwilling, to acquire dishonest gains, does he then honour his soul

with gifts--far otherwise; he sells her glory and honour for a small piece of

gold; but all the gold which is under or upon the earth is not enough to give in

exchange for virtue. In a word, I may say that he who does not estimate the

base and evil, the good and noble, according to the standard of the legislator,

and abstain in every possible way from the one and practise the other to the

utmost of his power, does not know that in all these respects he is most foully

and disgracefully abusing his soul, which is the divinest part of man; for no

one, as I may say, ever considers that which is declared to be the greatest

penalty of evil-doing--namely, to grow into the likeness of bad men, and

growing like them to fly from the conversation of the good, and be cut off

from them, and cleave to and follow after the company of the bad. And he

who is joined to them must do and suffer what such men by nature do and say

to one another,--a suffering which is not justice but retribution; for justice and

the  just  are  noble,  whereas  retribution  is  the  suffering  which  waits  upon

injustice; and whether a man escape or endure this, he is miserable,--in the

former case, because he is not cured; while in the latter, he perishes in order

that the rest of mankind may be saved.


Speaking generally, our glory is to follow the better and improve the inferior,

which is susceptible of improvement, as far as this is possible. And of all

human possessions, the soul is by nature most inclined to avoid the evil, and

track out and find the chief good; which when a man has found, he should

take up his abode with it during the remainder of his life. Wherefore the soul

also  is  second  (or  next  to  God)  in  honour;  and  third,  as  every  one  will

perceive, comes the honour of the body in natural order. Having determined

this, we have next to consider that there is a natural honour of the body, and

that of honours some are true and some are counterfeit. To decide which are

which is the business of the legislator; and he, I suspect, would intimate that

they are as follows:--Honour is not to be given to the fair body, or to the

strong or the swift or the tall, or to the healthy body (although many may

think otherwise), any more than to their opposites; but the mean states of all

these habits are by far the safest and most moderate; for the one extrememakes the soul braggart and insolent, and the other, illiberal and base; and

money, and property, and distinction all go to the same tune. The excess of

any of these things is apt to be a source of hatreds and divisions among states

and individuals; and the defect of them is commonly a cause of slavery. And,

therefore, I would not have any one fond of heaping up riches for the sake of

his children, in order that he may leave them as rich as possible. For the

possession of great wealth is of no use, either to them or to the state. The

condition of youth which is free from flattery, and at the same time not in

need of the necessaries of life, is the best and most harmonious of all, being

in accord and agreement with our nature, and making life to be most entirely

free from sorrow. Let parents, then, bequeath to their children not a heap of

riches, but the spirit of reverence. We, indeed, fancy that they will inherit

reverence from us, if we rebuke them when they show a want of reverence.

But  this  quality  is  not  really  imparted  to  them  by  the  present  style  of

admonition,  which  only  tells  them  that  the  young  ought  always  to  be

reverential. A sensible legislator will rather exhort the elders to reverence the

younger, and above all to take heed that no young man sees or hears one of

themselves doing or saying anything disgraceful; for where old men have no

shame, there young men will most certainly be devoid of reverence. The best

way  of  training  the  young  is  to  train  yourself  at  the  same  time;  not  to

admonish  them,  but  to  be  always  carrying  out  your  own  admonitions  in

practice. He who honours his kindred, and reveres those who share in the

same Gods and are of the same blood and family, may fairly expect that the

Gods who preside over generation will be propitious to him, and will quicken

his seed. And he who deems the services which his friends and acquaintances

do for him, greater and more important than they themselves deem them, and

his own favours to them less than theirs to him, will have their good-will in

the intercourse of life. And surely in his relations to the state and his fellow

citizens, he is by far the best, who rather than the Olympic or any other

victory of peace or war, desires to win the palm of obedience to the laws of

his country, and who, of all mankind, is the person reputed to have obeyed

them best through life. In his relations to strangers, a man should consider

that a contract is a most holy thing, and that all concerns and wrongs of

strangers are more directly dependent on the protection of God, than wrongs

done to citizens; for the stranger, having no kindred and friends, is more to be

pitied by Gods and men. Wherefore, also, he who is most able to avenge him

is most zealous in his cause; and he who is most able is the genius and thegod of the stranger, who follow in the train of Zeus, the god of strangers. And

for this reason, he who has a spark of caution in him, will do his best to pass

through life without sinning against the stranger. And of offences committed,

whether against strangers or fellow- countrymen, that against suppliants is the

greatest.  For  the  God  who  witnessed  to  the  agreement  made  with  the

suppliant, becomes in a special manner the guardian of the sufferer; and he

will certainly not suffer unavenged.


Thus we have fairly described the manner in which a man is to act about his

parents, and himself, and his own affairs; and in relation to the state, and his

friends, and kindred, both in what concerns his own countrymen, and in what

concerns the stranger. We will now consider what manner of man he must be

who would best pass through life in respect of those other things which are

not matters of law, but of praise and blame only; in which praise and blame

educate a man, and make him more tractable and amenable to the laws which

are about to be imposed.


Truth is the beginning of every good thing, both to Gods and men; and he

who would be blessed and happy, should be from the first a partaker of the

truth, that he may live a true man as long as possible, for then he can be

trusted; but he is not to be trusted who loves voluntary falsehood, and he who

loves involuntary falsehood is a fool. Neither condition is enviable, for the

untrustworthy and ignorant has no friend, and as time advances he becomes

known, and lays up in store for himself isolation in crabbed age when life is

on the wane: so that, whether his children or friends are alive or not, he is

equally solitary.--Worthy of honour is he who does no injustice, and of more

than twofold honour, if he not only does no injustice himself, but hinders

others from doing any; the first may count as one man, the second is worth

many men, because he informs the rulers of the injustice of others. And yet

more  highly  to  be  esteemed  is  he  who  co-  operates  with  the  rulers  in

correcting the citizens as far as he can--he shall be proclaimed the great and

perfect citizen, and bear away the palm of virtue. The same praise may be

given  about  temperance  and  wisdom,  and  all  other  goods  which  may  be

imparted to others, as well as acquired by a man for himself; he who imparts

them shall be honoured as the man of men, and he who is willing, yet is not

able, may be allowed the second place; but he who is jealous and will not, if

he  can  help,  allow  others  to  partake  in  a  friendly  way  of  any  good,  isdeserving  of  blame:  the  good,  however,  which  he  has,  is  not  to  be

undervalued by us because it is possessed by him, but must be acquired by us

also to the utmost of our power. Let every man, then, freely strive for the

prize of virtue, and let there be no envy. For the unenvious nature increases

the greatness of states--he himself contends in the race, blasting the fair fame

of no man; but the envious, who thinks that he ought to get the better by

defaming others, is less energetic himself in the pursuit of true virtue, and

reduces his rivals to despair by his unjust slanders of them. And so he makes

the  whole  city  to  enter  the  arena  untrained  in  the  practice  of  virtue,  and

diminishes her glory as far as in him lies. Now every man should be valiant,

but he should also be gentle. From the cruel, or hardly curable, or altogether

incurable acts of injustice done to him by others, a man can only escape by

fighting  and  defending  himself  and  conquering,  and  by  never  ceasing  to

punish them; and no man who is not of a noble spirit is able to accomplish

this. As to the actions of those who do evil, but whose evil is curable, in the

first place, let us remember that the unjust man is not unjust of his own free

will. For no man of his own free will would choose to possess the greatest of

evils, and least of all in the most honourable part of himself. And the soul, as

we said, is of a truth deemed by all men the most honourable. In the soul,

then, which is the most honourable part of him, no one, if he could help,

would admit, or allow to continue the greatest of evils (compare Republic).

The unrighteous and vicious are always to be pitied in any case; and one can

afford to forgive as well as pity him who is curable, and refrain and calm

one's anger, not getting into a passion, like a woman, and nursing ill- feeling.

But upon him who is incapable of reformation and wholly evil, the vials of

our wrath should be poured out; wherefore I say that good men ought, when

occasion demands, to be both gentle and passionate.


Of all evils the greatest is one which in the souls of most men is innate, and

which a man is always excusing in himself and never correcting; I mean,

what is expressed in the saying that 'Every man by nature is and ought to be

his own friend.' Whereas the excessive love of self is in reality the source to

each man of all offences; for the lover is blinded about the beloved, so that he

judges wrongly of the just, the good, and the honourable, and thinks that he

ought always to prefer himself to the truth. But he who would be a great man

ought to regard, not himself or his interests, but what is just, whether the just

act be his own or that of another. Through a similar error men are induced tofancy that their own ignorance is wisdom, and thus we who may be truly said

to know nothing, think that we know all things; and because we will not let

others act for us in what we do not know, we are compelled to act amiss

ourselves.  Wherefore  let  every  man  avoid  excess  of  self-love,  and

condescend to follow a better man than himself, not allowing any false shame

to stand in the way. There are also minor precepts which are often repeated,

and are quite as useful; a man should recollect them and remind himself of

them. For when a stream is flowing out, there should be water flowing in too;

and recollection flows in while wisdom is departing. Therefore I say that a

man should refrain from excess either of laughter or tears, and should exhort

his neighbour to do the same; he should veil his immoderate sorrow or joy,

and seek to behave with propriety, whether the genius of his good fortune

remains with him, or whether at the crisis of his fate, when he seems to be

mounting  high  and  steep  places,  the  Gods  oppose  him  in  some  of  his

enterprises. Still he may ever hope, in the case of good men, that whatever

afflictions are to befall them in the future God will lessen, and that present

evils He will change for the better; and as to the goods which are the opposite

of these evils, he will not doubt that they will be added to them, and that they

will  be  fortunate.  Such  should  be  men's  hopes,  and  such  should  be  the

exhortations  with  which  they  admonish  one  another,  never  losing  an

opportunity,  but  on  every  occasion  distinctly  reminding  themselves  and

others of all these things, both in jest and earnest.


Enough has now been said of divine matters, both as touching the practices

which men ought to follow, and as to the sort of persons who they ought

severally to be. But of human things we have not as yet spoken, and we must;

for  to  men  we  are  discoursing  and  not  to  Gods.  Pleasures  and  pains  and

desires are a part of human nature, and on them every mortal being must of

necessity hang and depend with the most eager interest. And therefore we

must praise the noblest life, not only as the fairest in appearance, but as being

one which, if a man will only taste, and not, while still in his youth, desert for

another, he will find to surpass also in the very thing which we all of us

desire,--I mean in having a greater amount of pleasure and less of pain during

the whole of life. And this will be plain, if a man has a true taste of them, as

will be quickly and clearly seen. But what is a true taste? That we have to

learn from the argument--the point being what is according to nature, and

what is not according to nature. One life must be compared with another, themore pleasurable with the more painful, after this manner:--We desire to have

pleasure, but we neither desire nor choose pain; and the neutral state we are

ready to take in exchange, not for pleasure but for pain; and we also wish for

less pain and greater pleasure, but less pleasure and greater pain we do not

wish for; and an equal balance of either we cannot venture to assert that we

should desire. And all these differ or do not differ severally in number and

magnitude and intensity and equality, and in the opposites of these when

regarded  as  objects  of  choice,  in  relation  to  desire.  And  such  being  the

necessary order of things, we wish for that life in which there are many great

and intense elements of pleasure and pain, and in which the pleasures are in

excess, and do not wish for that in which the opposites exceed; nor, again, do

we wish for that in which the elements of either are small and few and feeble,

and  the  pains  exceed.  And  when,  as  I  said  before,  there  is  a  balance  of

pleasure and pain in life, this is to be regarded by us as the balanced life;

while other lives are preferred by us because they exceed in what we like, or

are rejected by us because they exceed in what we dislike. All the lives of

men may be regarded by us as bound up in these, and we must also consider

what sort of lives we by nature desire. And if we wish for any others, I say

that we desire them only through some ignorance and inexperience of the

lives which actually exist.


Now, what lives are they, and how many in which, having searched out and

beheld the objects of will and desire and their opposites, and making of them

a law, choosing, I say, the dear and the pleasant and the best and noblest, a

man may live in the happiest way possible? Let us say that the temperate life

is one kind of life, and the rational another, and the courageous another, and

the healthful another; and to these four let us oppose four other lives--the

foolish,  the  cowardly,  the  intemperate,  the  diseased.  He  who  knows  the

temperate life will describe it as in all things gentle, having gentle pains and

gentle  pleasures,  and  placid  desires  and  loves  not  insane;  whereas  the

intemperate  life  is  impetuous  in  all  things,  and  has  violent  pains  and

pleasures, and vehement and stinging desires, and loves utterly insane; and in

the temperate life the pleasures exceed the pains, but in the intemperate life

the pains exceed the pleasures in greatness and number and frequency. Hence

one of the two lives is naturally and necessarily more pleasant and the other

more painful, and he who would live pleasantly cannot possibly choose to

live intemperately. And if this is true, the inference clearly is that no man isvoluntarily intemperate; but that the whole multitude of men lack temperance

in their lives, either from ignorance, or from want of self- control, or both.

And the same holds of the diseased and healthy life; they both have pleasures

and pains, but in health the pleasure exceeds the pain, and in sickness the

pain exceeds the pleasure. Now our intention in choosing the lives is not that

the painful should exceed, but the life in which pain is exceeded by pleasure

we have determined to be the more pleasant life. And we should say that the

temperate life has the elements both of pleasure and pain fewer and smaller

and less frequent than the intemperate, and the wise life than the foolish life,

and the life of courage than the life of cowardice; one of each pair exceeding

in pleasure and the other in pain, the courageous surpassing the cowardly,

and the wise exceeding the foolish. And so the one class of lives exceeds the

other class in pleasure; the temperate and courageous and wise and healthy

exceed  the  cowardly  and  foolish  and  intemperate  and  diseased  lives;  and

generally speaking, that which has any virtue, whether of body or soul, is

pleasanter than the vicious life, and far superior in beauty and rectitude and

excellence  and  reputation,  and  causes  him  who  lives  accordingly  to  be

infinitely happier than the opposite.


Enough of the preamble; and now the laws should follow; or, to speak more

correctly, an outline of them. As, then, in the case of a web or any other

tissue, the warp and the woof cannot be made of the same materials (compare

Statesman), but the warp is necessarily superior as being stronger, and having

a certain character of firmness, whereas the woof is softer and has a proper

degree of elasticity;--in a similar manner those who are to hold great offices

in states, should be distinguished truly in each case from those who have

been but slenderly proven by education. Let us suppose that there are two

parts in the constitution of a state--one the creation of offices, the other the

laws which are assigned to them to administer.


But,  before  all  this,  comes  the  following  consideration:--The  shepherd  or

herdsman, or breeder of horses or the like, when he has received his animals

will not begin to train them until he has first purified them in a manner which

befits a community of animals; he will divide the healthy and unhealthy, and

the good breed and the bad breed, and will send away the unhealthy and

badly bred to other herds, and tend the rest, reflecting that his labours will be

vain and have no effect, either on the souls or bodies of those whom natureand ill nurture have corrupted, and that they will involve in destruction the

pure and healthy nature and being of every other animal, if he should neglect

to purify them. Now the case of other animals is not so important--they are

only worth introducing for the sake of illustration; but what relates to man is

of  the  highest  importance;  and  the  legislator  should  make  enquiries,  and

indicate what is proper for each one in the way of purification and of any

other procedure. Take, for example, the purification of a city--there are many

kinds  of  purification,  some  easier  and  others  more  difficult;  and  some  of

them, and the best and most difficult of them, the legislator, if he be also a

despot, may be able to effect; but the legislator, who, not being a despot, sets

up a new government and laws, even if he attempt the mildest of purgations,

may  think  himself  happy  if  he  can  complete  his  work.  The  best  kind  of

purification  is  painful,  like  similar  cures  in  medicine,  involving  righteous

punishment and inflicting death or exile in the last resort. For in this way we

commonly dispose of great sinners who are incurable, and are the greatest

injury of the whole state. But the milder form of purification is as follows:--

when men who have nothing, and are in want of food, show a disposition to

follow their leaders in an attack on the property of the rich--these, who are

the natural plague of the state, are sent away by the legislator in a friendly

spirit as far as he is able; and this dismissal of them is euphemistically termed

a colony. And every legislator should contrive to do this at once. Our present

case,  however,  is  peculiar.  For  there  is  no  need  to  devise  any  colony  or

purifying separation under the circumstances in which we are placed. But as,

when many streams flow together from many sources, whether springs or

mountain torrents, into a single lake, we ought to attend and take care that the

confluent waters should be perfectly clear, and in order to effect this, should

pump and draw off and divert impurities, so in every political arrangement

there  may  be  trouble  and  danger.  But,  seeing  that  we  are  now  only

discoursing and not acting, let our selection be supposed to be completed, and

the  desired  purity  attained.  Touching  evil  men,  who  want  to  join  and  be

citizens of our state, after we have tested them by every sort of persuasion

and for a sufficient time, we will prevent them from coming; but the good we

will to the utmost of our ability receive as friends with open arms.


Another piece of good fortune must not be forgotten, which, as we were

saying,  the  Heraclid  colony  had,  and  which  is  also  ours,--that  we  have

escaped division of land and the abolition of debts; for these are always asource of dangerous contention, and a city which is driven by necessity to

legislate upon such matters can neither allow the old ways to continue, nor

yet venture to alter them. We must have recourse to prayers, so to speak, and

hope that a slight change may be cautiously effected in a length of time. And

such a change can be accomplished by those who have abundance of land,

and having also many debtors, are willing, in a kindly spirit, to share with

those who are in want, sometimes remitting and sometimes giving, holding

fast in a path of moderation, and deeming poverty to be the increase of a

man's desires and not the diminution of his property. For this is the great

beginning of salvation to a state, and upon this lasting basis may be erected

afterwards whatever political order is suitable under the circumstances; but if

the change be based upon an unsound principle, the future administration of

the country will be full of difficulties. That is a danger which, as I am saying,

is escaped by us, and yet we had better say how, if we had not escaped, we

might have escaped; and we may venture now to assert that no other way of

escape, whether narrow or broad, can be devised but freedom from avarice

and a sense of justice--upon this rock our city shall be built; for there ought to

be no disputes among citizens about property. If there are quarrels of long

standing among them, no legislator of any degree of sense will proceed a step

in the arrangement of the state until they are settled. But that they to whom

God has given, as He has to us, to be the founders of a new state as yet free

from enmity--that they should create themselves enmities by their mode of

distributing lands and houses, would be superhuman folly and wickedness.


How then can we rightly order the distribution of the land? In the first place,

the number of the citizens has to be determined, and also the number and size

of the divisions into which they will have to be formed; and the land and the

houses  will  then  have  to  be  apportioned  by  us  as  fairly  as  we  can.  The

number  of  citizens  can  only  be  estimated  satisfactorily  in  relation  to  the

territory  and  the  neighbouring  states.  The  territory  must  be  sufficient  to

maintain a certain number of inhabitants in a moderate way of life--more than

this is not required; and the number of citizens should be sufficient to defend

themselves against the injustice of their neighbours, and also to give them the

power of rendering efficient aid to their neighbours when they are wronged.

After having taken a survey of their's and their neighbours' territory, we will

determine the limits of them in fact as well as in theory. And now, let us

proceed to legislate with a view to perfecting the form and outline of ourstate. The number of our citizens shall be 5040--this will be a convenient

number; and these shall be owners of the land and protectors of the allotment.

The houses and the land will be divided in the same way, so that every man

may correspond to a lot. Let the whole number be first divided into two parts,

and then into three; and the number is further capable of being divided into

four or five parts, or any number of parts up to ten. Every legislator ought to

know so much arithmetic as to be able to tell what number is most likely to

be useful to all cities; and we are going to take that number which contains

the greatest and most regular and unbroken series of divisions. The whole of

number has every possible division, and the number 5040 can be divided by

exactly fifty-nine divisors, and ten of these proceed without interval from one

to ten: this will furnish numbers for war and peace, and for all contracts and

dealings,  including  taxes  and  divisions  of  the  land.  These  properties  of

number should be ascertained at leisure by those who are bound by law to

know them; for they are true, and should be proclaimed at the foundation of

the city, with a view to use. Whether the legislator is establishing a new state

or restoring an old and decayed one, in respect of Gods and temples,--the

temples which are to be built in each city, and the Gods or demi-gods after

whom they are to be called,--if he be a man of sense, he will make no change

in anything which the oracle of Delphi, or Dodona, or the God Ammon, or

any  ancient  tradition  has  sanctioned  in  whatever  manner,  whether  by

apparitions or reputed inspiration of Heaven, in obedience to which mankind

have established sacrifices in connexion with mystic rites, either originating

on the spot, or derived from Tyrrhenia or Cyprus or some other place, and on

the strength of which traditions they have consecrated oracles and images,

and altars and temples, and portioned out a sacred domain for each of them.

The least part of all these ought not to be disturbed by the legislator; but he

should assign to the several districts some God, or demi-god, or hero, and, in

the distribution of the soil, should give to these first their chosen domain and

all things fitting, that the inhabitants of the several districts may meet at fixed

times, and that they may readily supply their various wants, and entertain one

another with sacrifices, and become friends and acquaintances; for there is no

greater good in a state than that the citizens should be known to one another.

When not light but darkness and ignorance of each other's characters prevails

among them, no one will receive the honour of which he is deserving, or the

power or the justice to which he is fairly entitled: wherefore, in every state,

above all things, every man should take heed that he have no deceit in him,but that he be always true and simple; and that no deceitful person take any

advantage of him.


The next move in our pastime of legislation, like the withdrawal of the stone

from  the  holy  line  in  the  game  of  draughts,  being  an  unusual  one,  will

probably excite wonder when mentioned for the first time. And yet, if a man

will only reflect and weigh the matter with care, he will see that our city is

ordered in a manner which, if not the best, is the second best. Perhaps also

some  one  may  not  approve  this  form,  because  he  thinks  that  such  a

constitution is ill adapted to a legislator who has not despotic power. The

truth is, that there are three forms of government, the best, the second and the

third best, which we may just mention, and then leave the selection to the

ruler of the settlement. Following this method in the present instance, let us

speak  of  the  states  which  are  respectively  first,  second,  and  third  in

excellence, and then we will leave the choice to Cleinias now, or to any one

else who may hereafter have to make a similar choice among constitutions,

and may desire to give to his state some feature which is congenial to him

and which he approves in his own country.


The first and highest form of the state and of the government and of the law

is that in which there prevails most widely the ancient saying, that 'Friends

have all things in common.' Whether there is anywhere now, or will ever be,

this communion of women and children and of property, in which the private

and  individual  is  altogether  banished  from  life,  and  things  which  are  by

nature private, such as eyes and ears and hands, have become common, and

in some way see and hear and act in common, and all men express praise and

blame and feel joy and sorrow on the same occasions, and whatever laws

there are unite the city to the utmost (compare Republic),--whether all this is

possible or not, I say that no man, acting upon any other principle, will ever

constitute  a  state  which  will  be  truer  or  better  or  more  exalted  in  virtue.

Whether such a state is governed by Gods or sons of Gods, one, or more than

one,  happy  are  the  men  who,  living  after  this  manner,  dwell  there;  and

therefore to this we are to look for the pattern of the state, and to cling to this,

and to seek with all our might for one which is like this. The state which we

have now in hand, when created, will be nearest to immortality and the only

one which takes the second place; and after that, by the grace of God, we will

complete the third one. And we will begin by speaking of the nature andorigin of the second.


Let the citizens at once distribute their land and houses, and not till the land

in common, since a community of goods goes beyond their proposed origin,

and nurture, and education. But in making the distribution, let the several

possessors feel that their particular lots also belong to the whole city; and

seeing that the earth is their parent, let them tend her more carefully than

children do their mother. For she is a goddess and their queen, and they are

her mortal subjects. Such also are the feelings which they ought to entertain

to the Gods and demi-gods of the country. And in order that the distribution

may always remain, they ought to consider further that the present number of

families  should  be  always  retained,  and  neither  increased  nor  diminished.

This may be secured for the whole city in the following manner:--Let the

possessor of a lot leave the one of his children who is his best beloved, and

one only, to be the heir of his dwelling, and his successor in the duty of

ministering to the Gods, the state and the family, as well the living members

of it as those who are departed when he comes into the inheritance; but of his

other children, if he have more than one, he shall give the females in marriage

according to the law to be hereafter enacted, and the males he shall distribute

as sons to those citizens who have no children, and are disposed to receive

them; or if there should be none such, and particular individuals have too

many children, male or female, or too few, as in the case of barrenness--in all

these cases let the highest and most honourable magistracy created by us

judge and determine what is to be done with the redundant or deficient, and

devise a means that the number of 5040 houses shall always remain the same.

There are many ways of regulating numbers; for they in whom generation is

affluent may be made to refrain (compare Arist. Pol.), and, on the other hand,

special care may be taken to increase the number of births by rewards and

stigmas,  or  we  may  meet  the  evil  by  the  elder  men  giving  advice  and

administering rebuke to the younger--in this way the object may be attained.

And if after all there be very great difficulty about the equal preservation of

the 5040 houses, and there be an excess of citizens, owing to the too great

love of those who live together, and we are at our wits' end, there is still the

old device often mentioned by us of sending out a colony, which will part

friends with us, and be composed of suitable persons. If, on the other hand,

there come a wave bearing a deluge of disease, or a plague of war, and the

inhabitants  become  much  fewer  than  the  appointed  number  by  reason  ofbereavement,  we  ought  not  to  introduce  citizens  of  spurious  birth  and

education, if this can be avoided; but even God is said not to be able to fight

against necessity.


Wherefore let us suppose this 'high argument' of ours to address us in the

following  terms:--Best  of  men,  cease  not  to  honour  according  to  nature

similarity and equality and sameness and agreement, as regards number and

every good and noble quality. And, above all, observe the aforesaid number

5040 throughout life; in the second place, do not disparage the small and

modest proportions of the inheritances which you received in the distribution,

by buying and selling them to one another. For then neither will the God who

gave you the lot be your friend, nor will the legislator; and indeed the law

declares to the disobedient that these are the terms upon which he may or

may not take the lot. In the first place, the earth as he is informed is sacred to

the Gods; and in the next place, priests and priestesses will offer up prayers

over a first, and second, and even a third sacrifice, that he who buys or sells

the houses or lands which he has received, may suffer the punishment which

he deserves; and these their prayers they shall write down in the temples, on

tablets of cypress-wood, for the instruction of posterity. Moreover they will

set a watch over all these things, that they may be observed;--the magistracy

which has the sharpest eyes shall keep watch that any infringement of these

commands may be discovered and punished as offences both against the law

and the God. How great is the benefit of such an ordinance to all those cities,

which obey and are administered accordingly, no bad man can ever know, as

the old proverb says; but only a man of experience and good habits. For in

such  an  order  of  things  there  will  not  be  much  opportunity  for  making

money;  no  man  either  ought,  or  indeed  will  be  allowed,  to  exercise  any

ignoble  occupation,  of  which  the  vulgarity  is  a  matter  of  reproach  to  a

freeman, and should never want to acquire riches by any such means.


Further, the law enjoins that no private man shall be allowed to possess gold

and silver, but only coin for daily use, which is almost necessary in dealing

with artisans, and for payment of hirelings, whether slaves or immigrants, by

all those persons who require the use of them. Wherefore our citizens, as we

say, should have a coin passing current among themselves, but not accepted

among  the  rest  of  mankind;  with  a  view,  however,  to  expeditions  and

journeys to other lands,--for embassies, or for any other occasion which mayarise of sending out a herald, the state must also possess a common Hellenic

currency. If a private person is ever obliged to go abroad, let him have the

consent of the magistrates and go; and if when he returns he has any foreign

money remaining, let him give the surplus back to the treasury, and receive a

corresponding  sum  in  the  local  currency.  And  if  he  is  discovered  to

appropriate it, let it be confiscated, and let him who knows and does not

inform  be  subject  to  curse  and  dishonour  equally  him  who  brought  the

money, and also to a fine not less in amount than the foreign money which

has been brought back. In marrying and giving in marriage, no one shall give

or receive any dowry at all; and no one shall deposit money with another

whom he does not trust as a friend, nor shall he lend money upon interest;

and the borrower should be under no obligation to repay either capital or

interest. That these principles are best, any one may see who compares them

with the first principle and intention of a state. The intention, as we affirm, of

a reasonable statesman, is not what the many declare to be the object of a

good legislator, namely, that the state for the true interests of which he is

advising should be as great and as rich as possible, and should possess gold

and silver, and have the greatest empire by sea and land;--this they imagine to

be the real object of legislation, at the same time adding, inconsistently, that

the true legislator desires to have the city the best and happiest possible. But

they do not see that some of these things are possible, and some of them are

impossible; and he who orders the state will desire what is possible, and will

not  indulge  in  vain  wishes  or  attempts  to  accomplish  that  which  is

impossible. The citizen must indeed be happy and good, and the legislator

will seek to make him so; but very rich and very good at the same time he

cannot be, not, at least, in the sense in which the many speak of riches. For

they mean by 'the rich' the few who have the most valuable possessions,

although the owner of them may quite well be a rogue. And if this is true, I

can never assent to the doctrine that the rich man will be happy--he must be

good as well as rich. And good in a high degree, and rich in a high degree at

the same time, he cannot be. Some one will ask, why not? And we shall

answer--Because acquisitions which come from sources which are just and

unjust  indifferently,  are  more  than  double  those  which  come  from  just

sources  only;  and  the  sums  which  are  expended  neither  honourably  nor

disgracefully, are only half as great as those which are expended honourably

and on honourable purposes. Thus, if the one acquires double and spends

half, the other who is in the opposite case and is a good man cannot possiblybe wealthier than he. The first--I am speaking of the saver and not of the

spender--is not always bad; he may indeed in some cases be utterly bad, but,

as I was saying, a good man he never is. For he who receives money unjustly

as well as justly, and spends neither nor unjustly, will be a rich man if he be

also thrifty. On the other hand, the utterly bad is in general profligate, and

therefore  very  poor;  while  he  who  spends  on  noble  objects,  and  acquires

wealth by just means only, can hardly be remarkable for riches, any more

than he can be very poor. Our statement, then, is true, that the very rich are

not good, and, if they are not good, they are not happy. But the intention of

our laws was, that the citizens should be as happy as may be, and as friendly

as possible to one another. And men who are always at law with one another,

and amongst whom there are many wrongs done, can never be friends to one

another, but only those among whom crimes and lawsuits are few and slight.

Therefore we say that gold and silver ought not to be allowed in the city, nor

much of the vulgar sort of trade which is carried on by lending money, or

rearing the meaner kinds of live stock; but only the produce of agriculture,

and only so much of this as will not compel us in pursuing it to neglect that

for the sake of which riches exist--I mean, soul and body, which without

gymnastics,  and  without  education,  will  never  be  worth  anything;  and

therefore, as we have said not once but many times, the care of riches should

have the last place in our thoughts. For there are in all three things about

which every man has an interest; and the interest about money, when rightly

regarded, is the third and lowest of them: midway comes the interest of the

body; and, first of all, that of the soul; and the state which we are describing

will have been rightly constituted if it ordains honours according to this scale.

But  if,  in  any  of  the  laws  which  have  been  ordained,  health  has  been

preferred to temperance, or wealth to health and temperate habits, that law

must clearly be wrong. Wherefore, also, the legislator ought often to impress

upon himself the question-- 'What do I want?' and 'Do I attain my aim, or do I

miss the mark?' In this way, and in this way only, he may acquit himself and

free others from the work of legislation.


Let  the  allottee  then  hold  his  lot  upon  the  conditions  which  we  have

mentioned.


It would be well that every man should come to the colony having all things

equal; but seeing that this is not possible, and one man will have greaterpossessions  than  another,  for  many  reasons  and  in  particular  in  order  to

preserve equality in special crises of the state, qualifications of property must

be unequal, in order that offices and contributions and distributions may be

proportioned to the value of each person's wealth, and not solely to the virtue

of his ancestors or himself, nor yet to the strength and beauty of his person,

but  also  to  the  measure  of  his  wealth  or  poverty;  and  so  by  a  law  of

inequality, which will be in proportion to his wealth, he will receive honours

and offices as equally as possible, and there will be no quarrels and disputes.

To which end there should be four different standards appointed according to

the amount of property: there should be a first and a second and a third and a

fourth class, in which the citizens will be placed, and they will be called by

these or similar names: they may continue in the same rank, or pass into

another in any individual case, on becoming richer from being poorer, or

poorer from being richer. The form of law which I should propose as the

natural sequel would be as follows:--In a state which is desirous of being

saved from the greatest of all plagues--not faction, but rather distraction;--

there should exist among the citizens neither extreme poverty, nor, again,

excess  of  wealth,  for  both  are  productive  of  both  these  evils.  Now  the

legislator should determine what is to be the limit of poverty or wealth. Let

the limit of poverty be the value of the lot; this ought to be preserved, and no

ruler, nor any one else who aspires after a reputation for virtue, will allow the

lot to be impaired in any case. This the legislator gives as a measure, and he

will permit a man to acquire double or triple, or as much as four times the

amount of this (compare Arist. Pol.). But if a person have yet greater riches,

whether he has found them, or they have been given to him, or he has made

them in business, or has acquired by any stroke of fortune that which is in

excess of the measure, if he give back the surplus to the state, and to the Gods

who  are  the  patrons  of  the  state,  he  shall  suffer  no  penalty  or  loss  of

reputation; but if he disobeys this our law, any one who likes may inform

against him and receive half the value of the excess, and the delinquent shall

pay a sum equal to the excess out of his own property, and the other half of

the excess shall belong to the Gods. And let every possession of every man,

with the exception of the lot, be publicly registered before the magistrates

whom the law appoints, so that all suits about money may be easy and quite

simple.


The next thing to be noted is, that the city should be placed as nearly aspossible  in  the  centre  of  the  country;  we  should  choose  a  place  which

possesses what is suitable for a city, and this may easily be imagined and

described. Then we will divide the city into twelve portions, first founding

temples to Hestia, to Zeus and to Athene, in a spot which we will call the

Acropolis,  and  surround  with  a  circular  wall,  making  the  division  of  the

entire city and country radiate from this point. The twelve portions shall be

equalized by the provision that those which are of good land shall be smaller,

while those of inferior quality shall be larger. The number of the lots shall be

5040, and each of them shall be divided into two, and every allotment shall

be composed of two such sections; one of land near the city, the other of land

which is at a distance (compare Arist. Pol.). This arrangement shall be carried

out in the following manner: The section which is near the city shall be added

to that which is on the borders, and form one lot, and the portion which is

next nearest shall be added to the portion which is next farthest; and so of the

rest.  Moreover,  in  the  two  sections  of  the  lots  the  same  principle  of

equalization of the soil ought to be maintained; the badness and goodness

shall be compensated by more and less. And the legislator shall divide the

citizens into twelve parts, and arrange the rest of their property, as far as

possible, so as to form twelve equal parts; and there shall be a registration of

all. After this they shall assign twelve lots to twelve Gods, and call them by

their names, and dedicate to each God their several portions, and call the

tribes after them. And they shall distribute the twelve divisions of the city in

the same way in which they divided the country; and every man shall have

two  habitations,  one  in  the  centre  of  the  country,  and  the  other  at  the

extremity. Enough of the manner of settlement.


Now we ought by all means to consider that there can never be such a happy

concurrence of circumstances as we have described; neither can all things

coincide as they are wanted. Men who will not take offence at such a mode of

living together, and will endure all their life long to have their property fixed

at a moderate limit, and to beget children in accordance with our ordinances,

and will allow themselves to be deprived of gold and other things which the

legislator, as is evident from these enactments, will certainly forbid them; and

will endure, further, the situation of the land with the city in the middle and

dwellings round about;--all this is as if the legislator were telling his dreams,

or making a city and citizens of wax. There is truth in these objections, and

therefore every one should take to heart what I am going to say. Once more,then, the legislator shall appear and address us:--'O my friends,' he will say to

us, 'do not suppose me ignorant that there is a certain degree of truth in your

words; but I am of opinion that, in matters which are not present but future,

he who exhibits a pattern of that at which he aims, should in nothing fall

short  of  the  fairest  and  truest;  and  that  if  he  finds  any  part  of  this  work

impossible of execution he should avoid and not execute it, but he should

contrive to carry out that which is nearest and most akin to it; you must allow

the legislator to perfect his design, and when it is perfected, you should join

with him in considering what part of his legislation is expedient and what will

arouse opposition; for surely the artist who is to be deemed worthy of any

regard at all, ought always to make his work self-consistent.'


Having determined that there is to be a distribution into twelve parts, let us

now see in what way this may be accomplished. There is no difficulty in

perceiving that the twelve parts admit of the greatest number of divisions of

that which they include, or in seeing the other numbers which are consequent

upon them, and are produced out of them up to 5040; wherefore the law

ought to order phratries and demes and villages, and also military ranks and

movements, as well as coins and measures, dry and liquid, and weights, so as

to be commensurable and agreeable to one another. Nor should we fear the

appearance of minuteness, if the law commands that all the vessels which a

man possesses should have a common measure, when we consider generally

that the divisions and variations of numbers have a use in respect of all the

variations of which they are susceptible, both in themselves and as measures

of height and depth, and in all sounds, and in motions, as well those which

proceed in a straight direction, upwards or downwards, as in those which go

round and round. The legislator is to consider all these things and to bid the

citizens, as far as possible, not to lose sight of numerical order; for no single

instrument of youthful education has such mighty power, both as regards

domestic economy and politics, and in the arts, as the study of arithmetic.

Above all, arithmetic stirs up him who is by nature sleepy and dull, and

makes him quick to learn, retentive, shrewd, and aided by art divine he makes

progress  quite  beyond  his  natural  powers  (compare  Republic).  All  such

things,  if  only  the  legislator,  by  other  laws  and  institutions,  can  banish

meanness and covetousness from the souls of men, so that they can use them

properly and to their own good, will be excellent and suitable instruments of

education. But if he cannot, he will unintentionally create in them, instead ofwisdom,  the  habit  of  craft,  which  evil  tendency  may  be  observed  in  the

Egyptians  and  Phoenicians,  and  many  other  races,  through  the  general

vulgarity of their pursuits and acquisitions, whether some unworthy legislator

of theirs has been the cause, or some impediment of chance or nature. For we

must not fail to observe, O Megillus and Cleinias, that there is a difference in

places,  and  that  some  beget  better  men  and  others  worse;  and  we  must

legislate accordingly. Some places are subject to strange and fatal influences

by reason of diverse winds and violent heats, some by reason of waters; or,

again, from the character of the food given by the earth, which not only

affects the bodies of men for good or evil, but produces similar results in their

souls. And in all such qualities those spots excel in which there is a divine

inspiration, and in which the demigods have their appointed lots, and are

propitious,  not  adverse,  to  the  settlers  in  them.  To  all  these  matters  the

legislator, if he have any sense in him, will attend as far as man can, and

frame his laws accordingly. And this is what you, Cleinias, must do, and to

matters of this kind you must turn your mind since you are going to colonize

a new country.


CLEINIAS: Your words, Athenian Stranger, are excellent, and I will do as

you say.BOOK VI.


ATHENIAN: And now having made an end of the preliminaries we will

proceed to the appointment of magistracies.


CLEINIAS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: In the ordering of a state there are two parts: first, the number

of the magistracies, and the mode of establishing them; and, secondly, when

they have been established, laws again will have to be provided for each of

them, suitable in nature and number. But before electing the magistrates let us

stop a little and say a word in season about the election of them.


CLEINIAS: What have you got to say?


ATHENIAN: This is what I have to say;--every one can see, that although the

work  of  legislation  is  a  most  important  matter,  yet  if  a  well-ordered  city

superadd to good laws unsuitable offices, not only will there be no use in

having the good laws,--not only will they be ridiculous and useless, but the

greatest political injury and evil will accrue from them.


CLEINIAS: Of course.


ATHENIAN: Then now, my friend, let us observe what will happen in the

constitution of out intended state. In the first place, you will acknowledge

that those who are duly appointed to magisterial power, and their families,

should severally have given satisfactory proof of what they are, from youth

upward until the time of election; in the next place, those who are to elect

should have been trained in habits of law, and be well educated, that they

may have a right judgment, and may be able to select or reject men whom

they approve or disapprove, as they are worthy of either. But how can we

imagine  that  those  who  are  brought  together  for  the  first  time,  and  are

strangers to one another, and also uneducated, will avoid making mistakes in

the choice of magistrates?


CLEINIAS: Impossible.ATHENIAN: The matter is serious, and excuses will not serve the turn. I will

tell you, then, what you and I will have to do, since you, as you tell me, with

nine others, have offered to settle the new state on behalf of the people of

Crete,  and  I  am  to  help  you  by  the  invention  of  the  present  romance.  I

certainly  should  not  like  to  leave  the  tale  wandering  all  over  the  world

without a head;--a headless monster is such a hideous thing.


CLEINIAS: Excellent, Stranger.


ATHENIAN: Yes; and I will be as good as my word.


CLEINIAS: Let us by all means do as you propose.


ATHENIAN: That we will, by the grace of God, if old age will only permit

us.


CLEINIAS: But God will be gracious.


ATHENIAN: Yes; and under his guidance let us consider a further point.


CLEINIAS: What is it?


ATHENIAN: Let us remember what a courageously mad and daring creation

this our city is.


CLEINIAS: What had you in your mind when you said that?


ATHENIAN: I had in my mind the free and easy manner in which we are

ordaining that the inexperienced colonists shall receive our laws. Now a man

need not be very wise, Cleinias, in order to see that no one can easily receive

laws at their first imposition. But if we could anyhow wait until those who

have  been  imbued  with  them  from  childhood,  and  have  been  nurtured  in

them, and become habituated to them, take their part in the public elections of

the state; I say, if this could be accomplished, and rightly accomplished by

any way or contrivance--then, I think that there would be very little danger, at

the end of the time, of a state thus trained not being permanent.


CLEINIAS: A reasonable supposition.ATHENIAN:  Then  let  us  consider  if  we  can  find  any  way  out  of  the

difficulty;  for  I  maintain,  Cleinias,  that  the  Cnosians,  above  all  the  other

Cretans,  should  not  be  satisfied  with  barely  discharging  their  duty  to  the

colony, but they ought to take the utmost pains to establish the offices which

are first created by them in the best and surest manner. Above all, this applies

to the selection of the guardians of the law, who must be chosen first of all,

and with the greatest care; the others are of less importance.


CLEINIAS: What method can we devise of electing them?


ATHENIAN: This will be the method:--Sons of the Cretans, I shall say to

them, inasmuch as the Cnosians have precedence over the other states, they

should, in common with those who join this settlement, choose a body of

thirty-seven in all, nineteen of them being taken from the settlers, and the

remainder from the citizens of Cnosus. Of these latter the Cnosians shall

make a present to your colony, and you yourself shall be one of the eighteen,

and shall become a citizen of the new state; and if you and they cannot be

persuaded to go, the Cnosians may fairly use a little violence in order to make

you.


CLEINIAS: But why, Stranger, do not you and Megillus take a part in our

new city?


ATHENIAN: O, Cleinias, Athens is proud, and Sparta too; and they are both

a long way off. But you and likewise the other colonists are conveniently

situated as you describe. I have been speaking of the way in which the new

citizens may be best managed under present circumstances; but in after- ages,

if the city continues to exist, let the election be on this wise. All who are

horse or foot soldiers, or have seen military service at the proper ages when

they  were  severally  fitted  for  it  (compare  Arist.  Pol.),  shall  share  in  the

election of magistrates; and the election shall be held in whatever temple the

state deems most venerable, and every one shall carry his vote to the altar of

the God, writing down on a tablet the name of the person for whom he votes,

and his father's name, and his tribe, and ward; and at the side he shall write

his own name in like manner. Any one who pleases may take away any tablet

which he does not think properly filled up, and exhibit it in the Agora for a

period of not less than thirty days. The tablets which are judged to be first, tothe number of 300, shall be shown by the magistrates to the whole city, and

the citizens shall in like manner select from these the candidates whom they

prefer;  and  this  second  selection,  to  the  number  of  100,  shall  be  again

exhibited to the citizens; in the third, let any one who pleases select whom he

pleases out of the 100, walking through the parts of victims, and let them

choose  for  magistrates  and  proclaim  the  seven-and-thirty  who  have  the

greatest number of votes. But who, Cleinias and Megillus, will order for us in

the colony all this matter of the magistrates, and the scrutinies of them? If we

reflect, we shall see that cities which are in process of construction like ours

must have some such persons, who cannot possibly be elected before there

are any magistrates; and yet they must be elected in some way, and they are

not to be inferior men, but the best possible. For as the proverb says, 'a good

beginning is half the business'; and 'to have begun well' is praised by all, and

in my opinion is a great deal more than half the business, and has never been

praised by any one enough.


CLEINIAS: That is very true.


ATHENIAN: Then let us recognize the difficulty, and make clear to our own

minds how the beginning is to be accomplished. There is only one proposal

which I have to offer, and that is one which, under our circumstances, is both

necessary and expedient.


CLEINIAS: What is it?


ATHENIAN: I maintain that this colony of ours has a father and mother, who

are no other than the colonizing state. Well I know that many colonies have

been, and will be, at enmity with their parents. But in early days the child, as

in a family, loves and is beloved; even if there come a time later when the tie

is broken, still, while he is in want of education, he naturally loves his parents

and is beloved by them, and flies to his relatives for protection, and finds in

them his only natural allies in time of need; and this parental feeling already

exists in the Cnosians, as is shown by their care of the new city; and there is a

similar feeling on the part of the young city towards Cnosus. And I repeat

what I was saying --for there is no harm in repeating a good thing--that the

Cnosians should take a common interest in all these matters, and choose, as

far as they can, the eldest and best of the colonists, to the number of not lessthan a hundred; and let there be another hundred of the Cnosians themselves.

These, I say, on their arrival, should have a joint care that the magistrates

should be appointed according to law, and that when they are appointed they

should undergo a scrutiny. When this has been effected, the Cnosians shall

return home, and the new city do the best she can for her own preservation

and happiness. I would have the seven-and-thirty now, and in all future time,

chosen  to  fulfil  the  following  duties:--Let  them,  in  the  first  place,  be  the

guardians  of  the  law;  and,  secondly,  of  the  registers  in  which  each  one

registers before the magistrate the amount of his property, excepting four

minae which are allowed to citizens of the first class, three allowed to the

second, two to the third, and a single mina to the fourth. And if any one,

despising the laws for the sake of gain, be found to possess anything more

which has not been registered, let all that he has in excess be confiscated, and

let  him  be  liable  to  a  suit  which  shall  be  the  reverse  of  honourable  or

fortunate. And let any one who will, indict him on the charge of loving base

gains, and proceed against him before the guardians of the law. And if he be

cast, let him lose his share of the public possessions, and when there is any

public distribution, let him have nothing but his original lot; and let him be

written down a condemned man as long as he lives, in some place in which

any one who pleases can read about his offences. The guardian of the law

shall not hold office longer than twenty years, and shall not be less than fifty

years of age when he is elected; or if he is elected when he is sixty years of

age, he shall hold office for ten years only; and upon the same principle, he

must not imagine that he will be permitted to hold such an important office as

that of guardian of the laws after he is seventy years of age, if he live so long.


These are the three first ordinances about the guardians of the law; as the

work of legislation progresses, each law in turn will assign to them their

further duties. And now we may proceed in order to speak of the election of

other officers; for generals have to be elected, and these again must have their

ministers, commanders, and colonels of horse, and commanders of brigades

of  foot,  who  would  be  more  rightly  called  by  their  popular  name  of

brigadiers. The guardians of the law shall propose as generals men who are

natives of the city, and a selection from the candidates proposed shall be

made by those who are or have been of the age for military service. And if

one who is not proposed is thought by somebody to be better than one who is,

let him name whom he prefers in the place of whom, and make oath that he isbetter, and propose him; and whichever of them is approved by vote shall be

admitted to the final selection; and the three who have the greatest number of

votes  shall  be  appointed  generals,  and  superintendents  of  military  affairs,

after previously undergoing a scrutiny, like the guardians of the law. And let

the generals thus elected propose twelve brigadiers, one for each tribe; and

there shall be a right of counter-proposal as in the case of the generals, and

the voting and decision shall take place in the same way. Until the prytanes

and council are elected, the guardians of the law shall convene the assembly

in some holy spot which is suitable to the purpose, placing the hoplites by

themselves, and the cavalry by themselves, and in a third division all the rest

of the army. All are to vote for the generals (and for the colonels of horse),

but the brigadiers are to be voted for only by those who carry shields (i.e. the

hoplites).  Let  the  body  of  cavalry  choose  phylarchs  for  the  generals;  but

captains of light troops, or archers, or any other division of the army, shall be

appointed  by  the  generals  for  themselves.  There  only  remains  the

appointment  of  officers  of  cavalry:  these  shall  be  proposed  by  the  same

persons who proposed the generals, and the election and the counter-proposal

of other candidates shall be arranged in the same way as in the case of the

generals, and let the cavalry vote and the infantry look on at the election; the

two who have the greatest number of votes shall be the leaders of all the

horse.  Disputes  about  the  voting  may  be  raised  once  or  twice;  but  if  the

dispute be raised a third time, the officers who preside at the several elections

shall decide.


The  council  shall  consist  of  30  x  12  members--360  will  be  a  convenient

number for sub-division. If we divide the whole number into four parts of

ninety each, we get ninety counsellors for each class. First, all the citizens

shall select candidates from the first class; they shall be compelled to vote,

and,  if  they  do  not,  shall  be  duly  fined.  When  the  candidates  have  been

selected, some one shall mark them down; this shall be the business of the

first day. And on the following day, candidates shall be selected from the

second class in the same manner and under the same conditions as on the

previous day; and on the third day a selection shall be made from the third

class, at which every one may, if he likes vote, and the three first classes shall

be  compelled  to  vote;  but  the  fourth  and  lowest  class  shall  be  under  no

compulsion, and any member of this class who does not vote shall not be

punished. On the fourth day candidates shall be selected from the fourth andsmallest class; they shall be selected by all, but he who is of the fourth class

shall suffer no penalty, nor he who is of the third, if he be not willing to vote;

but  he  who  is  of  the  first  or  second  class,  if  he  does  not  vote  shall  be

punished;--he who is of the second class shall pay a fine of triple the amount

which was exacted at first, and he who is of the first class quadruple. On the

fifth day the rulers shall bring out the names noted down, for all the citizens

to see, and every man shall choose out of them, under pain, if he do not, of

suffering the first penalty; and when they have chosen 180 out of each of the

classes,  they  shall  choose  one-half  of  them  by  lot,  who  shall  undergo  a

scrutiny:--These are to form the council for the year.


The  mode  of  election  which  has  been  described  is  in  a  mean  between

monarchy  and  democracy,  and  such  a  mean  the  state  ought  always  to

observe; for servants and masters never can be friends, nor good and bad,

merely because they are declared to have equal privileges. For to unequals

equals become unequal, if they are not harmonised by measure; and both by

reason of equality, and by reason of inequality, cities are filled with seditions.

The old saying, that 'equality makes friendship,' is happy and also true; but

there is obscurity and confusion as to what sort of equality is meant. For there

are two equalities which are called by the same name, but are in reality in

many  ways  almost  the  opposite  of  one  another;  one  of  them  may  be

introduced without difficulty, by any state or any legislator in the distribution

of honours: this is the rule of measure, weight, and number, which regulates

and apportions them. But there is another equality, of a better and higher

kind, which is not so easily recognized. This is the judgment of Zeus; among

men it avails but little; that little, however, is the source of the greatest good

to individuals and states. For it gives to the greater more, and to the inferior

less and in proportion to the nature of each; and, above all, greater honour

always to the greater virtue, and to the less less; and to either in proportion to

their respective measure of virtue and education. And this is justice, and is

ever the true principle of states, at which we ought to aim, and according to

this rule order the new city which is now being founded, and any other city

which may be hereafter founded. To this the legislator should look,--not to

the interests of tyrants one or more, or to the power of the people, but to

justice always; which, as I was saying, is the distribution of natural equality

among unequals in each case. But there are times at which every state is

compelled to use the words, 'just,' 'equal,' in a secondary sense, in the hope ofescaping  in  some  degree  from  factions.  For  equity  and  indulgence  are

infractions of the perfect and strict rule of justice. And this is the reason why

we are obliged to use the equality of the lot, in order to avoid the discontent

of the people; and so we invoke God and fortune in our prayers, and beg that

they  themselves  will  direct  the  lot  with  a  view  to  supreme  justice.  And

therefore, although we are compelled to use both equalities, we should use

that into which the element of chance enters as seldom as possible.


Thus, O my friends, and for the reasons given, should a state act which would

endure and be saved. But as a ship sailing on the sea has to be watched night

and day, in like manner a city also is sailing on a sea of politics, and is liable

to all sorts of insidious assaults; and therefore from morning to night, and

from night to morning, rulers must join hands with rulers, and watchers with

watchers, receiving and giving up their trust in a perpetual succession. Now a

multitude  can  never  fulfil  a  duty  of  this  sort  with  anything  like  energy.

Moreover, the greater number of the senators will have to be left during the

greater part of the year to order their concerns at their own homes. They will

therefore have to be arranged in twelve portions, answering to the twelve

months, and furnish guardians of the state, each portion for a single month.

Their  business  is  to  be  at  hand  and  receive  any  foreigner  or  citizen  who

comes to them, whether to give information, or to put one of those questions,

to which, when asked by other cities, a city should give an answer, and to

which, if she ask them herself, she should receive an answer; or again, when

there  is  a  likelihood  of  internal  commotions,  which  are  always  liable  to

happen in some form or other, they will, if they can, prevent their occurring;

or if they have already occurred, will lose no time in making them known to

the city, and healing the evil. Wherefore, also, this which is the presiding

body of the state ought always to have the control of their assemblies, and of

the dissolutions of them, ordinary as well as extraordinary. All this is to be

ordered by the twelfth part of the council, which is always to keep watch

together with the other officers of the state during one portion of the year, and

to rest during the remaining eleven portions.


Thus  will  the  city  be  fairly  ordered.  And  now,  who  is  to  have  the

superintendence of the country, and what shall be the arrangement? Seeing

that the whole city and the entire country have been both of them divided into

twelve portions, ought there not to be appointed superintendents of the streetsof the city, and of the houses, and buildings, and harbours, and the agora, and

fountains, and sacred domains, and temples, and the like?


CLEINIAS: To be sure there ought.


ATHENIAN:  Let  us  assume,  then,  that  there  ought  to  be  servants  of  the

temples, and priests and priestesses. There must also be superintendents of

roads and buildings, who will have a care of men, that they may do no harm,

and also of beasts, both within the enclosure and in the suburbs. Three kinds

of  officers  will  thus  have  to  be  appointed,  in  order  that  the  city  may  be

suitably provided according to her needs. Those who have the care of the city

shall be called wardens of the city; and those who have the care of the agora

shall be called wardens of the agora; and those who have the care of the

temples shall be called priests. Those who hold hereditary offices as priests or

priestesses, shall not be disturbed; but if there be few or none such, as is

probable  at  the  foundation  of  a  new  city,  priests  and  priestesses  shall  be

appointed to be servants of the Gods who have no servants. Some of our

officers shall be elected, and others appointed by lot, those who are of the

people and those who are not of the people mingling in a friendly manner in

every place and city, that the state may be as far as possible of one mind. The

officers of the temples shall be appointed by lot; in this way their election

will be committed to God, that He may do what is agreeable to Him. And he

who obtains a lot shall undergo a scrutiny, first, as to whether he is sound of

body and of legitimate birth; and in the second place, in order to show that he

is of a perfectly pure family, not stained with homicide or any similar impiety

in his own person, and also that his father and mother have led a similar

unstained life. Now the laws about all divine things should be brought from

Delphi,  and  interpreters  appointed,  under  whose  direction  they  should  be

used. The tenure of the priesthood should always be for a year and no longer;

and he who will duly execute the sacred office, according to the laws of

religion, must be not less than sixty years of age--the laws shall be the same

about priestesses. As for the interpreters, they shall be appointed thus:--Let

the twelve tribes be distributed into groups of four, and let each group select

four, one out of each tribe within the group, three times; and let the three who

have  the  greatest  number  of  votes  (out  of  the  twelve  appointed  by  each

group), after undergoing a scrutiny, nine in all, be sent to Delphi, in order that

the God may return one out of each triad; their age shall be the same as thatof  the  priests,  and  the  scrutiny  of  them  shall  be  conducted  in  the  same

manner; let them be interpreters for life, and when any one dies let the four

tribes select another from the tribe of the deceased. Moreover, besides priests

and  interpreters,  there  must  be  treasurers,  who  will  take  charge  of  the

property of the several temples, and of the sacred domains, and shall have

authority over the produce and the letting of them; and three of them shall be

chosen  from  the  highest  classes  for  the  greater  temples,  and  two  for  the

lesser,  and  one  for  the  least  of  all;  the  manner  of  their  election  and  the

scrutiny of them shall be the same as that of the generals. This shall be the

order of the temples.


Let everything have a guard as far as possible. Let the defence of the city be

commited to the generals, and taxiarchs, and hipparchs, and phylarchs, and

prytanes, and the wardens of the city, and of the agora, when the election of

them has been completed. The defence of the country shall be provided for as

follows:--The entire land has been already distributed into twelve as nearly as

possible equal parts, and let the tribe allotted to a division provide annually

for it five wardens of the country and commanders of the watch; and let each

body of five have the power of selecting twelve others out of the youth of

their own tribe,-- these shall be not less than twenty-five years of age, and not

more than thirty. And let there be allotted to them severally every month the

various districts, in order that they may all acquire knowledge and experience

of the whole country. The term of service for commanders and for watchers

shall continue during two years. After having had their stations allotted to

them, they will go from place to place in regular order, making their round

from left to right as their commanders direct them; (when I speak of going to

the right, I mean that they are to go to the east). And at the commencement of

the second year, in order that as many as possible of the guards may not only

get a knowledge of the country at any one season of the year, but may also

have  experience  of  the  manner  in  which  different  places  are  affected  at

different seasons of the year, their then commanders shall lead them again

towards the left, from place to place in succession, until they have completed

the  second  year.  In  the  third  year  other  wardens  of  the  country  shall  be

chosen and commanders of the watch, five for each division, who are to be

the superintendents of the bands of twelve. While on service at each station,

their attention shall be directed to the following points:--In the first place,

they shall see that the country is well protected against enemies; they shalltrench and dig wherever this is required, and, as far as they can, they shall by

fortifications keep off the evil-disposed, in order to prevent them from doing

any harm to the country or the property; they shall use the beasts of burden

and the labourers whom they find on the spot: these will be their instruments

whom they will superintend, taking them, as far as possible, at the times

when they are not engaged in their regular business. They shall make every

part of the country inaccessible to enemies, and as accessible as possible to

friends  (compare  Arist.  Pol.);  there  shall  be  ways  for  man  and  beasts  of

burden and for cattle, and they shall take care to have them always as smooth

as they can; and shall provide against the rains doing harm instead of good to

the land, when they come down from the mountains into the hollow dells;

and shall keep in the overflow by the help of works and ditches, in order that

the valleys, receiving and drinking up the rain from heaven, and providing

fountains and streams in the fields and regions which lie underneath, may

furnish even to the dry places plenty of good water. The fountains of water,

whether of rivers or of springs, shall be ornamented with plantations and

buildings for beauty; and let them bring together the streams in subterraneous

channels, and make all things plenteous; and if there be a sacred grove or

dedicated precinct in the neighbourhood, they shall conduct the water to the

actual temples of the Gods, and so beautify them at all seasons of the year.

Everywhere in such places the youth shall make gymnasia for themselves,

and warm baths for the aged, placing by them abundance of dry wood, for the

benefit of those labouring under disease-- there the weary frame of the rustic,

worn with toil, will receive a kindly welcome, far better than he would at the

hands of a not over-wise doctor.


The building of these and the like works will be useful and ornamental; they

will provide a pleasing amusement, but they will be a serious employment

too; for the sixty wardens will have to guard their several divisions, not only

with a view to enemies, but also with an eye to professing friends. When a

quarrel arises among neighbours or citizens, and any one whether slave or

freeman wrongs another, let the five wardens decide small matters on their

own authority; but where the charge against another relates to greater matters,

the seventeen composed of the fives and twelves, shall determine any charges

which one man brings against another, not involving more than three minae.

Every judge and magistrate shall be liable to give an account of his conduct

in office, except those who, like kings, have the final decision. Moreover, asregards the aforesaid wardens of the country, if they do any wrong to those of

whom they have the care, whether by imposing upon them unequal tasks, or

by taking the produce of the soil or implements of husbandry without their

consent; also if they receive anything in the way of a bribe, or decide suits

unjustly, or if they yield to the influences of flattery, let them be publicly

dishonoured;  and  in  regard  to  any  other  wrong  which  they  do  to  the

inhabitants of the country, if the question be of a mina, let them submit to the

decision of the villagers in the neighbourhood; but in suits of greater amount,

or  in  case  of  lesser,  if  they  refuse  to  submit,  trusting  that  their  monthly

removal into another part of the country will enable them to escape--in such

cases the injured party may bring his suit in the common court, and if he

obtain a verdict he may exact from the defendant, who refused to submit, a

double penalty.


The  wardens  and  the  overseers  of  the  country,  while  on  their  two  years'

service, shall have common meals at their several stations, and shall all live

together; and he who is absent from the common meal, or sleeps out, if only

for one day or night, unless by order of his commanders, or by reason of

absolute necessity, if the five denounce him and inscribe his name in the

agora as not having kept his guard, let him be deemed to have betrayed the

city, as far as lay in his power, and let him be disgraced and beaten with

impunity by any one who meets him and is willing to punish him. If any of

the commanders is guilty of such an irregularity, the whole company of sixty

shall see to it, and he who is cognisant of the offence, and does not bring the

offender to trial, shall be amenable to the same laws as the younger offender

himself, and shall pay a heavier fine, and be incapable of ever commanding

the young. The guardians of the law are to be careful inspectors of these

matters,  and  shall  either  prevent  or  punish  offenders.  Every  man  should

remember the universal rule, that he who is not a good servant will not be a

good master; a man should pride himself more upon serving well than upon

commanding well: first upon serving the laws, which is also the service of the

Gods; in the second place, upon having served ancient and honourable men in

the days of his youth. Furthermore, during the two years in which any one is

a warden of the country, his daily food ought to be of a simple and humble

kind. When the twelve have been chosen, let them and the five meet together,

and determine that they will be their own servants, and, like servants, will not

have other slaves and servants for their own use, neither will they use thoseof  the  villagers  and  husbandmen  for  their  private  advantage,  but  for  the

public service only; and in general they should make up their minds to live

independently  by  themselves,  servants  of  each  other  and  of  themselves.

Further, at all seasons of the year, summer and winter alike, let them be under

arms and survey minutely the whole country; thus they will at once keep

guard, and at the same time acquire a perfect knowledge of every locality.

There  can  be  no  more  important  kind  of  information  than  the  exact

knowledge of a man's own country; and for this as well as for more general

reasons  of  pleasure  and  advantage,  hunting  with  dogs  and  other  kinds  of

sports  should  be  pursued  by  the  young.  The  service  to  whom  this  is

committed may be called the secret police or wardens of the country; the

name does not much signify, but every one who has the safety of the state at

heart will use his utmost diligence in this service.


After the wardens of the country, we have to speak of the election of wardens

of  the  agora  and  of  the  city.  The  wardens  of  the  country  were  sixty  in

number, and the wardens of the city will be three, and will divide the twelve

parts of the city into three; like the former, they shall have care of the ways,

and of the different high roads which lead out of the country into the city, and

of the buildings, that they may be all made according to law;--also of the

waters, which the guardians of the supply preserve and convey to them, care

being taken that they may reach the fountains pure and abundant, and be both

an ornament and a benefit to the city. These also should be men of influence,

and at leisure to take care of the public interest. Let every man propose as

warden of the city any one whom he likes out of the highest class, and when

the vote has been given on them, and the number is reduced to the six who

have the greatest number of votes, let the electing officers choose by lot three

out of the six, and when they have undergone a scrutiny let them hold office

according to the laws laid down for them. Next, let the wardens of the agora

be elected in like manner, out of the first and second class, five in number:

ten are to be first elected, and out of the ten five are to be chosen by lot, as in

the election of the wardens of the city:--these when they have undergone a

scrutiny are to be declared magistrates. Every one shall vote for every one,

and he who will not vote, if he be informed against before the magistrates,

shall be fined fifty drachmae, and shall also be deemed a bad citizen. Let any

one  who  likes  go  to  the  assembly  and  to  the  general  council;  it  shall  be

compulsory to go on citizens of the first and second class, and they shall paya fine of ten drachmae if they be found not answering to their names at the

assembly. But the third and fourth class shall be under no compulsion, and

shall be let off without a fine, unless the magistrates have commanded all to

be present, in consequence of some urgent necessity. The wardens of the

agora shall observe the order appointed by law for the agora, and shall have

the charge of the temples and fountains which are in the agora; and they shall

see that no one injures anything, and punish him who does, with stripes and

bonds, if he be a slave or stranger; but if he be a citizen who misbehaves in

this way, they shall have the power themselves of inflicting a fine upon him

to the amount of a hundred drachmae, or with the consent of the wardens of

the city up to double that amount. And let the wardens of the city have a

similar power of imposing punishments and fines in their own department;

and let them impose fines by their own department; and let them impose fines

by their own authority, up to a mina, or up to two minae with the consent of

the wardens of the agora.


In  the  next  place,  it  will  be  proper  to  appoint  directors  of  music  and

gymnastic, two kinds of each--of the one kind the business will be education,

of the other, the superintendence of contests. In speaking of education, the

law means to speak of those who have the care of order and instruction in

gymnasia and schools, and of the going to school, and of school buildings for

boys and girls; and in speaking of contests, the law refers to the judges of

gymnastics and of music; these again are divided into two classes, the one

having to do with music, the other with gymnastics; and the same who judge

of the gymnastic contests of men, shall judge of horses; but in music there

shall  be  one  set  of  judges  of  solo  singing,  and  of  imitation--I  mean  of

rhapsodists, players on the harp, the flute and the like, and another who shall

judge of choral song. First of all, we must choose directors for the choruses

of boys, and men, and maidens, whom they shall follow in the amusement of

the  dance,  and  for  our  other  musical  arrangements;--one  director  will  be

enough for the choruses, and he should be not less than forty years of age.

One director will also be enough to introduce the solo singers, and to give

judgment on the competitors, and he ought not to be less than thirty years of

age.  The  director  and  manager  of  the  choruses  shall  be  elected  after  the

following manner:--Let any persons who commonly take an interest in such

matters go to the meeting, and be fined if they do not go (the guardians of the

law shall judge of their fault), but those who have no interest shall not becompelled. The elector shall propose as director some one who understands

music, and he in the scrutiny may be challenged on the one part by those who

say he has no skill, and defended on the other hand by those who say that he

has. Ten are to be elected by vote, and he of the ten who is chosen by lot shall

undergo a scrutiny, and lead the choruses for a year according to law. And in

like manner the competitor who wins the lot shall be leader of the solo and

concert music for that year; and he who is thus elected shall deliver the award

to the judges. In the next place, we have to choose judges in the contests of

horses and of men; these shall be selected from the third and also from the

second class of citizens, and three first classes shall be compelled to go to the

election, but the lowest may stay away with impunity; and let there be three

elected by lot out of the twenty who have been chosen previously, and they

must also have the vote and approval of the examiners. But if any one is

rejected in the scrutiny at any ballot or decision, others shall be chosen in the

same manner, and undergo a similar scrutiny.


There remains the minister of the education of youth, male and female; he too

will rule according to law; one such minister will be sufficient, and he must

be fifty years old, and have children lawfully begotten, both boys and girls by

preference, at any rate, one or the other. He who is elected, and he who is the

elector, should consider that of all the great offices of state this is the greatest;

for the first shoot of any plant, if it makes a good start towards the attainment

of its natural excellence, has the greatest effect on its maturity; and this is not

only true of plants, but of animals wild and tame, and also of men. Man, as

we  say,  is  a  tame  or  civilized  animal;  nevertheless,  he  requires  proper

instruction and a fortunate nature, and then of all animals he becomes the

most divine and most civilized (Arist. Pol.); but if he be insufficiently or ill

educated he is the most savage of earthly creatures. Wherefore the legislator

ought  not  to  allow  the  education  of  children  to  become  a  secondary  or

accidental matter. In the first place, he who would be rightly provident about

them, should begin by taking care that he is elected, who of all the citizens is

in every way best; him the legislator shall do his utmost to appoint guardian

and superintendent. To this end all the magistrates, with the exception of the

council and prytanes, shall go to the temple of Apollo, and elect by ballot him

of  the  guardians  of  the  law  whom  they  severally  think  will  be  the  best

superintendent of education. And he who has the greatest number of votes,

after he has undergone a scrutiny at the hands of all the magistrates who havebeen his electors, with the exception of the guardians of the law,--shall hold

office  for  five  years;  and  in  the  sixth  year  let  another  be  chosen  in  like

manner to fill his office.


If any one dies while he is holding a public office, and more than thirty days

before his term of office expires, let those whose business it is elect another

to the office in the same manner as before. And if any one who is entrusted

with orphans dies, let the relations both on the father's and mother's side, who

are residing at home, including cousins, appoint another guardian within ten

days, or be fined a drachma a day for neglect to do so.


A city which has no regular courts of law ceases to be a city; and again, if a

judge is silent and says no more in preliminary proceedings than the litigants,

as is the case in arbitrations, he will never be able to decide justly; wherefore

a multitude of judges will not easily judge well, nor a few if they are bad. The

point in dispute between the parties should be made clear; and time, and

deliberation, and repeated examination, greatly tend to clear up doubts. For

this reason, he who goes to law with another, should go first of all to his

neighbours and friends who know best the questions at issue. And if he be

unable to obtain from them a satisfactory decision, let him have recourse to

another court; and if the two courts cannot settle the matter, let a third put an

end to the suit.


Now the establishment of courts of justice may be regarded as a choice of

magistrates, for every magistrate must also be a judge of some things; and the

judge,  though  he  be  not  a  magistrate,  yet  in  certain  respects  is  a  very

important magistrate on the day on which he is determining a suit. Regarding

then the judges also as magistrates, let us say who are fit to be judges, and of

what they are to be judges, and how many of them are to judge in each suit.

Let that be the supreme tribunal which the litigants appoint in common for

themselves,  choosing  certain  persons  by  agreement.  And  let  there  be  two

other tribunals: one for private causes, when a citizen accuses another of

wronging him and wishes to get a decision; the other for public causes, in

which some citizen is of opinion that the public has been wronged by an

individual, and is willing to vindicate the common interests. And we must not

forget to mention how the judges are to be qualified, and who they are to be.

In the first place, let there be a tribunal open to all private persons who aretrying causes one against another for the third time, and let this be composed

as follows:--All the officers of state, as well annual as those holding office for

a longer period, when the new year is about to commence, in the month

following after the summer solstice, on the last day but one of the year, shall

meet in some temple, and calling God to witness, shall dedicate one judge

from every magistracy to be their first-fruits, choosing in each office him

who seems to them to be the best, and whom they deem likely to decide the

causes of his fellow-citizens during the ensuing year in the best and holiest

manner. And when the election is completed, a scrutiny shall be held in the

presence of the electors themselves, and if any one be rejected another shall

be chosen in the same manner. Those who have undergone the scrutiny shall

judge the causes of those who have declined the inferior courts, and shall

give  their  vote  openly.  The  councillors  and  other  magistrates  who  have

elected them shall be required to be hearers and spectators of the causes; and

any one else may be present who pleases. If one man charges another with

having intentionally decided wrong, let him go to the guardians of the law

and lay his accusation before them, and he who is found guilty in such a case

shall pay damages to the injured party equal to half the injury; but if he shall

appear  to  deserve  a  greater  penalty,  the  judges  shall  determine  what

additional punishment he shall suffer, and how much more he ought to pay to

the public treasury, and to the party who brought the suit.


In the judgment of offences against the state, the people ought to participate,

for  when  any  one  wrongs  the  state  all  are  wronged,  and  may  reasonably

complain if they are not allowed to share in the decision. Such causes ought

to originate with the people, and the ought also to have the final decision of

them,  but  the  trial  of  them  shall  take  place  before  three  of  the  highest

magistrates, upon whom the plaintiff and the defendant shall agree; and if

they  are  not  able  to  come  to  an  agreement  themselves,  the  council  shall

choose  one  of  the  two  proposed.  And  in  private  suits,  too,  as  far  as  is

possible,  all  should  have  a  share;  for  he  who  has  no  share  in  the

administration of justice, is apt to imagine that he has no share in the state at

all. And for this reason there shall be a court of law in every tribe, and the

judges shall be chosen by lot;--they shall give their decisions at once, and

shall be inaccessible to entreaties. The final judgment shall rest with that

court which, as we maintain, has been established in the most incorruptible

form of which human things admit: this shall be the court established forthose who are unable to get rid of their suits either in the courts of neighbours

or of the tribes.


Thus much of the courts of law, which, as I was saying, cannot be precisely

defined either as being or not being offices; a superficial sketch has been

given of them, in which some things have been told and others omitted. For

the right place of an exact statement of the laws respecting suits, under their

several heads, will be at the end of the body of legislation;--let us then expect

them at the end. Hitherto our legislation has been chiefly occupied with the

appointment of offices. Perfect unity and exactness, extending to the whole

and every particular of political administration, cannot be attained to the full,

until the discussion shall have a beginning, middle, and end, and is complete

in every part. At present we have reached the election of magistrates, and this

may be regarded as a sufficient termination of what preceded. And now there

need  no  longer  be  any  delay  or  hesitation  in  beginning  the  work  of

legislation.


CLEINIAS: I like what you have said, Stranger; and I particularly like your

manner of tacking on the beginning of your new discourse to the end of the

former one.


ATHENIAN: Thus far, then, the old men's rational pastime has gone off well.


CLEINIAS: You mean, I suppose, their serious and noble pursuit?


ATHENIAN:  Perhaps;  but  I  should  like  to  know  whether  you  and  I  are

agreed about a certain thing.


CLEINIAS: About what thing?


ATHENIAN: You know the endless labour which painters expend upon their

pictures--they are always putting in or taking out colours, or whatever be the

term which artists employ; they seem as if they would never cease touching

up their works, which are always being made brighter and more beautiful.


CLEINIAS: I know something of these matters from report, although I have

never had any great acquaintance with the art.ATHENIAN:  No  matter;  we  may  make  use  of  the  illustration

notwithstanding: --Suppose that some one had a mind to paint a figure in the

most beautiful manner, in the hope that his work instead of losing would

always improve as time went on--do you not see that being a mortal, unless

he leaves some one to succeed him who will correct the flaws which time

may introduce, and be able to add what is left imperfect through the defect of

the artist, and who will further brighten up and improve the picture, all his

great labour will last but a short time?


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: And is not the aim of the legislator similar? First, he desires

that  his  laws  should  be  written  down  with  all  possible  exactness;  in  the

second place, as time goes on and he has made an actual trial of his decrees,

will he not find omissions? Do you imagine that there ever was a legislator so

foolish as not to know that many things are necessarily omitted, which some

one  coming  after  him  must  correct,  if  the  constitution  and  the  order  of

government is not to deteriorate, but to improve in the state which he has

established?


CLEINIAS: Assuredly, that is the sort of thing which every one would desire.


ATHENIAN: And if any one possesses any means of accomplishing this by

word or deed, or has any way great or small by which he can teach a person

to understand how he can maintain and amend the laws, he should finish

what he has to say, and not leave the work incomplete.


CLEINIAS: By all means.


ATHENIAN:  And  is  not  this  what  you  and  I  have  to  do  at  the  present

moment?


CLEINIAS: What have we to do?


ATHENIAN: As we are about to legislate and have chosen our guardians of

the law, and are ourselves in the evening of life, and they as compared with

us are young men, we ought not only to legislate for them, but to endeavourto make them not only guardians of the law but legislators themselves, as far

as this is possible.


CLEINIAS: Certainly; if we can.


ATHENIAN: At any rate, we must do our best.


CLEINIAS: Of course.


ATHENIAN: We will say to them--O friends and saviours of our laws, in

laying down any law, there are many particulars which we shall omit, and

this cannot be helped; at the same time, we will do our utmost to describe

what is important, and will give an outline which you shall fill up. And I will

explain on what principle you are to act. Megillus and Cleinias and I have

often spoken to one another touching these matters, and we are of opinion

that we have spoken well. And we hope that you will be of the same mind

with us, and become our disciples, and keep in view the things which in our

united opinion the legislator and guardian of the law ought to keep in view.

There was one main point about which we were agreed--that a man's whole

energies throughout life should be devoted to the acquisition of the virtue

proper to a man, whether this was to be gained by study, or habit, or some

mode of acquisition, or desire, or opinion, or knowledge--and this applies

equally to men and women, old and young--the aim of all should always be

such as I have described; anything which may be an impediment, the good

man ought to show that he utterly disregards. And if at last necessity plainly

compels him to be an outlaw from his native land, rather than bow his neck to

the yoke of slavery and be ruled by inferiors, and he has to fly, an exile he

must  be  and  endure  all  such  trials,  rather  than  accept  another  form  of

government,  which  is  likely  to  make  men  worse.  These  are  our  original

principles; and do you now, fixing your eyes upon the standard of what a man

and a citizen ought or ought not to be, praise and blame the laws--blame

those which have not this power of making the citizen better, but embrace

those which have; and with gladness receive and live in them; bidding a long

farewell to other institutions which aim at goods, as they are termed, of a

different kind.


Let us proceed to another class of laws, beginning with their foundation inreligion. And we must first return to the number 5040--the entire number had,

and has, a great many convenient divisions, and the number of the tribes

which was a twelfth part of the whole, being correctly formed by 21 x 20

(5040/(21 x 20), i.e., 5040/420 = 12), also has them. And not only is the

whole  number  divisible  by  twelve,  but  also  the  number  of  each  tribe  is

divisible by twelve. Now every portion should be regarded by us as a sacred

gift of Heaven, corresponding to the months and to the revolution of the

universe (compare Tim.). Every city has a guiding and sacred principle given

by nature, but in some the division or distribution has been more right than in

others, and has been more sacred and fortunate. In our opinion, nothing can

be more right than the selection of the number 5040, which may be divided

by all numbers from one to twelve with the single exception of eleven, and

that admits of a very easy correction; for if, turning to the dividend (5040),

we deduct two families, the defect in the division is cured. And the truth of

this may be easily proved when we have leisure. But for the present, trusting

to the mere assertion of this principle, let us divide the state; and assigning to

each portion some God or son of a God, let us give them altars and sacred

rites, and at the altars let us hold assemblies for sacrifice twice in the month--

twelve assemblies for the tribes, and twelve for the city, according to their

divisions; the first in honour of the Gods and divine things, and the second to

promote friendship and 'better acquaintance,' as the phrase is, and every sort

of good fellowship with one another. For people must be acquainted with

those into whose families and whom they marry and with those to whom they

give in marriage; in such matters, as far as possible, a man should deem it all

important to avoid a mistake, and with this serious purpose let games be

instituted  (compare  Republic)  in  which  youths  and  maidens  shall  dance

together, seeing one another and being seen naked, at a proper age, and on a

suitable occasion, not transgressing the rules of modesty.


The directors of choruses will be the superintendents and regulators of these

games, and they, together with the guardians of the law, will legislate in any

matters which we have omitted; for, as we said, where there are numerous

and minute details, the legislator must leave out something. And the annual

officers  who  have  experience,  and  know  what  is  wanted,  must  make

arrangements  and  improvements  year  by  year,  until  such  enactments  and

provisions are sufficiently determined. A ten years' experience of sacrifices

and dances, if extending to all particulars, will be quite sufficient; and if thelegislator be alive they shall communicate with him, but if he be dead then

the several officers shall refer the omissions which come under their notice to

the guardians of the law, and correct them, until all is perfect; and from that

time there shall be no more change, and they shall establish and use the new

laws with the others which the legislator originally gave them, and of which

they  are  never,  if  they  can  help,  to  change  aught;  or,  if  some  necessity

overtakes them, the magistrates must be called into counsel, and the whole

people, and they must go to all the oracles of the Gods; and if they are all

agreed, in that case they may make the change, but if they are not agreed, by

no  manner  of  means,  and  any  one  who  dissents  shall  prevail,  as  the  law

ordains.


Whenever any one over twenty-five years of age, having seen and been seen

by others, believes himself to have found a marriage connexion which is to

his mind, and suitable for the procreation of children, let him marry if he be

still under the age of five-and-thirty years; but let him first hear how he ought

to seek after what is suitable and appropriate (compare Arist. Pol.). For, as

Cleinias says, every law should have a suitable prelude.


CLEINIAS: You recollect at the right moment, Stranger, and do not miss the

opportunity which the argument affords of saying a word in season.


ATHENIAN: I thank you. We will say to him who is born of good parents--O

my son, you ought to make such a marriage as wise men would approve.

Now they would advise you neither to avoid a poor marriage, nor specially to

desire a rich one; but if other things are equal, always to honour inferiors, and

with them to form connexions;--this will be for the benefit of the city and of

the  families  which  are  united;  for  the  equable  and  symmetrical  tends

infinitely more to virtue than the unmixed. And he who is conscious of being

too headstrong, and carried away more than is fitting in all his actions, ought

to desire to become the relation of orderly parents; and he who is of the

opposite temper ought to seek the opposite alliance. Let there be one word

concerning  all  marriages:--Every  man  shall  follow,  not  after  the  marriage

which is most pleasing to himself, but after that which is most beneficial to

the state. For somehow every one is by nature prone to that which is likest to

himself, and in this way the whole city becomes unequal in property and in

disposition; and hence there arise in most states the very results which weleast desire to happen. Now, to add to the law an express provision, not only

that the rich man shall not marry into the rich family, nor the powerful into

the family of the powerful, but that the slower natures shall be compelled to

enter into marriage with the quicker, and the quicker with the slower, may

awaken  anger  as  well  as  laughter  in  the  minds  of  many;  for  there  is  a

difficulty in perceiving that the city ought to be well mingled like a cup, in

which the maddening wine is hot and fiery, but when chastened by a soberer

God, receives a fair associate and becomes an excellent and temperate drink

(compare Statesman). Yet in marriage no one is able to see that the same

result occurs. Wherefore also the law must let alone such matters, but we

should try to charm the spirits of men into believing the equability of their

children's disposition to be of more importance than equality in excessive

fortune  when  they  marry;  and  him  who  is  too  desirous  of  making  a  rich

marriage we should endeavour to turn aside by reproaches, not, however, by

any compulsion of written law.


Let this then be our exhortation concerning marriage, and let us remember

what  was  said  before--that  a  man  should  cling  to  immortality,  and  leave

behind him children's children to be the servants of God in his place for ever.

All this and much more may be truly said by way of prelude about the duty of

marriage. But if a man will not listen, and remains unsocial and alien among

his fellow-citizens, and is still unmarried at thirty-five years of age, let him

pay a yearly fine;--he who of the highest class shall pay a fine of a hundred

drachmae, and he who is of the second class a fine of seventy drachmae; the

third class shall pay sixty drachmae, and the fourth thirty drachmae, and let

the money be sacred to Here; he who does not pay the fine annually shall owe

ten times the sum, which the treasurer of the goddess shall exact; and if he

fails in doing so, let him be answerable and give an account of the money at

his audit. He who refuses to marry shall be thus punished in money, and also

be deprived of all honour which the younger show to the elder; let no young

man voluntarily obey him, and, if he attempt to punish any one, let every one

come to the rescue and defend the injured person, and he who is present and

does not come to the rescue, shall be pronounced by the law to be a coward

and a bad citizen. Of the marriage portion I have already spoken; and again I

say for the instruction of poor men that he who neither gives nor receives a

dowry on account of poverty, has a compensation; for the citizens of our state

are provided with the necessaries of life, and wives will be less likely to beinsolent, and husbands to be mean and subservient to them on account of

property. And he who obeys this law will do a noble action; but he who will

not obey, and gives or receives more than fifty drachmae as the price of the

marriage garments if he be of the lowest, or more than a mina, or a mina-and-

a-half, if he be of the third or second classes, or two minae if he be of the

highest class, shall owe to the public treasury a similar sum, and that which is

given or received shall be sacred to Here and Zeus; and let the treasurers of

these Gods exact the money, as was said before about the unmarried--that the

treasurers of Here were to exact the money, or pay the fine themselves.


The  betrothal  by  a  father  shall  be  valid  in  the  first  degree,  that  by  a

grandfather  in  the  second  degree,  and  in  the  third  degree,  betrothal  by

brothers who have the same father; but if there are none of these alive, the

betrothal by a mother shall be valid in like manner; in cases of unexampled

fatality, the next of kin and the guardians shall have authority. What are to be

the rites before marriages, or any other sacred acts, relating either to future,

present, or past marriages, shall be referred to the interpreters; and he who

follows their advice may be satisfied. Touching the marriage festival, they

shall  assemble  not  more  than  five  male  and  five  female  friends  of  both

families; and a like number of members of the family of either sex, and no

man shall spend more than his means will allow; he who is of the richest

class may spend a mina,--he who is of the second, half a mina, and in the

same proportion as the census of each decreases: all men shall praise him

who is obedient to the law; but he who is disobedient shall be punished by the

guardians of the law as a man wanting in true taste, and uninstructed in the

laws of bridal song. Drunkenness is always improper, except at the festivals

of the God who gave wine; and peculiarly dangerous, when a man is engaged

in  the  business  of  marriage;  at  such  a  crisis  of  their  lives  a  bride  and

bridegroom ought to have all their wits about them--they ought to take care

that their offspring may be born of reasonable beings; for on what day or

night Heaven will give them increase, who can say? Moreover, they ought

not to begetting children when their bodies are dissipated by intoxication, but

their offspring should be compact and solid, quiet and compounded properly;

whereas the drunkard is all abroad in all his actions, and beside himself both

in body and soul. Wherefore, also, the drunken man is bad and unsteady in

sowing the seed of increase, and is likely to beget offspring who will be

unstable and untrustworthy, and cannot be expected to walk straight either inbody  or  mind.  Hence  during  the  whole  year  and  all  his  life  long,  and

especially  while  he  is  begetting  children,  he  ought  to  take  care  and  not

intentionally do what is injurious to health, or what involves insolence and

wrong; for he cannot help leaving the impression of himself on the souls and

bodies of his offspring, and he begets children in every way inferior. And

especially on the day and night of marriage should a man abstain from such

things. For the beginning, which is also a God dwelling in man, preserves all

things, if it meet with proper respect from each individual. He who marries is

further  to  consider,  that  one  of  the  two  houses  in  the  lot  is  the  nest  and

nursery of his young, and there he is to marry and make a home for himself

and bring up his children, going away from his father and mother. For in

friendships there must be some degree of desire, in order to cement and bind

together  diversities  of  character;  but  excessive  intercourse  not  having  the

desire  which  is  created  by  time,  insensibly  dissolves  friendships  from  a

feeling of satiety; wherefore a man and his wife shall leave to his and her

father  and  mother  their  own  dwelling-places,  and  themselves  go  as  to  a

colony and dwell there, and visit and be visited by their parents; and they

shall  beget  and  bring  up  children,  handing  on  the  torch  of  life  from  one

generation to another, and worshipping the Gods according to law for ever.


In the next place, we have to consider what sort of property will be most

convenient. There is no difficulty either in understanding or acquiring most

kinds of property, but there is great difficulty in what relates to slaves. And

the reason is, that we speak about them in a way which is right and which is

not right; for what we say about our slaves is consistent and also inconsistent

with our practice about them.


MEGILLUS: I do not understand, Stranger, what you mean.


ATHENIAN: I am not surprised, Megillus, for the state of the Helots among

the Lacedaemonians is of all Hellenic forms of slavery the most controverted

and disputed about, some approving and some condemning it; there is less

dispute  about  the  slavery  which  exists  among  the  Heracleots,  who  have

subjugated the Mariandynians, and about the Thessalian Penestae. Looking at

these and the like examples, what ought we to do concerning property in

slaves? I made a remark, in passing, which naturally elicited a question about

my meaning from you. It was this:--We know that all would agree that weshould have the best and most attached slaves whom we can get. For many a

man has found his slaves better in every way than brethren or sons, and many

times they have saved the lives and property of their masters and their whole

house--such tales are well known.


MEGILLUS: To be sure.


ATHENIAN: But may we not also say that the soul of the slave is utterly

corrupt, and that no man of sense ought to trust them? And the wisest of our

poets, speaking of Zeus, says:


'Far-seeing Zeus takes away half the understanding of men whom the day of

slavery subdues.'


Different  persons  have  got  these  two  different  notions  of  slaves  in  their

minds--some of them utterly distrust their servants, and, as if they were wild

beasts, chastise them with goads and whips, and make their souls three times,

or rather many times, as slavish as they were before;--and others do just the

opposite.


MEGILLUS: True.


CLEINIAS: Then what are we to do in our own country, Stranger, seeing that

there are such differences in the treatment of slaves by their owners?


ATHENIAN: Well, Cleinias, there can be no doubt that man is a troublesome

animal, and therefore he is not very manageable, nor likely to become so,

when you attempt to introduce the necessary division of slave, and freeman,

and master.


CLEINIAS: That is obvious.


ATHENIAN: He is a troublesome piece of goods, as has been often shown

by  the  frequent  revolts  of  the  Messenians,  and  the  great  mischiefs  which

happen in states having many slaves who speak the same language, and the

numerous robberies and lawless life of the Italian banditti, as they are called.

A man who considers all this is fairly at a loss. Two remedies alone remain tous,--not to have the slaves of the same country, nor if possible, speaking the

same language (compare Aris. Pol.); in this way they will more easily be held

in subjection: secondly, we should tend them carefully, not only out of regard

to them, but yet more out of respect to ourselves. And the right treatment of

slaves is to behave properly to them, and to do to them, if possible, even

more  justice  than  to  those  who  are  our  equals;  for  he  who  naturally  and

genuinely reverences justice, and hates injustice, is discovered in his dealings

with any class of men to whom he can easily be unjust. And he who in regard

to the natures and actions of his slaves is undefiled by impiety and injustice,

will best sow the seeds of virtue in them; and this may be truly said of every

master,  and  tyrant,  and  of  every  other  having  authority  in  relation  to  his

inferiors. Slaves ought to be punished as they deserve, and not admonished as

if they were freemen, which will only make them conceited. The language

used to a servant ought always to be that of a command (compare Arist. Pol.),

and we ought not to jest with them, whether they are males or females--this is

a foolish way which many people have of setting up their slaves, and making

the life of servitude more disagreeable both for them and for their masters.


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: Now that each of the citizens is provided, as far as possible,

with a sufficient number of suitable slaves who can help him in what he has

to do, we may next proceed to describe their dwellings.


CLEINIAS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: The city being new and hitherto uninhabited, care ought to be

taken of all the buildings, and the manner of building each of them, and also

of the temples and walls. These, Cleinias, were matters which properly came

before the marriages;--but, as we are only talking, there is no objection to

changing the order. If, however, our plan of legislation is ever to take effect,

then the house shall precede the marriage if God so will, and afterwards we

will  come  to  the  regulations  about  marriage;  but  at  present  we  are  only

describing these matters in a general outline.


CLEINIAS: Quite true.ATHENIAN: The temples are to be placed all round the agora, and the whole

city built on the heights in a circle (compare Arist. Pol.), for the sake of

defence  and  for  the  sake  of  purity.  Near  the  temples  are  to  be  placed

buildings for the magistrates and the courts of law; in these plaintiff and

defendant will receive their due, and the places will be regarded as most holy,

partly because they have to do with holy things: and partly because they are

the dwelling-places of holy Gods: and in them will be held the courts in

which cases of homicide and other trials of capital offences may fitly take

place. As to the walls, Megillus, I agree with Sparta in thinking that they

should be allowed to sleep in the earth, and that we should not attempt to

disinter them (compare Arist. Pol.); there is a poetical saying, which is finely

expressed, that 'walls ought to be of steel and iron, and not of earth;' besides,

how ridiculous of us to be sending out our young men annually into the

country to dig and to trench, and to keep off the enemy by fortifications,

under the idea that they are not to be allowed to set foot in our territory, and

then, that we should surround ourselves with a wall, which, in the first place,

is by no means conducive to the health of cities, and is also apt to produce a

certain effeminacy in the minds of the inhabitants, inviting men to run thither

instead of repelling their enemies, and leading them to imagine that their

safety is due not to their keeping guard day and night, but that when they are

protected by walls and gates, then they may sleep in safety; as if they were

not meant to labour, and did not know that true repose comes from labour,

and  that  disgraceful  indolence  and  a  careless  temper  of  mind  is  only  the

renewal of trouble. But if men must have walls, the private houses ought to

be so arranged from the first that the whole city may be one wall, having all

the  houses  capable  of  defence  by  reason  of  their  uniformity  and  equality

towards the streets (compare Arist. Pol.). The form of the city being that of a

single dwelling will have an agreeable aspect, and being easily guarded will

be infinitely better for security. Until the original building is completed, these

should be the principal objects of the inhabitants; and the wardens of the city

should  superintend  the  work,  and  should  impose  a  fine  on  him  who  is

negligent;  and  in  all  that  relates  to  the  city  they  should  have  a  care  of

cleanliness,  and  not  allow  a  private  person  to  encroach  upon  any  public

property either by buildings or excavations. Further, they ought to take care

that the rains from heaven flow off easily, and of any other matters which

may have to be administered either within or without the city. The guardians

of  the  law  shall  pass  any  further  enactments  which  their  experience  mayshow to be necessary, and supply any other points in which the law may be

deficient. And now that these matters, and the buildings about the agora, and

the  gymnasia,  and  places  of  instruction,  and  theatres,  are  all  ready  and

waiting  for  scholars  and  spectators,  let  us  proceed  to  the  subjects  which

follow marriage in the order of legislation.


CLEINIAS: By all means.


ATHENIAN: Assuming that marriages exist already, Cleinias, the mode of

life during the year after marriage, before children are born, will follow next

in order. In what way bride and bridegroom ought to live in a city which is to

be superior to other cities, is a matter not at all easy for us to determine.

There have been many difficulties already, but this will be the greatest of

them, and the most disagreeable to the many. Still I cannot but say what

appears to me to be right and true, Cleinias.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: He who imagines that he can give laws for the public conduct

of states, while he leaves the private life of citizens wholly to take care of

itself; who thinks that individuals may pass the day as they please, and that

there is no necessity of order in all things; he, I say, who gives up the control

of their private lives, and supposes that they will conform to law in their

common and public life, is making a great mistake. Why have I made this

remark? Why, because I am going to enact that the bridegrooms should live

at the common tables, just as they did before marriage. This was a singularity

when first enacted by the legislator in your parts of the world, Megillus and

Cleinias, as I should suppose, on the occasion of some war or other similar

danger, which caused the passing of the law, and which would be likely to

occur in thinly-peopled places, and in times of pressure. But when men had

once tried and been accustomed to a common table, experience showed that

the institution greatly conduced to security; and in some such manner the

custom of having common tables arose among you.


CLEINIAS: Likely enough.


ATHENIAN:  I  said  that  there  may  have  been  singularity  and  danger  inimposing such a custom at first, but that now there is not the same difficulty.

There is, however, another institution which is the natural sequel to this, and

would be excellent, if it existed anywhere, but at present it does not. The

institution of which I am about to speak is not easily described or executed;

and would be like the legislator 'combing wool into the fire,' as people say, or

performing any other impossible and useless feat.


CLEINIAS: What is the cause, Stranger, of this extreme hesitation?


ATHENIAN: You shall hear without any fruitless loss of time. That which

has law and order in a state is the cause of every good, but that which is

disordered or ill-ordered is often the ruin of that which is well-ordered; and at

this point the argument is now waiting. For with you, Cleinias and Megillus,

the  common  tables  of  men  are,  as  I  said,  a  heaven-born  and  admirable

institution, but you are mistaken in leaving the women unregulated by law.

They have no similar institution of public tables in the light of day, and just

that part of the human race which is by nature prone to secrecy and stealth on

account  of  their  weakness--I  mean  the  female  sex--has  been  left  without

regulation by the legislator, which is a great mistake. And, in consequence of

this neglect, many things have grown lax among you, which might have been

far  better,  if  they  had  been  only  regulated  by  law;  for  the  neglect  of

regulations about women may not only be regarded as a neglect of half the

entire matter (Arist. Pol.), but in proportion as woman's nature is inferior to

that of men in capacity for virtue, in that degree the consequence of such

neglect is more than twice as important. The careful consideration of this

matter, and the arranging and ordering on a common principle of all our

institutions  relating  both  to  men  and  women,  greatly  conduces  to  the

happiness of the state. But at present, such is the unfortunate condition of

mankind, that no man of sense will even venture to speak of common tables

in places and cities in which they have never been established at all; and how

can any one avoid being utterly ridiculous, who attempts to compel women to

show in public how much they eat and drink? There is nothing at which the

sex is more likely to take offence. For women are accustomed to creep into

dark places, and when dragged out into the light they will exert their utmost

powers of resistance, and be far too much for the legislator. And therefore, as

I said before, in most places they will not endure to have the truth spoken

without raising a tremendous outcry, but in this state perhaps they may. Andif we may assume that our whole discussion about the state has not been mere

idle talk, I should like to prove to you, if you will consent to listen, that this

institution is good and proper; but if you had rather not, I will refrain.


CLEINIAS:  There  is  nothing  which  we  should  both  of  us  like  better,

Stranger, than to hear what you have to say.


ATHENIAN: Very good; and you must not be surprised if I go back a little,

for  we  have  plenty  of  leisure,  and  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  us  from

considering in every point of view the subject of law.


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: Then let us return once more to what we were saying at first.

Every man should understand that the human race either had no beginning at

all, and will never have an end, but always will be and has been; or that it

began an immense while ago.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Well, and have there not been constitutions and destructions of

states,  and  all  sorts  of  pursuits  both  orderly  and  disorderly,  and  diverse

desires of meats and drinks always, and in all the world, and all sorts of

changes of the seasons in which animals may be expected to have undergone

innumerable transformations of themselves?


CLEINIAS: No doubt.


ATHENIAN:  And  may  we  not  suppose  that  vines  appeared,  which  had

previously no existence, and also olives, and the gifts of Demeter and her

daughter, of which one Triptolemus was the minister, and that, before these

existed, animals took to devouring each other as they do still?


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: Again, the practice of men sacrificing one another still exists

among  many  nations;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  we  hear  of  other  human

beings who did not even venture to taste the flesh of a cow and had no animalsacrifices,  but  only  cakes  and  fruits  dipped  in  honey,  and  similar  pure

offerings, but no flesh of animals; from these they abstained under the idea

that they ought not to eat them, and might not stain the altars of the Gods

with blood. For in those days men are said to have lived a sort of Orphic life,

having the use of all lifeless things, but abstaining from all living things.


CLEINIAS: Such has been the constant tradition, and is very likely true.


ATHENIAN: Some one might say to us, What is the drift of all this?


CLEINIAS: A very pertinent question, Stranger.


ATHENIAN: And therefore I will endeavour, Cleinias, if I can, to draw the

natural inference.


CLEINIAS: Proceed.


ATHENIAN: I see that among men all things depend upon three wants and

desires, of which the end is virtue, if they are rightly led by them, or the

opposite if wrongly. Now these are eating and drinking, which begin at birth-

-every animal has a natural desire for them, and is violently excited, and

rebels against him who says that he must not satisfy all his pleasures and

appetites,  and  get  rid  of  all  the  corresponding  pains--and  the  third  and

greatest and sharpest want and desire breaks out last, and is the fire of sexual

lust, which kindles in men every species of wantonness and madness. And

these  three  disorders  we  must  endeavour  to  master  by  the  three  great

principles of fear and law and right reason; turning them away from that

which is called pleasantest to the best, using the Muses and the Gods who

preside over contests to extinguish their increase and influx.


But to return:--After marriage let us speak of the birth of children, and after

their  birth  of  their  nurture  and  education.  In  the  course  of  discussion  the

several laws will be perfected, and we shall at last arrive at the common

tables. Whether such associations are to be confined to men, or extended to

women also, we shall see better when we approach and take a nearer view of

them; and we may then determine what previous institutions are required and

will have to precede them. As I said before, we shall see them more in detail,and shall be better able to lay down the laws which are proper or suited to

them.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: Let us keep in mind the words which have now been spoken;

for hereafter there may be need of them.


CLEINIAS: What do you bid us keep in mind?


ATHENIAN:  That  which  we  comprehended  under  the  three  words--first,

eating, secondly, drinking, thirdly, the excitement of love.


CLEINIAS: We shall be sure to remember, Stranger.


ATHENIAN: Very good. Then let us now proceed to marriage, and teach

persons  in  what  way  they  shall  beget  children,  threatening  them,  if  they

disobey, with the terrors of the law.


CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN:  The  bride  and  bridegroom  should  consider  that  they  are  to

produce for the state the best and fairest specimens of children which they

can. Now all men who are associated in any action always succeed when they

attend and give their mind to what they are doing, but when they do not give

their mind or have no mind, they fail; wherefore let the bridegroom give his

mind  to  the  bride  and  to  the  begetting  of  children,  and  the  bride  in  like

manner give her mind to the bridegroom, and particularly at the time when

their children are not yet born. And let the women whom we have chosen be

the overseers of such matters, and let them in whatever number, large or

small, and at whatever time the magistrates may command, assemble every

day in the temple of Eileithyia during a third part of the day, and being there

assembled, let them inform one another of any one whom they see, whether

man  or  woman,  of  those  who  are  begetting  children,  disregarding  the

ordinances given at the time when the nuptial sacrifices and ceremonies were

performed. Let the begetting of children and the supervision of those who are

begetting  them  continue  ten  years  and  no  longer,  during  the  time  whenmarriage is fruitful. But if any continue without children up to this time, let

them take counsel with their kindred and with the women holding the office

of overseer and be divorced for their mutual benefit. If, however, any dispute

arises about what is proper and for the interest of either party, they shall

choose ten of the guardians of the law and abide by their permission and

appointment. The women who preside over these matters shall enter into the

houses of the young, and partly by admonitions and partly by threats make

them give over their folly and error: if they persist, let the women go and tell

the guardians of the law, and the guardians shall prevent them. But if they too

cannot prevent them, they shall bring the matter before the people; and let

them write up their names and make oath that they cannot reform such and

such an one; and let him who is thus written up, if he cannot in a court of law

convict those who have inscribed his name, be deprived of the privileges of a

citizen  in  the  following  respects:--let  him  not  go  to  weddings  nor  to  the

thanksgivings after the birth of children; and if he go, let any one who pleases

strike him with impunity; and let the same regulations hold about women: let

not a woman be allowed to appear abroad, or receive honour, or go to nuptial

and birthday festivals, if she in like manner be written up as acting disorderly

and  cannot  obtain  a  verdict.  And  if,  when  they  themselves  have  done

begetting children according to the law, a man or woman have connexion

with another man or woman who are still begetting children, let the same

penalties be inflicted upon them as upon those who are still having a family;

and when the time for procreation has passed let the man or woman who

refrains in such matters be held in esteem, and let those who do not refrain be

held in the contrary of esteem--that is to say, disesteem. Now, if the greater

part  of  mankind  behave  modestly,  the  enactments  of  law  may  be  left  to

slumber; but, if they are disorderly, the enactments having been passed, let

them be carried into execution. To every man the first year is the beginning

of life, and the time of birth ought to be written down in the temples of their

fathers as the beginning of existence to every child, whether boy or girl. Let

every phratria have inscribed on a whited wall the names of the successive

archons by whom the years are reckoned. And near to them let the living

members of the phratria be inscribed, and when they depart life let them be

erased. The limit of marriageable ages for a woman shall be from sixteen to

twenty years at the longest,--for a man, from thirty to thirty-five years; and let

a woman hold office at forty, and a man at thirty years. Let a man go out to

war from twenty to sixty years, and for a woman, if there appear any need tomake use of her in military service, let the time of service be after she shall

have brought forth children up to fifty years of age; and let regard be had to

what is possible and suitable to each.BOOK VII.


And  now,  assuming  children  of  both  sexes  to  have  been  born,  it  will  be

proper for us to consider, in the next place, their nurture and education; this

cannot be left altogether unnoticed, and yet may be thought a subject fitted

rather for precept and admonition than for law. In private life there are many

little things, not always apparent, arising out of the pleasures and pains and

desires of individuals, which run counter to the intention of the legislator, and

make the characters of the citizens various and dissimilar:--this is an evil in

states; for by reason of their smallness and frequent occurrence, there would

be an unseemliness and want of propriety in making them penal by law; and

if made penal, they are the destruction of the written law because mankind

get the habit of frequently transgressing the law in small matters. The result is

that you cannot legislate about them, and still less can you be silent. I speak

somewhat darkly, but I shall endeavour also to bring my wares into the light

of day, for I acknowledge that at present there is a want of clearness in what I

am saying.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN. Am I not right in maintaining that a good education is that

which tends most to the improvement of mind and body?


CLEINIAS: Undoubtedly.


ATHENIAN:  And  nothing  can  be  plainer  than  that  the  fairest  bodies  are

those which grow up from infancy in the best and straightest manner?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And do we not further observe that the first shoot of every

living thing is by far the greatest and fullest? Many will even contend that a

man at twenty-five does not reach twice the height which he attained at five.


CLEINIAS: True.ATHENIAN: Well, and is not rapid growth without proper and abundant

exercise the source endless evils in the body?


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: And the body should have the most exercise when it receives

most nourishment?


CLEINIAS: But, Stranger, are we to impose this great amount of exercise

upon newly-born infants?


ATHENIAN: Nay, rather on the bodies of infants still unborn.


CLEINIAS: What do you mean, my good sir? In the process of gestation?


ATHENIAN: Exactly. I am not at all surprised that you have never heard of

this very peculiar sort of gymnastic applied to such little creatures, which,

although strange, I will endeavour to explain to you.


CLEINIAS: By all means.


ATHENIAN: The practice is more easy for us to understand than for you, by

reason of certain amusements which are carried to excess by us at Athens.

Not only boys, but often older persons, are in the habit of keeping quails and

cocks (compare Republic), which they train to fight one another. And they

are far from thinking that the contests in which they stir them up to fight with

one another are sufficient exercise; for, in addition to this, they carry them

about tucked beneath their armpits, holding the smaller birds in their hands,

the larger under their arms, and go for a walk of a great many miles for the

sake of health, that is to say, not their own health, but the health of the birds;

whereby they prove to any intelligent person, that all bodies are benefited by

shakings and movements, when they are moved without weariness, whether

the motion proceeds from themselves, or is caused by a swing, or at sea, or

on horseback, or by other bodies in whatever way moving, and that thus

gaining the mastery over food and drink, they are able to impart beauty and

health and strength. But admitting all this, what follows? Shall we make a

ridiculous law that the pregnant woman shall walk about and fashion theembryo within as we fashion wax before it hardens, and after birth swathe the

infant for two years? Suppose that we compel nurses, under penalty of a legal

fine, to be always carrying the children somewhere or other, either to the

temples, or into the country, or to their relations' houses, until they are well

able to stand, and to take care that their limbs are not distorted by leaning on

them when they are too young (compare Arist. Pol.),--they should continue to

carry them until the infant has completed its third year; the nurses should be

strong, and there should be more than one of them. Shall these be our rules,

and shall we impose a penalty for the neglect of them? No, no; the penalty of

which we were speaking will fall upon our own heads more than enough.


CLEINIAS: What penalty?


ATHENIAN: Ridicule, and the difficulty of getting the feminine and servant-

like dispositions of the nurses to comply.


CLEINIAS: Then why was there any need to speak of the matter at all?


ATHENIAN: The reason is, that masters and freemen in states, when they

hear  of  it,  are  very  likely  to  arrive  at  a  true  conviction  that  without  due

regulation of private life in cities, stability in the laying down of laws is

hardly to be expected (compare Republic); and he who makes this reflection

may himself adopt the laws just now mentioned, and, adopting them, may

order his house and state well and be happy.


CLEINIAS: Likely enough.


ATHENIAN: And therefore let us proceed with our legislation until we have

determined the exercises which are suited to the souls of young children, in

the same manner in which we have begun to go through the rules relating to

their bodies.


CLEINIAS: By all means.


ATHENIAN: Let us assume, then, as a first principle in relation both to the

body and soul of very young creatures, that nursing and moving about by day

and night is good for them all, and that the younger they are, the more theywill need it (compare Arist. Pol.); infants should live, if that were possible, as

if they were always rocking at sea. This is the lesson which we may gather

from the experience of nurses, and likewise from the use of the remedy of

motion in the rites of the Corybantes; for when mothers want their restless

children to go to sleep they do not employ rest, but, on the contrary, motion--

rocking them in their arms; nor do they give them silence, but they sing to

them and lap them in sweet strains; and the Bacchic women are cured of their

frenzy in the same manner by the use of the dance and of music.


CLEINIAS: Well, Stranger, and what is the reason of this?


ATHENIAN: The reason is obvious.


CLEINIAS: What?


ATHENIAN: The affection both of the Bacchantes and of the children is an

emotion of fear, which springs out of an evil habit of the soul. And when

some  one  applies  external  agitation  to  affections  of  this  sort,  the  motion

coming from without gets the better of the terrible and violent internal one,

and produces a peace and calm in the soul, and quiets the restless palpitation

of the heart, which is a thing much to be desired, sending the children to

sleep, and making the Bacchantes, although they remain awake, to dance to

the pipe with the help of the Gods to whom they offer acceptable sacrifices,

and producing in them a sound mind, which takes the place of their frenzy.

And, to express what I mean in a word, there is a good deal to be said in

favour of this treatment.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: But if fear has such a power we ought to infer from these facts,

that every soul which from youth upward has been familiar with fears, will be

made more liable to fear (compare Republic), and every one will allow that

this is the way to form a habit of cowardice and not of courage.


CLEINIAS: No doubt.


ATHENIAN: And, on the other hand, the habit of overcoming, from ouryouth upwards, the fears and terrors which beset us, may be said to be an

exercise of courage.


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: And we may say that the use of exercise and motion in the

earliest years of life greatly contributes to create a part of virtue in the soul.


CLEINIAS: Quite true.


ATHENIAN: Further, a cheerful temper, or the reverse, may be regarded as

having much to do with high spirit on the one hand, or with cowardice on the

other.


CLEINIAS: To be sure.


ATHENIAN: Then now we must endeavour to show how and to what extent

we may, if we please, without difficulty implant either character in the young.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: There is a common opinion, that luxury makes the disposition

of youth discontented and irascible and vehemently excited by trifles; that on

the other hand excessive and savage servitude makes men mean and abject,

and haters of their kind, and therefore makes them undesirable associates.


CLEINIAS:  But  how  must  the  state  educate  those  who  do  not  as  yet

understand  the  language  of  the  country,  and  are  therefore  incapable  of

appreciating any sort of instruction?


ATHENIAN: I will tell you how:--Every animal that is born is wont to utter

some cry, and this is especially the case with man, and he is also affected

with the inclination to weep more than any other animal.


CLEINIAS: Quite true.


ATHENIAN: Do not nurses, when they want to know what an infant desires,

judge by these signs?--when anything is brought to the infant and he is silent,then he is supposed to be pleased, but, when he weeps and cries out, then he

is  not  pleased.  For  tears  and  cries  are  the  inauspicious  signs  by  which

children show what they love and hate. Now the time which is thus spent is

no less than three years, and is a very considerable portion of life to be passed

ill or well.


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: Does not the discontented and ungracious nature appear to you

to be full of lamentations and sorrows more than a good man ought to be?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Well, but if during these three years every possible care were

taken that our nursling should have as little of sorrow and fear, and in general

of pain as was possible, might we not expect in early childhood to make his

soul more gentle and cheerful? (Compare Arist. Pol.)


CLEINIAS: To be sure, Stranger--more especially if we could procure him a

variety of pleasures.


ATHENIAN: There I can no longer agree, Cleinias: you amaze me. To bring

him up in such a way would be his utter ruin; for the beginning is always the

most critical part of education. Let us see whether I am right.


CLEINIAS: Proceed.


ATHENIAN: The point about which you and I differ is of great importance,

and I hope that you, Megillus, will help to decide between us. For I maintain

that the true life should neither seek for pleasures, nor, on the other hand,

entirely  avoid  pains,  but  should  embrace  the  middle  state  (compare

Republic), which I just spoke of as gentle and benign, and is a state which we

by some divine presage and inspiration rightly ascribe to God. Now, I say, he

among men, too, who would be divine ought to pursue after this mean habit--

he should not rush headlong into pleasures, for he will not be free from pains;

nor should we allow any one, young or old, male or female, to be thus given

any more than ourselves, and least of all the newly-born infant, for in infancymore than at any other time the character is engrained by habit. Nay, more, if

I were not afraid of appearing to be ridiculous, I would say that a woman

during her year of pregnancy should of all women be most carefully tended,

and kept from violent or excessive pleasures and pains, and should at that

time cultivate gentleness and benevolence and kindness.


CLEINIAS: You need not ask Megillus, Stranger, which of us has most truly

spoken; for I myself agree that all men ought to avoid the life of unmingled

pain or pleasure, and pursue always a middle course. And having spoken

well, may I add that you have been well answered?


ATHENIAN: Very good, Cleinias; and now let us all three consider a further

point.


CLEINIAS: What is it?


ATHENIAN:  That  all  the  matters  which  we  are  now  describing  are

commonly called by the general name of unwritten customs, and what are

termed the laws of our ancestors are all of similar nature. And the reflection

which lately arose in our minds, that we can neither call these things laws,

nor yet leave them unmentioned, is justified; for they are the bonds of the

whole state, and come in between the written laws which are or are hereafter

to be laid down; they are just ancestral customs of great antiquity, which, if

they are rightly ordered and made habitual, shield and preserve the previously

existing written law; but if they depart from right and fall into disorder, then

they are like the props of builders which slip away out of their place and

cause  a  universal  ruin--one  part  drags  another  down,  and  the  fair  super-

structure falls because the old foundations are undermined. Reflecting upon

this, Cleinias, you ought to bind together the new state in every possible way,

omitting nothing, whether great or small, of what are called laws or manners

or pursuits, for by these means a city is bound together, and all these things

are only lasting when they depend upon one another; and, therefore, we must

not wonder if we find that many apparently trifling customs or usages come

pouring in and lengthening out our laws.


CLEINIAS: Very true: we are disposed to agree with you.ATHENIAN: Up to the age of three years, whether of boy or girl, if a person

strictly carries out our previous regulations and makes them a principal aim,

he will do much for the advantage of the young creatures. But at three, four,

five, and even six years the childish nature will require sports; now is the

time to get rid of self-will in him, punishing him, but not so as to disgrace

him. We were saying about slaves, that we ought neither to add insult to

punishment so as to anger them, nor yet to leave them unpunished lest they

become self-willed; and a like rule is to be observed in the case of the free-

born. Children at that age have certain natural modes of amusement which

they find out for themselves when they meet. And all the children who are

between the ages of three and six ought to meet at the temples of the villages,

the several families of a village uniting on one spot. The nurses are to see that

the  children  behave  properly  and  orderly--they  themselves  and  all  their

companies  are  to  be  under  the  control  of  twelve  matrons,  one  for  each

company,  who  are  annually  selected  to  inspect  them  from  the  women

previously mentioned [i.e. the women who have authority over marriage],

whom the guardians of the law appoint. These matrons shall be chosen by the

women who have authority over marriage, one out of each tribe; all are to be

of the same age; and let each of them, as soon as she is appointed, hold office

and go to the temples every day, punishing all offenders, male or female, who

are slaves or strangers, by the help of some of the public slaves; but if any

citizen disputes the punishment, let her bring him before the wardens of the

city; or, if there be no dispute, let her punish him herself. After the age of six

years the time has arrived for the separation of the sexes --let boys live with

boys, and girls in like manner with girls. Now they must begin to learn--the

boys going to teachers of horsemanship and the use of the bow, the javelin,

and sling, and the girls too, if they do not object, at any rate until they know

how to manage these weapons, and especially how to handle heavy arms; for

I  may  note,  that  the  practice  which  now  prevails  is  almost  universally

misunderstood.


CLEINIAS: In what respect?


ATHENIAN: In that the right and left hand are supposed to be by nature

differently  suited  for  our  various  uses  of  them;  whereas  no  difference  is

found in the use of the feet and the lower limbs; but in the use of the hands

we are, as it were, maimed by the folly of nurses and mothers; for althoughour several limbs are by nature balanced, we create a difference in them by

bad habit. In some cases this is of no consequence, as, for example, when we

hold the lyre in the left hand, and the plectrum in the right, but it is downright

folly to make the same distinction in other cases. The custom of the Scythians

proves our error; for they not only hold the bow from them with the left hand

and draw the arrow to them with their right, but use either hand for both

purposes. And there are many similar examples in charioteering and other

things, from which we may learn that those who make the left side weaker

than the right act contrary to nature. In the case of the plectrum, which is of

horn only, and similar instruments, as I was saying, it is of no consequence,

but makes a great difference, and may be of very great importance to the

warrior who has to use iron weapons, bows and javelins, and the like; above

all, when in heavy armour, he has to fight against heavy armour. And there is

a very great difference between one who has learnt and one who has not, and

between one who has been trained in gymnastic exercises and one who has

not been. For as he who is perfectly skilled in the Pancratium or boxing or

wrestling, is not unable to fight from his left side, and does not limp and

draggle in confusion when his opponent makes him change his position, so in

heavy-armed fighting, and in all other things, if I am not mistaken, the like

holds--he who has these double powers of attack and defence ought not in

any case to leave them either unused or untrained, if he can help; and if a

person had the nature of Geryon or Briareus he ought to be able with his

hundred hands to throw a hundred darts. Now, the magistrates, male and

female, should see to all these things, the women superintending the nursing

and amusements of the children, and the men superintending their education,

that all of them, boys and girls alike, may be sound hand and foot, and may

not, if they can help, spoil the gifts of nature by bad habits.


Education has two branches--one of gymnastic, which is concerned with the

body, and the other of music, which is designed for the improvement of the

soul. And gymnastic has also two branches--dancing and wrestling; and one

sort of dancing imitates musical recitation, and aims at preserving dignity and

freedom, the other aims at producing health, agility, and beauty in the limbs

and parts of the body, giving the proper flexion and extension to each of

them,  a  harmonious  motion  being  diffused  everywhere,  and  forming  a

suitable accompaniment to the dance. As regards wrestling, the tricks which

Antaeus  and  Cercyon  devised  in  their  systems  out  of  a  vain  spirit  ofcompetition, or the tricks of boxing which Epeius or Amycus invented, are

useless and unsuitable for war, and do not deserve to have much said about

them; but the art of wrestling erect and keeping free the neck and hands and

sides, working with energy and constancy, with a composed strength, for the

sake of health--these are always useful, and are not to be neglected, but to be

enjoined  alike  on  masters  and  scholars,  when  we  reach  that  part  of

legislation; and we will desire the one to give their instructions freely, and the

others  to  receive  them  thankfully.  Nor,  again,  must  we  omit  suitable

imitations of war in our choruses; here in Crete you have the armed dances of

the Curetes, and the Lacedaemonians have those of the Dioscuri. And our

virgin lady, delighting in the amusement of the dance, thought it not fit to

amuse herself with empty hands; she must be clothed in a complete suit of

armour,  and  in  this  attire  go  through  the  dance;  and  youths  and  maidens

should  in  every  respect  imitate  her,  esteeming  highly  the  favour  of  the

Goddess, both with a view to the necessities of war, and to festive occasions:

it will be right also for the boys, until such time as they go out to war, to

make processions and supplications to all the Gods in goodly array, armed

and on horseback, in dances and marches, fast or slow, offering up prayers to

the Gods and to the sons of Gods; and also engaging in contests and preludes

of contests, if at all, with these objects. For these sorts of exercises, and no

others, are useful both in peace and war, and are beneficial alike to states and

to private houses. But other labours and sports and exercises of the body are

unworthy of freemen, O Megillus and Cleinias.


I have now completely described the kind of gymnastic which I said at first

ought to be described; if you know of any better, will you communicate your

thoughts?


CLEINIAS: It is not easy, Stranger, to put aside these principles of gymnastic

and wrestling and to enunciate better ones.


ATHENIAN: Now we must say what has yet to be said about the gifts of the

Muses  and  of  Apollo:  before,  we  fancied  that  we  had  said  all,  and  that

gymnastic alone remained; but now we see clearly what points have been

omitted,  and  should  be  first  proclaimed;  of  these,  then,  let  us  proceed  to

speak.CLEINIAS: By all means.


ATHENIAN: Let me tell you once more--although you have heard me say

the same before--that caution must be always exercised, both by the speaker

and by the hearer, about anything that is very singular and unusual. For my

tale  is  one  which  many  a  man  would  be  afraid  to  tell,  and  yet  I  have  a

confidence which makes me go on.


CLEINIAS: What have you to say, Stranger?


ATHENIAN: I say that in states generally no one has observed that the plays

of  childhood  have  a  great  deal  to  do  with  the  permanence  or  want  of

permanence in legislation. For when plays are ordered with a view to children

having the same plays, and amusing themselves after the same manner, and

finding delight in the same playthings, the more solemn institutions of the

state are allowed to remain undisturbed. Whereas if sports are disturbed, and

innovations are made in them, and they constantly change, and the young

never speak of their having the same likings, or the same established notions

of good and bad taste, either in the bearing of their bodies or in their dress,

but he who devises something new and out of the way in figures and colours

and the like is held in special honour, we may truly say that no greater evil

can happen in a state; for he who changes the sports is secretly changing the

manners of the young, and making the old to be dishonoured among them

and the new to be honoured. And I affirm that there is nothing which is a

greater injury to all states than saying or thinking thus. Will you hear me tell

how great I deem the evil to be?


CLEINIAS: You mean the evil of blaming antiquity in states?


ATHENIAN: Exactly.


CLEINIAS: If you are speaking of that, you will find in us hearers who are

disposed to receive what you say not unfavourably but most favourably.


ATHENIAN: I should expect so.


CLEINIAS: Proceed.ATHENIAN: Well, then, let us give all the greater heed to one another's

words. The argument affirms that any change whatever except from evil is

the most dangerous of all things; this is true in the case of the seasons and of

the winds, in the management of our bodies and the habits of our minds--true

of  all  things  except,  as  I  said  before,  of  the  bad.  He  who  looks  at  the

constitution of individuals accustomed to eat any sort of meat, or drink any

drink, or to do any work which they can get, may see that they are at first

disordered  by  them,  but  afterwards,  as  time  goes  on,  their  bodies  grow

adapted to them, and they learn to know and like variety, and have good

health and enjoyment of life; and if ever afterwards they are confined again to

a superior diet, at first they are troubled with disorders, and with difficulty

become habituated to their new food. A similar principle we may imagine to

hold good about the minds of men and the natures of their souls. For when

they have been brought up in certain laws, which by some Divine Providence

have remained unchanged during long ages, so that no one has any memory

or tradition of their ever having been otherwise than they are, then every one

is afraid and ashamed to change that which is established. The legislator must

somehow find a way of implanting this reverence for antiquity, and I would

propose the following way: People are apt to fancy, as I was saying before,

that when the plays of children are altered they are merely plays, not seeing

that the most serious and detrimental consequences arise out of the change;

and they readily comply with the child's wishes instead of deterring him, not

considering that these children who make innovations in their games, when

they grow up to be men, will be different from the last generation of children,

and,  being  different,  will  desire  a  different  sort  of  life,  and  under  the

influence of this desire will want other institutions and laws; and no one of

them reflects that there will follow what I just now called the greatest of evils

to states. Changes in bodily fashions are no such serious evils, but frequent

changes in the praise and censure of manners are the greatest of evils, and

require the utmost prevision.


CLEINIAS: To be sure.


ATHENIAN: And now do we still hold to our former assertion, that rhythms

and music in general are imitations of good and evil characters in men? What

say you?CLEINIAS: That is the only doctrine which we can admit.


ATHENIAN: Must we not, then, try in every possible way to prevent our

youth from even desiring to imitate new modes either in dance or song? nor

must any one be allowed to offer them varieties of pleasures.


CLEINIAS: Most true.


ATHENIAN: Can any of us imagine a better mode of effecting this object

than that of the Egyptians?


CLEINIAS: What is their method?


ATHENIAN: To consecrate every sort of dance or melody. First we should

ordain festivals--calculating for the year what they ought to be, and at what

time, and in honour of what Gods, sons of Gods, and heroes they ought to be

celebrated; and, in the next place, what hymns ought to be sung at the several

sacrifices, and with what dances the particular festival is to be honoured. This

has to be arranged at first by certain persons, and, when arranged, the whole

assembly of the citizens are to offer sacrifices and libations to the Fates and

all the other Gods, and to consecrate the several odes to Gods and heroes: and

if any one offers any other hymns or dances to any one of the Gods, the

priests and priestesses, acting in concert with the guardians of the law, shall,

with  the  sanction  of  religion  and  the  law,  exclude  him,  and  he  who  is

excluded, if he do not submit, shall be liable all his life long to have a suit of

impiety brought against him by any one who likes.


CLEINIAS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: In the consideration of this subject, let us remember what is

due to ourselves.


CLEINIAS: To what are you referring?


ATHENIAN: I mean that any young man, and much more any old one, when

he sees or hears anything strange or unaccustomed, does not at once run to

embrace the paradox, but he stands considering, like a person who is at aplace where three paths meet, and does not very well know his way--he may

be alone or he may be walking with others, and he will say to himself and

them, 'Which is the way?' and will not move forward until he is satisfied that

he is going right. And this is what we must do in the present instance: A

strange discussion on the subject of law has arisen, which requires the utmost

consideration, and we should not at our age be too ready to speak about such

great  matters,  or  be  confident  that  we  can  say  anything  certain  all  in  a

moment.


CLEINIAS: Most true.


ATHENIAN: Then we will allow time for reflection, and decide when we

have  given  the  subject  sufficient  consideration.  But  that  we  may  not  be

hindered from completing the natural arrangement of our laws, let us proceed

to the conclusion of them in due order; for very possibly, if God will, the

exposition  of  them,  when  completed,  may  throw  light  on  our  present

perplexity.


CLEINIAS: Excellent, Stranger; let us do as you propose.


ATHENIAN: Let us then affirm the paradox that strains of music are our

laws (nomoi), and this latter being the name which the ancients gave to lyric

songs, they probably would not have very much objected to our proposed

application of the word. Some one, either asleep or awake, must have had a

dreamy suspicion of their nature. And let our decree be as follows: No one in

singing or dancing shall offend against public and consecrated models, and

the general fashion among the youth, any more than he would offend against

any other law. And he who observes this law shall be blameless; but he who

is disobedient, as I was saying, shall be punished by the guardians of the

laws, and by the priests and priestesses. Suppose that we imagine this to be

our law.


CLEINIAS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: Can any one who makes such laws escape ridicule? Let us see.

I  think  that  our  only  safety  will  be  in  first  framing  certain  models  for

composers. One of these models shall be as follows: If when a sacrifice isgoing on, and the victims are being burnt according to law--if, I say, any one

who may be a son or brother, standing by another at the altar and over the

victims, horribly blasphemes, will not his words inspire despondency and evil

omens and forebodings in the mind of his father and of his other kinsmen?


CLEINIAS: Of course.


ATHENIAN: And this is just what takes place in almost all our cities. A

magistrate  offers  a  public  sacrifice,  and  there  come  in  not  one  but  many

choruses, who take up a position a little way from the altar, and from time to

time pour forth all sorts of horrible blasphemies on the sacred rites, exciting

the  souls  of  the  audience  with  words  and  rhythms  and  melodies  most

sorrowful  to  hear;  and  he  who  at  the  moment  when  the  city  is  offering

sacrifice makes the citizens weep most, carries away the palm of victory.

Now, ought we not to forbid such strains as these? And if ever our citizens

must hear such lamentations, then on some unblest and inauspicious day let

there be choruses of foreign and hired minstrels, like those hirelings who

accompany the departed at funerals with barbarous Carian chants. That is the

sort of thing which will be appropriate if we have such strains at all; and let

the apparel of the singers be, not circlets and ornaments of gold, but the

reverse. Enough of all this. I will simply ask once more whether we shall lay

down as one of our principles of song--


CLEINIAS: What?


ATHENIAN: That we should avoid every word of evil omen; let that kind of

song which is of good omen be heard everywhere and always in our state. I

need hardly ask again, but shall assume that you agree with me.


CLEINIAS: By all means; that law is approved by the suffrages of us all.


ATHENIAN: But what shall be our next musical law or type? Ought not

prayers to be offered up to the Gods when we sacrifice?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And our third law, if I am not mistaken, will be to the effectthat our poets, understanding prayers to be requests which we make to the

Gods, will take especial heed that they do not by mistake ask for evil instead

of good. To make such a prayer would surely be too ridiculous.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: Were we not a little while ago quite convinced that no silver or

golden Plutus should dwell in our state?


CLEINIAS: To be sure.


ATHENIAN: And what has it been the object of our argument to show? Did

we not imply that the poets are not always quite capable of knowing what is

good or evil? And if one of them utters a mistaken prayer in song or words,

he will make our citizens pray for the opposite of what is good in matters of

the highest import; than which, as I was saying, there can be few greater

mistakes. Shall we then propose as one of our laws and models relating to the

Muses--


CLEINIAS: What? will you explain the law more precisely?


ATHENIAN:  Shall  we  make  a  law  that  the  poet  shall  compose  nothing

contrary to the ideas of the lawful, or just, or beautiful, or good, which are

allowed  in  the  state?  nor  shall  he  be  permitted  to  communicate  his

compositions to any private individuals, until he shall have shown them to the

appointed judges and the guardians of the law, and they are satisfied with

them. As to the persons whom we appoint to be our legislators about music

and as to the director of education, these have been already indicated. Once

more then, as I have asked more than once, shall this be our third law, and

type, and model--What do you say?


CLEINIAS: Let it be so, by all means.


ATHENIAN: Then it will be proper to have hymns and praises of the Gods,

intermingled with prayers; and after the Gods prayers and praises should be

offered  in  like  manner  to  demigods  and  heroes,  suitable  to  their  several

characters.CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN:  In  the  next  place  there  will  be  no  objection  to  a  law,  that

citizens who are departed and have done good and energetic deeds, either

with their souls or with their bodies, and have been obedient to the laws,

should receive eulogies; this will be very fitting.


CLEINIAS: Quite true.


ATHENIAN: But to honour with hymns and panegyrics those who are still

alive is not safe; a man should run his course, and make a fair ending, and

then we will praise him; and let praise be given equally to women as well as

men who have been distinguished in virtue. The order of songs and dances

shall be as follows: There are many ancient musical compositions and dances

which are excellent, and from these the newly-founded city may freely select

what is proper and suitable; and they shall choose judges of not less than fifty

years of age, who shall make the selection, and any of the old poems which

they deem sufficient they shall include; any that are deficient or altogether

unsuitable,  they  shall  either  utterly  throw  aside,  or  examine  and  amend,

taking  into  their  counsel  poets  and  musicians,  and  making  use  of  their

poetical genius; but explaining to them the wishes of the legislator in order

that they may regulate dancing, music, and all choral strains, according to the

mind of the judges; and not allowing them to indulge, except in some few

matters, their individual pleasures and fancies. Now the irregular strain of

music is always made ten thousand times better by attaining to law and order,

and  rejecting  the  honeyed  Muse--not  however  that  we  mean  wholly  to

exclude pleasure, which is the characteristic of all music. And if a man be

brought up from childhood to the age of discretion and maturity in the use of

the orderly and severe music, when he hears the opposite he detests it, and

calls it illiberal; but if trained in the sweet and vulgar music, he deems the

severer kind cold and displeasing. So that, as I was saying before, while he

who hears them gains no more pleasure from the one than from the other, the

one  has  the  advantage  of  making  those  who  are  trained  in  it  better  men,

whereas the other makes them worse.


CLEINIAS: Very true.ATHENIAN: Again, we must distinguish and determine on some general

principle  what  songs  are  suitable  to  women,  and  what  to  men,  and  must

assign to them their proper melodies and rhythms. It is shocking for a whole

harmony to be inharmonical, or for a rhythm to be unrhythmical, and this will

happen  when  the  melody  is  inappropriate  to  them.  And  therefore  the

legislator  must  assign  to  these  also  their  forms.  Now  both  sexes  have

melodies  and  rhythms  which  of  necessity  belong  to  them;  and  those  of

women are clearly enough indicated by their natural difference. The grand,

and that which tends to courage, may be fairly called manly; but that which

inclines to moderation and temperance, may be declared both in law and in

ordinary  speech  to  be  the  more  womanly  quality.  This,  then,  will  be  the

general order of them.


Let us now speak of the manner of teaching and imparting them, and the

persons to whom, and the time when, they are severally to be imparted. As

the shipwright first lays down the lines of the keel, and thus, as it were, draws

the ship in outline, so do I seek to distinguish the patterns of life, and lay

down their keels according to the nature of different men's souls; seeking

truly to consider by what means, and in what ways, we may go through the

voyage  of  life  best.  Now  human  affairs  are  hardly  worth  considering  in

earnest, and yet we must be in earnest about them--a sad necessity constrains

us. And having got thus far, there will be a fitness in our completing the

matter, if we can only find some suitable method of doing so. But what do I

mean? Some one may ask this very question, and quite rightly, too.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: I say that about serious matters a man should be serious, and

about a matter which is not serious he should not be serious; and that God is

the natural and worthy object of our most serious and blessed endeavours, for

man, as I said before, is made to be the plaything of God, and this, truly

considered, is the best of him; wherefore also every man and woman should

walk seriously, and pass life in the noblest of pastimes, and be of another

mind from what they are at present.


CLEINIAS: In what respect?ATHENIAN: At present they think that their serious pursuits should be for

the sake of their sports, for they deem war a serious pursuit, which must be

managed well for the sake of peace; but the truth is, that there neither is, nor

has been, nor ever will be, either amusement or instruction in any degree

worth speaking of in war, which is nevertheless deemed by us to be the most

serious of our pursuits. And therefore, as we say, every one of us should live

the life of peace as long and as well as he can. And what is the right way of

living? Are we to live in sports always? If so, in what kind of sports? We

ought to live sacrificing, and singing, and dancing, and then a man will be

able to propitiate the Gods, and to defend himself against his enemies and

conquer them in battle. The type of song or dance by which he will propitiate

them has been described, and the paths along which he is to proceed have

been cut for him. He will go forward in the spirit of the poet:


'Telemachus, some things thou wilt thyself find in thy heart, but other things

God will suggest; for I deem that thou wast not born or brought up without

the will of the Gods.'


And this ought to be the view of our alumni; they ought to think that what has

been said is enough for them, and that any other things their Genius and God

will suggest to them--he will tell them to whom, and when, and to what Gods

severally  they  are  to  sacrifice  and  perform  dances,  and  how  they  may

propitiate the deities, and live according to the appointment of nature; being

for the most part puppets, but having some little share of reality.


MEGILLUS: You have a low opinion of mankind, Stranger.


ATHENIAN:  Nay,  Megillus,  be  not  amazed,  but  forgive  me:  I  was

comparing them with the Gods; and under that feeling I spoke. Let us grant,

if you wish, that the human race is not to be despised, but is worthy of some

consideration.


Next follow the buildings for gymnasia and schools open to all; these are to

be in three places in the midst of the city; and outside the city and in the

surrounding country, also in three places, there shall be schools for horse

exercise, and large grounds arranged with a view to archery and the throwing

of missiles, at which young men may learn and practise. Of these mention hasalready  been  made;  and  if  the  mention  be  not  sufficiently  explicit,  let  us

speak further of them and embody them in laws. In these several schools let

there be dwellings for teachers, who shall be brought from foreign parts by

pay, and let them teach those who attend the schools the art of war and the art

of music, and the children shall come not only if their parents please, but if

they do not please; there shall be compulsory education, as the saying is, of

all and sundry, as far as this is possible; and the pupils shall be regarded as

belonging to the state rather than to their parents. My law would apply to

females as well as males; they shall both go through the same exercises. I

assert without fear of contradiction that gymnastic and horsemanship are as

suitable to women as to men. Of the truth of this I am persuaded from ancient

tradition, and at the present day there are said to be countless myriads of

women in the neighbourhood of the Black Sea, called Sauromatides, who not

only ride on horseback like men, but have enjoined upon them the use of

bows and other weapons equally with the men. And I further affirm, that if

these things are possible, nothing can be more absurd than the practice which

prevails  in  our  own  country,  of  men  and  women  not  following  the  same

pursuits with all their strength and with one mind, for thus the state, instead

of being a whole, is reduced to a half, but has the same imposts to pay and the

same toils to undergo; and what can be a greater mistake for any legislator to

make than this?


CLEINIAS: Very true; yet much of what has been asserted by us, Stranger, is

contrary to the custom of states; still, in saying that the discourse should be

allowed to proceed, and that when the discussion is completed, we should

choose  what  seems  best,  you  spoke  very  properly,  and  I  now  feel

compunction for what I have said. Tell me, then, what you would next wish

to say.


ATHENIAN:  I  should  wish  to  say,  Cleinias,  as  I  said  before,  that  if  the

possibility of these things were not sufficiently proven in fact, then there

might be an objection to the argument, but the fact being as I have said, he

who rejects the law must find some other ground of objection; and, failing

this, our exhortation will still hold good, nor will any one deny that women

ought to share as far as possible in education and in other ways with men. For

consider; if women do not share in their whole life with men, then they must

have some other order of life.CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN:  And  what  arrangement  of  life  to  be  found  anywhere  is

preferable to this community which we are now assigning to them? Shall we

prefer that which is adopted by the Thracians and many other races who use

their women to till the ground and to be shepherds of their herds and flocks,

and to minister to them like slaves? Or shall we do as we and people in our

part of the world do--getting together, as the phrase is, all our goods and

chattels  into  one  dwelling,  we  entrust  them  to  our  women,  who  are  the

stewards of them, and who also preside over the shuttles and the whole art of

spinning? Or shall we take a middle course, as in Lacedaemon, Megillus- -

letting the girls share in gymnastic and music, while the grown-up women, no

longer employed in spinning wool, are hard at work weaving the web of life,

which will be no cheap or mean employment, and in the duty of serving and

taking care of the household and bringing up the children, in which they will

observe a sort of mean, not participating in the toils of war; and if there were

any necessity that they should fight for their city and families, unlike the

Amazons, they would be unable to take part in archery or any other skilled

use of missiles, nor could they, after the example of the Goddess, carry shield

or spear, or stand up nobly for their country when it was being destroyed, and

strike terror into their enemies, if only because they were seen in regular

order?  Living  as  they  do,  they  would  never  dare  at  all  to  imitate  the

Sauromatides, who, when compared with ordinary women, would appear to

be like men. Let him who will, praise your legislators, but I must say what I

think. The legislator ought to be whole and perfect, and not half a man only;

he ought not to let the female sex live softly and waste money and have no

order of life, while he takes the utmost care of the male sex, and leaves half

of life only blest with happiness, when he might have made the whole state

happy.


MEGILLUS: What shall we do, Cleinias? Shall we allow a stranger to run

down Sparta in this fashion?


CLEINIAS: Yes; for as we have given him liberty of speech we must let him

go on until we have perfected the work of legislation.


MEGILLUS: Very true.ATHENIAN: Then now I may proceed?


CLEINIAS: By all means.


ATHENIAN:  What  will  be  the  manner  of  life  among  men  who  may  be

supposed to have their food and clothing provided for them in moderation,

and  who  have  entrusted  the  practice  of  the  arts  to  others,  and  whose

husbandry committed to slaves paying a part of the produce, brings them a

return sufficient for men living temperately; who, moreover, have common

tables in which the men are placed apart, and near them are the common

tables of their families, of their daughters and mothers, which day by day, the

officers, male and female, are to inspect--they shall see to the behaviour of

the company, and so dismiss them; after which the presiding magistrate and

his attendants shall honour with libations those Gods to whom that day and

night are dedicated, and then go home? To men whose lives are thus ordered,

is there no work remaining to be done which is necessary and fitting, but

shall each one of them live fattening like a beast? Such a life is neither just

nor honourable, nor can he who lives it fail of meeting his due; and the due

reward of the idle fatted beast is that he should be torn in pieces by some

other  valiant  beast  whose  fatness  is  worn  down  by  brave  deeds  and  toil.

These regulations, if we duly consider them, will never be exactly carried into

execution under present circumstances, nor as long as women and children

and houses and all other things are the private property of individuals; but if

we can attain the second-best form of polity, we shall be very well off. And

to  men  living  under  this  second  polity  there  remains  a  work  to  be

accomplished  which  is  far  from  being  small  or  insignificant,  but  is  the

greatest of all works, and ordained by the appointment of righteous law. For

the life which may be truly said to be concerned with the virtue of body and

soul is twice, or more than twice, as full of toil and trouble as the pursuit after

Pythian and Olympic victories, which debars a man from every employment

of life. For there ought to be no bye-work interfering with the greater work of

providing  the  necessary  exercise  and  nourishment  for  the  body,  and

instruction and education for the soul. Night and day are not long enough for

the accomplishment of their perfection and consummation; and therefore to

this end all freemen ought to arrange the way in which they will spend their

time during the whole course of the day, from morning till evening and from

evening till the morning of the next sunrise. There may seem to be someimpropriety in the legislator determining minutely the numberless details of

the  management  of  the  house,  including  such  particulars  as  the  duty  of

wakefulness in those who are to be perpetual watchmen of the whole city; for

that  any  citizen  should  continue  during  the  whole  of  any  night  in  sleep,

instead of being seen by all his servants, always the first to awake and get up-

-this, whether the regulation is to be called a law or only a practice, should be

deemed base and unworthy of a freeman; also that the mistress of the house

should be awakened by her hand-maidens instead of herself first awakening

them, is what the slaves, male and female, and the serving-boys, and, if that

were possible, everybody and everything in the house should regard as base.

If they rise early, they may all of them do much of their public and of their

household business, as magistrates in the city, and masters and mistresses in

their private houses, before the sun is up. Much sleep is not required by

nature, either for our souls or bodies, or for the actions which they perform.

For no one who is asleep is good for anything, any more than if he were dead;

but he of us who has the most regard for life and reason keeps awake as long

as he can, reserving only so much time for sleep as is expedient for health;

and much sleep is not required, if the habit of moderation be once rightly

formed. Magistrates in states who keep awake at night are terrible to the bad,

whether enemies or citizens, and are honoured and reverenced by the just and

temperate, and are useful to themselves and to the whole state.


A  night  which  is  passed  in  such  a  manner,  in  addition  to  all  the  above-

mentioned  advantages,  infuses  a  sort  of  courage  into  the  minds  of  the

citizens. When the day breaks, the time has arrived for youth to go to their

schoolmasters. Now neither sheep nor any other animals can live without a

shepherd, nor can children be left without tutors, or slaves without masters.

And of all animals the boy is the most unmanageable, inasmuch as he has the

fountain of reason in him not yet regulated; he is the most insidious, sharp-

witted, and insubordinate of animals. Wherefore he must be bound with many

bridles; in the first place, when he gets away from mothers and nurses, he

must be under the management of tutors on account of his childishness and

foolishness; then, again, being a freeman, he must be controlled by teachers,

no matter what they teach, and by studies; but he is also a slave, and in that

regard any freeman who comes in his way may punish him and his tutor and

his instructor, if any of them does anything wrong; and he who comes across

him and does not inflict upon him the punishment which he deserves, shallincur the greatest disgrace; and let the guardian of the law, who is the director

of education, see to him who coming in the way of the offences which we

have mentioned, does not chastise them when he ought, or chastises them in a

way which he ought not; let him keep a sharp look-out, and take especial care

of the training of our children, directing their natures, and always turning

them to good according to the law.


But how can our law sufficiently train the director of education himself; for

as  yet  all  has  been  imperfect,  and  nothing  has  been  said  either  clear  or

satisfactory? Now, as far as possible, the law ought to leave nothing to him,

but to explain everything, that he may be an interpreter and tutor to others.

About dances and music and choral strains, I have already spoken both as to

the character of the selection of them, and the manner in which they are to be

amended  and  consecrated.  But  we  have  not  as  yet  spoken,  O  illustrious

guardian of education, of the manner in which your pupils are to use those

strains which are written in prose, although you have been informed what

martial strains they are to learn and practise; what relates in the first place to

the  learning  of  letters,  and  secondly,  to  the  lyre,  and  also  to  calculation,

which, as we were saying, is needful for them all to learn, and any other

things which are required with a view to war and the management of house

and city, and, looking to the same object, what is useful in the revolutions of

the heavenly bodies--the stars and sun and moon, and the various regulations

about these matters which are necessary for the whole state--I am speaking of

the arrangements of days in periods of months, and of months in years, which

are to be observed, in order that seasons and sacrifices and festivals may have

their regular and natural order, and keep the city alive and awake, the Gods

receiving the honours due to them, and men having a better understanding

about  them:  all  these  things,  O  my  friend,  have  not  yet  been  sufficiently

declared to you by the legislator. Attend, then, to what I am now going to

say: We were telling you, in the first place, that you were not sufficiently

informed about letters, and the objection was to this effect--that you were

never told whether he who was meant to be a respectable citizen should apply

himself in detail to that sort of learning, or not apply himself at all; and the

same remark holds good of the study of the lyre. But now we say that he

ought to attend to them. A fair time for a boy of ten years old to spend in

letters is three years; the age of thirteen is the proper time for him to begin to

handle the lyre, and he may continue at this for another three years, neithermore nor less, and whether his father or himself like or dislike the study, he is

not to be allowed to spend more or less time in learning music than the law

allows. And let him who disobeys the law be deprived of those youthful

honours of which we shall hereafter speak. Hear, however, first of all, what

the young ought to learn in the early years of life, and what their instructors

ought to teach them. They ought to be occupied with their letters until they

are able to read and write; but the acquisition of perfect beauty or quickness

in  writing,  if  nature  has  not  stimulated  them  to  acquire  these

accomplishments in the given number of years, they should let alone. And as

to the learning of compositions committed to writing which are not set to the

lyre, whether metrical or without rhythmical divisions, compositions in prose,

as they are termed, having no rhythm or harmony--seeing how dangerous are

the writings handed down to us by many writers of this class--what will you

do  with  them,  O  most  excellent  guardians  of  the  law?  or  how  can  the

lawgiver rightly direct you about them? I believe that he will be in great

difficulty.


CLEINIAS: What troubles you, Stranger? and why are you so perplexed in

your mind?


ATHENIAN: You naturally ask, Cleinias, and to you and Megillus, who are

my partners in the work of legislation, I must state the more difficult as well

as the easier parts of the task.


CLEINIAS: To what do you refer in this instance?


ATHENIAN: I will tell you. There is a difficulty in opposing many myriads

of mouths.


CLEINIAS: Well, and have we not already opposed the popular voice in

many important enactments?


ATHENIAN: That is quite true; and you mean to imply that the road which

we  are  taking  may  be  disagreeable  to  some  but  is  agreeable  to  as  many

others, or if not to as many, at any rate to persons not inferior to the others,

and in company with them you bid me, at whatever risk, to proceed along the

path of legislation which has opened out of our present discourse, and to beof good cheer, and not to faint.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And I do not faint; I say, indeed, that we have a great many

poets writing in hexameter, trimeter, and all sorts of measures--some who are

serious, others who aim only at raising a laugh--and all mankind declare that

the  youth  who  are  rightly  educated  should  be  brought  up  in  them  and

saturated with them; some insist that they should be constantly hearing them

read aloud, and always learning them, so as to get by heart entire poets; while

others select choice passages and long speeches, and make compendiums of

them, saying that these ought to be committed to memory, if a man is to be

made good and wise by experience and learning of many things. And you

want me now to tell them plainly in what they are right and in what they are

wrong.


CLEINIAS: Yes, I do.


ATHENIAN: But how can I in one word rightly comprehend all of them? I

am of opinion, and, if I am not mistaken, there is a general agreement, that

every one of these poets has said many things well and many things the

reverse of well; and if this be true, then I do affirm that much learning is

dangerous to youth.


CLEINIAS: How would you advise the guardian of the law to act?


ATHENIAN: In what respect?


CLEINIAS: I mean to what pattern should he look as his guide in permitting

the young to learn some things and forbidding them to learn others. Do not

shrink from answering.


ATHENIAN: My good Cleinias, I rather think that I am fortunate.


CLEINIAS: How so?


ATHENIAN: I think that I am not wholly in want of a pattern, for when I

consider the words which we have spoken from early dawn until now, andwhich, as I believe, have been inspired by Heaven, they appear to me to be

quite like a poem. When I reflected upon all these words of ours, I naturally

felt pleasure, for of all the discourses which I have ever learnt or heard, either

in poetry or prose, this seemed to me to be the justest, and most suitable for

young men to hear; I cannot imagine any better pattern than this which the

guardian of the law who is also the director of education can have. He cannot

do better than advise the teachers to teach the young these words and any

which are of a like nature, if he should happen to find them, either in poetry

or prose, or if he come across unwritten discourses akin to ours, he should

certainly preserve them, and commit them to writing. And, first of all, he

shall constrain the teachers themselves to learn and approve them, and any of

them who will not, shall not be employed by him, but those whom he finds

agreeing in his judgment, he shall make use of and shall commit to them the

instruction and education of youth. And here and on this wise let my fanciful

tale about letters and teachers of letters come to an end.


CLEINIAS:  I  do  not  think,  Stranger,  that  we  have  wandered  out  of  the

proposed limits of the argument; but whether we are right or not in our whole

conception, I cannot be very certain.


ATHENIAN: The truth, Cleinias, may be expected to become clearer when,

as we have often said, we arrive at the end of the whole discussion about

laws.


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: And now that we have done with the teacher of letters, the

teacher of the lyre has to receive orders from us.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: I think that we have only to recollect our previous discussions,

and we shall be able to give suitable regulations touching all this part of

instruction and education to the teachers of the lyre.


CLEINIAS: To what do you refer?ATHENIAN: We were saying, if I remember rightly, that the sixty years old

choristers  of  Dionysus  were  to  be  specially  quick  in  their  perceptions  of

rhythm and musical composition, that they might be able to distinguish good

and bad imitation, that is to say, the imitation of the good or bad soul when

under the influence of passion, rejecting the one and displaying the other in

hymns and songs, charming the souls of youth, and inviting them to follow

and attain virtue by the way of imitation.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: And with this view the teacher and the learner ought to use the

sounds of the lyre, because its notes are pure, the player who teaches and his

pupil  rendering  note  for  note  in  unison;  but  complexity,  and  variation  of

notes,  when  the  strings  give  one  sound  and  the  poet  or  composer  of  the

melody  gives  another--also  when  they  make  concords  and  harmonies  in

which lesser and greater intervals, slow and quick, or high and low notes, are

combined--or, again, when they make complex variations of rhythms, which

they adapt to the notes of the lyre--all that sort of thing is not suited to those

who have to acquire speedy and useful knowledge of music in three years; for

opposite principles are confusing, and create a difficulty in learning, and our

young men should learn quickly, and their mere necessary acquirements are

not  few  or  trifling,  as  will  be  shown  in  due  course.  Let  the  director  of

education  attend  to  the  principles  concerning  music  which  we  are  laying

down. As to the songs and words themselves which the masters of choruses

are to teach and the character of them, they have been already described by

us, and are the same which, when consecrated and adapted to the different

festivals,  we  said  were  to  benefit  cities  by  affording  them  an  innocent

amusement.


CLEINIAS: That, again, is true.


ATHENIAN: Then let him who has been elected a director of music receive

these rules from us as containing the very truth; and may he prosper in his

office!  Let  us  now  proceed  to  lay  down  other  rules  in  addition  to  the

preceding about dancing and gymnastic exercise in general. Having said what

remained to be said about the teaching of music, let us speak in like manner

about gymnastic. For boys and girls ought to learn to dance and practisegymnastic exercises--ought they not?


CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: Then the boys ought to have dancing masters, and the girls

dancing mistresses to exercise them.


CLEINIAS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: Then once more let us summon him who has the chief concern

in the business, the superintendent of youth [i.e. the director of education]; he

will have plenty to do, if he is to have the charge of music and gymnastic.


CLEINIAS: But how will an old man be able to attend to such great charges?


ATHENIAN: O my friend, there will be no difficulty, for the law has already

given and will give him permission to select as his assistants in this charge

any citizens, male or female, whom he desires; and he will know whom he

ought to choose, and will be anxious not to make a mistake, from a due sense

of responsibility, and from a consciousness of the importance of his office,

and also because he will consider that if young men have been and are well

brought up, then all things go swimmingly, but if not, it is not meet to say,

nor do we say, what will follow, lest the regarders of omens should take

alarm about our infant state. Many things have been said by us about dancing

and about gymnastic movements in general; for we include under gymnastics

all military exercises, such as archery, and all hurling of weapons, and the use

of the light shield, and all fighting with heavy arms, and military evolutions,

and  movements  of  armies,  and  encampings,  and  all  that  relates  to

horsemanship. Of all these things there ought to be public teachers, receiving

pay from the state, and their pupils should be the men and boys in the state,

and also the girls and women, who are to know all these things. While they

are yet girls they should have practised dancing in arms and the whole art of

fighting--when grown-up women, they should apply themselves to evolutions

and tactics, and the mode of grounding and taking up arms; if for no other

reason, yet in case the whole military force should have to leave the city and

carry on operations of war outside, that those who will have to guard the

young and the rest of the city may be equal to the task; and, on the otherhand, when enemies, whether barbarian or Hellenic, come from without with

mighty force and make a violent assault upon them, and thus compel them to

fight for the possession of the city, which is far from being an impossibility,

great would be the disgrace to the state, if the women had been so miserably

trained that they could not fight for their young, as birds will, against any

creature however strong, and die or undergo any danger, but must instantly

rush to the temples and crowd at the altars and shrines, and bring upon human

nature the reproach, that of all animals man is the most cowardly!


CLEINIAS: Such a want of education, Stranger, is certainly an unseemly

thing to happen in a state, as well as a great misfortune.


ATHENIAN:  Suppose  that  we  carry  our  law  to  the  extent  of  saying  that

women ought not to neglect military matters, but that all citizens, male and

female alike, shall attend to them?


CLEINIAS: I quite agree.


ATHENIAN: Of wrestling we have spoken in part, but of what I should call

the most important part we have not spoken, and cannot easily speak without

showing at the same time by gesture as well as in word what we mean; when

word and action combine, and not till then, we shall explain clearly what has

been said, pointing out that of all movements wrestling is most akin to the

military art, and is to be pursued for the sake of this, and not this for the sake

of wrestling.


CLEINIAS:  Excellent.  ATHENIAN:  Enough  of  wrestling;  we  will  now

proceed to speak of other movements of the body. Such motion may be in

general called dancing, and is of two kinds: one of nobler figures, imitating

the honourable, the other of the more ignoble figures, imitating the mean; and

of both these there are two further subdivisions. Of the serious, one kind is of

those engaged in war and vehement action, and is the exercise of a noble

person  and  a  manly  heart;  the  other  exhibits  a  temperate  soul  in  the

enjoyment of prosperity and modest pleasures, and may be truly called and is

the dance of peace. The warrior dance is different from the peaceful one, and

may be rightly termed Pyrrhic; this imitates the modes of avoiding blows and

missiles by dropping or giving way, or springing aside, or rising up or fallingdown; also the opposite postures which are those of action, as, for example,

the imitation of archery and the hurling of javelins, and of all sorts of blows.

And when the imitation is of brave bodies and souls, and the action is direct

and muscular, giving for the most part a straight movement to the limbs of

the body--that, I say, is the true sort; but the opposite is not right. In the dance

of peace what we have to consider is whether a man bears himself naturally

and gracefully, and after the manner of men who duly conform to the law.

But before proceeding I must distinguish the dancing about which there is

any doubt, from that about which there is no doubt. Which is the doubtful

kind,  and  how  are  the  two  to  be  distinguished?  There  are  dances  of  the

Bacchic sort, both those in which, as they say, they imitate drunken men, and

which are named after the Nymphs, and Pan, and Silenuses, and Satyrs; and

also those in which purifications are made or mysteries celebrated-- all this

sort of dancing cannot be rightly defined as having either a peaceful or a

warlike character, or indeed as having any meaning whatever, and may, I

think, be most truly described as distinct from the warlike dance, and distinct

from the peaceful, and not suited for a city at all. There let it lie; and so

leaving it to lie, we will proceed to the dances of war and peace, for with

these  we  are  undoubtedly  concerned.  Now  the  unwarlike  muse,  which

honours in dance the Gods and the sons of the Gods, is entirely associated

with the consciousness of prosperity; this class may be subdivided into two

lesser classes, of which one is expressive of an escape from some labour or

danger  into  good,  and  has  greater  pleasures,  the  other  expressive  of

preservation  and  increase  of  former  good,  in  which  the  pleasure  is  less

exciting--in all these cases, every man when the pleasure is greater, moves his

body more, and less when the pleasure is less; and, again, if he be more

orderly and has learned courage from discipline he moves less, but if he be a

coward,  and  has  no  training  or  self-control,  he  makes  greater  and  more

violent movements, and in general when he is speaking or singing he is not

altogether able to keep his body still; and so out of the imitation of words in

gestures the whole art of dancing has arisen. And in these various kinds of

imitation one man moves in an orderly, another in a disorderly manner; and

as  the  ancients  may  be  observed  to  have  given  many  names  which  are

according  to  nature  and  deserving  of  praise,  so  there  is  an  excellent  one

which they have given to the dances of men who in their times of prosperity

are  moderate  in  their  pleasures--the  giver  of  names,  whoever  he  was,

assigned to them a very true, and poetical, and rational name, when he calledthem Emmeleiai, or dances of order, thus establishing two kinds of dances of

the nobler sort, the dance of war which he called the Pyrrhic, and the dance of

peace which he called Emmeleia, or the dance of order; giving to each their

appropriate and becoming name. These things the legislator should indicate

in general outline, and the guardian of the law should enquire into them and

search them out, combining dancing with music, and assigning to the several

sacrificial feasts that which is suitable to them; and when he has consecrated

all of them in due order, he shall for the future change nothing, whether of

dance or song. Thenceforward the city and the citizens shall continue to have

the same pleasures, themselves being as far as possible alike, and shall live

well and happily.


I  have  described  the  dances  which  are  appropriate  to  noble  bodies  and

generous  souls.  But  it  is  necessary  also  to  consider  and  know  uncomely

persons and thoughts, and those which are intended to produce laughter in

comedy, and have a comic character in respect of style, song, and dance, and

of the imitations which these afford. For serious things cannot be understood

without laughable things, nor opposites at all without opposites, if a man is

really to have intelligence of either; but he cannot carry out both in action, if

he is to have any degree of virtue. And for this very reason he should learn

them both, in order that he may not in ignorance do or say anything which is

ridiculous and out of place-- he should command slaves and hired strangers

to imitate such things, but he should never take any serious interest in them

himself, nor should any freeman or freewoman be discovered taking pains to

learn  them;  and  there  should  always  be  some  element  of  novelty  in  the

imitation. Let these then be laid down, both in law and in our discourse, as

the regulations of laughable amusements which are generally called comedy.

And, if any of the serious poets, as they are termed, who write tragedy, come

to us and say-- 'O strangers, may we go to your city and country or may we

not, and shall we bring with us our poetry--what is your will about these

matters?'--how  shall  we  answer  the  divine  men?  I  think  that  our  answer

should  be  as  follows:  Best  of  strangers,  we  will  say  to  them,  we  also

according  to  our  ability  are  tragic  poets,  and  our  tragedy  is  the  best  and

noblest; for our whole state is an imitation of the best and noblest life, which

we affirm to be indeed the very truth of tragedy. You are poets and we are

poets, both makers of the same strains, rivals and antagonists in the noblest of

dramas, which true law can alone perfect, as our hope is. Do not then supposethat we shall all in a moment allow you to erect your stage in the agora, or

introduce the fair voices of your actors, speaking above our own, and permit

you to harangue our women and children, and the common people, about our

institutions, in language other than our own, and very often the opposite of

our own. For a state would be mad which gave you this licence, until the

magistrates had determined whether your poetry might be recited, and was fit

for publication or not. Wherefore, O ye sons and scions of the softer Muses,

first of all show your songs to the magistrates, and let them compare them

with our own, and if they are the same or better we will give you a chorus;

but  if  not,  then,  my  friends,  we  cannot.  Let  these,  then,  be  the  customs

ordained by law about all dances and the teaching of them, and let matters

relating to slaves be separated from those relating to masters, if you do not

object.


CLEINIAS: We can have no hesitation in assenting when you put the matter

thus.


ATHENIAN: There still remain three studies suitable for freemen. Arithmetic

is one of them; the measurement of length, surface, and depth is the second;

and the third has to do with the revolutions of the stars in relation to one

another. Not every one has need to toil through all these things in a strictly

scientific manner, but only a few, and who they are to be we will hereafter

indicate  at  the  end,  which  will  be  the  proper  place;  not  to  know  what  is

necessary for mankind in general, and what is the truth, is disgraceful to

every one: and yet to enter into these matters minutely is neither easy, nor at

all possible for every one; but there is something in them which is necessary

and cannot be set aside, and probably he who made the proverb about God

originally had this in view when he said, that 'not even God himself can fight

against necessity;' he meant, if I am not mistaken, divine necessity; for as to

the  human  necessities  of  which  the  many  speak,  when  they  talk  in  this

manner,  nothing  can  be  more  ridiculous  than  such  an  application  of  the

words.


CLEINIAS: And what necessities of knowledge are there, Stranger, which

are divine and not human?


ATHENIAN: I conceive them to be those of which he who has no use norany knowledge at all cannot be a God, or demi-god, or hero to mankind, or

able to take any serious thought or charge of them. And very unlike a divine

man would he be, who is unable to count one, two, three, or to distinguish

odd and even numbers, or is unable to count at all, or reckon night and day,

and who is totally unacquainted with the revolution of the sun and moon, and

the other stars. There would be great folly in supposing that all these are not

necessary parts of knowledge to him who intends to know anything about the

highest kinds of knowledge; but which these are, and how many there are of

them, and when they are to be learned, and what is to be learned together and

what apart, and the whole correlation of them, must be rightly apprehended

first;  and  these  leading  the  way  we  may  proceed  to  the  other  parts  of

knowledge. For so necessity grounded in nature constrains us, against which

we say that no God contends, or ever will contend.


CLEINIAS: I think, Stranger, that what you have now said is very true and

agreeable to nature.


ATHENIAN: Yes, Cleinias, that is so. But it is difficult for the legislator to

begin with these studies; at a more convenient time we will make regulations

for them.


CLEINIAS: You seem, Stranger, to be afraid of our habitual ignorance of the

subject: there is no reason why that should prevent you from speaking out.


ATHENIAN: I certainly am afraid of the difficulties to which you allude, but

I  am  still  more  afraid  of  those  who  apply  themselves  to  this  sort  of

knowledge,  and  apply  themselves  badly.  For  entire  ignorance  is  not  so

terrible or extreme an evil, and is far from being the greatest of all; too much

cleverness and too much learning, accompanied with an ill bringing up, are

far more fatal.


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: All freemen I conceive, should learn as much of these branches

of knowledge as every child in Egypt is taught when he learns the alphabet.

In that country arithmetical games have been invented for the use of mere

children,  which  they  learn  as  a  pleasure  and  amusement.  They  have  todistribute apples and garlands, using the same number sometimes for a larger

and sometimes for a lesser number of persons; and they arrange pugilists and

wrestlers as they pair together by lot or remain over, and show how their

turns come in natural order. Another mode of amusing them is to distribute

vessels, sometimes of gold, brass, silver, and the like, intermixed with one

another, sometimes of one metal only; as I was saying they adapt to their

amusement  the  numbers  in  common  use,  and  in  this  way  make  more

intelligible to their pupils the arrangements and movements of armies and

expeditions, and in the management of a household they make people more

useful to themselves, and more wide awake; and again in measurements of

things  which  have  length,  and  breadth,  and  depth,  they  free  us  from  that

natural ignorance of all these things which is so ludicrous and disgraceful.


CLEINIAS: What kind of ignorance do you mean?


ATHENIAN: O my dear Cleinias, I, like yourself, have late in life heard with

amazement of our ignorance in these matters; to me we appear to be more

like pigs than men, and I am quite ashamed, not only of myself, but of all

Hellenes.


CLEINIAS: About what? Say, Stranger, what you mean.


ATHENIAN: I will; or rather I will show you my meaning by a question, and

do you please to answer me: You know, I suppose, what length is?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And what breadth is?


CLEINIAS: To be sure.


ATHENIAN: And you know that these are two distinct things, and that there

is a third thing called depth?


CLEINIAS: Of course.


ATHENIAN: And do not all these seem to you to be commensurable with

themselves?CLEINIAS: Yes.


ATHENIAN: That is to say, length is naturally commensurable with length,

and breadth with breadth, and depth in like manner with depth?


CLEINIAS: Undoubtedly.


ATHENIAN:  But  if  some  things  are  commensurable  and  others  wholly

incommensurable, and you think that all things are commensurable, what is

your position in regard to them?


CLEINIAS: Clearly, far from good.


ATHENIAN: Concerning length and breadth when compared with depth, or

breadth and length when compared with one another, are not all the Hellenes

agreed that these are commensurable with one another in some way?


CLEINIAS: Quite true.


ATHENIAN: But if they are absolutely incommensurable, and yet all of us

regard them as commensurable, have we not reason to be ashamed of our

compatriots; and might we not say to them: O ye best of Hellenes, is not this

one  of  the  things  of  which  we  were  saying  that  not  to  know  them  is

disgraceful,  and  of  which  to  have  a  bare  knowledge  only  is  no  great

distinction?


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: And there are other things akin to these, in which there spring

up other errors of the same family.


CLEINIAS: What are they?


ATHENIAN:  The  natures  of  commensurable  and  incommensurable

quantities in their relation to one another. A man who is good for anything

ought to be able, when he thinks, to distinguish them; and different persons

should compete with one another in asking questions, which will be a farbetter and more graceful way of passing their time than the old man's game of

draughts.


CLEINIAS: I dare say; and these pastimes are not so very unlike a game of

draughts.


ATHENIAN: And these, as I maintain, Cleinias, are the studies which our

youth ought to learn, for they are innocent and not difficult; the learning of

them will be an amusement, and they will benefit the state. If any one is of

another mind, let him say what he has to say.


CLEINIAS: Certainly.


ATHENIAN: Then if these studies are such as we maintain, we will include

them; if not, they shall be excluded.


CLEINIAS:  Assuredly:  but  may  we  not  now,  Stranger,  prescribe  these

studies as necessary, and so fill up the lacunae of our laws?


ATHENIAN:  They  shall  be  regarded  as  pledges  which  may  be  hereafter

redeemed and removed from our state, if they do not please either us who

give them, or you who accept them.


CLEINIAS: A fair condition.


ATHENIAN: Next let us see whether we are or are not willing that the study

of astronomy shall be proposed for our youth.


CLEINIAS: Proceed.


ATHENIAN: Here occurs a strange phenomenon, which certainly cannot in

any point of view be tolerated.


CLEINIAS: To what are you referring?


ATHENIAN: Men say that we ought not to enquire into the supreme God and

the nature of the universe, nor busy ourselves in searching out the causes of

things, and that such enquiries are impious; whereas the very opposite is thetruth.


CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN:  Perhaps  what  I  am  saying  may  seem  paradoxical,  and  at

variance with the usual language of age. But when any one has any good and

true  notion  which  is  for  the  advantage  of  the  state  and  in  every  way

acceptable to God, he cannot abstain from expressing it.


CLEINIAS: Your words are reasonable enough; but shall we find any good

or true notion about the stars?


ATHENIAN: My good friends, at this hour all of us Hellenes tell lies, if I

may use such an expression, about those great Gods, the Sun and the Moon.


CLEINIAS: Lies of what nature?


ATHENIAN: We say that they and divers other stars do not keep the same

path, and we call them planets or wanderers.


CLEINIAS: Very true, Stranger; and in the course of my life I have often

myself  seen  the  morning  star  and  the  evening  star  and  divers  others  not

moving in their accustomed course, but wandering out of their path in all

manner of ways, and I have seen the sun and moon doing what we all know

that they do.


ATHENIAN: Just so, Megillus and Cleinias; and I maintain that our citizens

and our youth ought to learn about the nature of the Gods in heaven, so far as

to be able to offer sacrifices and pray to them in pious language, and not to

blaspheme about them.


CLEINIAS: There you are right, if such a knowledge be only attainable; and

if we are wrong in our mode of speaking now, and can be better instructed

and learn to use better language, then I quite agree with you that such a

degree of knowledge as will enable us to speak rightly should be acquired by

us. And now do you try to explain to us your whole meaning, and we, on our

part, will endeavour to understand you.ATHENIAN: There is some difficulty in understanding my meaning, but not

a very great one, nor will any great length of time be required. And of this I

am myself a proof; for I did not know these things long ago, nor in the days

of my youth, and yet I can explain them to you in a brief space of time;

whereas if they had been difficult I could certainly never have explained them

all, old as I am, to old men like yourselves.


CLEINIAS: True; but what is this study which you describe as wonderful and

fitting for youth to learn, but of which we are ignorant? Try and explain the

nature of it to us as clearly as you can.


ATHENIAN: I will. For, O my good friends, that other doctrine about the

wandering of the sun and the moon and the other stars is not the truth, but the

very reverse of the truth. Each of them moves in the same path-- not in many

paths, but in one only, which is circular, and the varieties are only apparent.

Nor are we right in supposing that the swiftest of them is the slowest, nor

conversely, that the slowest is the quickest. And if what I say is true, only just

imagine that we had a similar notion about horses running at Olympia, or

about men who ran in the long course, and that we addressed the swiftest as

the  slowest  and  the  slowest  as  the  swiftest,  and  sang  the  praises  of  the

vanquished as though he were the victor--in that case our praises would not

be true, nor very agreeable to the runners, though they be but men; and now,

to commit the same error about the Gods which would have been ludicrous

and erroneous in the case of men--is not that ludicrous and erroneous?


CLEINIAS: Worse than ludicrous, I should say.


ATHENIAN: At all events, the Gods cannot like us to be spreading a false

report of them.


CLEINIAS: Most true, if such is the fact.


ATHENIAN: And if we can show that such is really the fact, then all these

matters  ought  to  be  learned  so  far  as  is  necessary  for  the  avoidance  of

impiety; but if we cannot, they may be let alone, and let this be our decision.


CLEINIAS: Very good.ATHENIAN: Enough of laws relating to education and learning. But hunting

and similar pursuits in like manner claim our attention. For the legislator

appears  to  have  a  duty  imposed  upon  him  which  goes  beyond  mere

legislation. There is something over and above law which lies in a region

between admonition and law, and has several times occurred to us in the

course of discussion; for example, in the education of very young children

there were things, as we maintain, which are not to be defined, and to regard

them as matters of positive law is a great absurdity. Now, our laws and the

whole constitution of our state having been thus delineated, the praise of the

virtuous  citizen  is  not  complete  when  he  is  described  as  the  person  who

serves the laws best and obeys them most, but the higher form of praise is

that  which  describes  him  as  the  good  citizen  who  passes  through  life

undefiled and is obedient to the words of the legislator, both when he is

giving laws and when he assigns praise and blame. This is the truest word

that can be spoken in praise of a citizen; and the true legislator ought not only

to write his laws, but also to interweave with them all such things as seem to

him honourable and dishonourable. And the perfect citizen ought to seek to

strengthen these no less than the principles of law which are sanctioned by

punishments. I will adduce an example which will clear up my meaning, and

will be a sort of witness to my words. Hunting is of wide extent, and has a

name  under  which  many  things  are  included,  for  there  is  a  hunting  of

creatures in the water, and of creatures in the air, and there is a great deal of

hunting of land animals of all kinds, and not of wild beasts only. The hunting

after man is also worthy of consideration; there is the hunting after him in

war, and there is often a hunting after him in the way of friendship, which is

praised  and  also  blamed;  and  there  is  thieving,  and  the  hunting  which  is

practised by robbers, and that of armies against armies. Now the legislator, in

laying down laws about hunting, can neither abstain from noting these things,

nor can he make threatening ordinances which will assign rules and penalties

about all of them. What is he to do? He will have to praise and blame hunting

with a view to the exercise and pursuits of youth. And, on the other hand, the

young man must listen obediently; neither pleasure nor pain should hinder

him,  and  he  should  regard  as  his  standard  of  action  the  praises  and

injunctions of the legislator rather than the punishments which he imposes by

law. This being premised, there will follow next in order moderate praise and

censure of hunting; the praise being assigned to that kind which will make the

souls of young men better, and the censure to that which has the oppositeeffect. And now let us address young men in the form of a prayer for their

welfare: O friends, we will say to them, may no desire or love of hunting in

the sea, or of angling or of catching the creatures in the waters, ever take

possession of you, either when you are awake or when you are asleep, by

hook or with weels, which latter is a very lazy contrivance; and let not any

desire of catching men and of piracy by sea enter into your souls and make

you cruel and lawless hunters. And as to the desire of thieving in town or

country,  may  it  never  enter  into  your  most  passing  thoughts;  nor  let  the

insidious fancy of catching birds, which is hardly worthy of freemen, come

into the head of any youth. There remains therefore for our athletes only the

hunting and catching of land animals, of which the one sort is called hunting

by night, in which the hunters sleep in turn and are lazy; this is not to be

commended any more than that which has intervals of rest, in which the wild

strength of beasts is subdued by nets and snares, and not by the victory of a

laborious spirit. Thus, only the best kind of hunting is allowed at all--that of

quadrupeds, which is carried on with horses and dogs and men's own persons,

and they get the victory over the animals by running them down and striking

them and hurling at them, those who have a care of godlike manhood taking

them with their own hands. The praise and blame which is assigned to all

these things has now been declared; and let the law be as follows: Let no one

hinder these who verily are sacred hunters from following the chase wherever

and whithersoever they will; but the hunter by night, who trusts to his nets

and gins, shall not be allowed to hunt anywhere. The fowler in the mountains

and  waste  places  shall  be  permitted,  but  on  cultivated  ground  and  on

consecrated wilds he shall not be permitted; and any one who meets him may

stop  him.  As  to  the  hunter  in  waters,  he  may  hunt  anywhere  except  in

harbours or sacred streams or marshes or pools, provided only that he do not

pollute the water with poisonous juices. And now we may say that all our

enactments about education are complete.


CLEINIAS: Very good.BOOK VIII.


ATHENIAN: Next, with the help of the Delphian oracle, we have to institute

festivals and make laws about them, and to determine what sacrifices will be

for the good of the city, and to what Gods they shall be offered; but when

they shall be offered, and how often, may be partly regulated by us.


CLEINIAS: The number--yes.


ATHENIAN: Then we will first determine the number; and let the whole

number  be  365--one  for  every  day--so  that  one  magistrate  at  least  will

sacrifice  daily  to  some  God  or  demi-god  on  behalf  of  the  city,  and  the

citizens,  and  their  possessions.  And  the  interpreters,  and  priests,  and

priestesses, and prophets shall meet, and, in company with the guardians of

the law, ordain those things which the legislator of necessity omits; and I may

remark that they are the very persons who ought to take note of what is

omitted. The law will say that there are twelve feasts dedicated to the twelve

Gods, after whom the several tribes are named; and that to each of them they

shall sacrifice every month, and appoint choruses, and musical and gymnastic

contests, assigning them so as to suit the Gods and seasons of the year. And

they shall have festivals for women, distinguishing those which ought to be

separated from the men's festivals, and those which ought not. Further, they

shall not confuse the infernal deities and their rites with the Gods who are

termed heavenly and their rites, but shall separate them, giving to Pluto his

own in the twelfth month, which is sacred to him, according to the law. To

such  a  deity  warlike  men  should  entertain  no  aversion,  but  they  should

honour him as being always the best friend of man. For the connexion of soul

and body is no way better than the dissolution of them, as I am ready to

maintain quite seriously. Moreover, those who would regulate these matters

rightly should consider, that our city among existing cities has no fellow,

either in respect of leisure or command of the necessaries of life, and that like

an individual she ought to live happily. And those who would live happily

should  in  the  first  place  do  no  wrong  to  one  another,  and  ought  not

themselves to be wronged by others; to attain the first is not difficult, but

there is great difficulty in acquiring the power of not being wronged. No mancan be perfectly secure against wrong, unless he has become perfectly good;

and cities are like individuals in this, for a city if good has a life of peace, but

if evil, a life of war within and without. Wherefore the citizens ought to

practise war--not in time of war, but rather while they are at peace. And every

city which has any sense, should take the field at least for one day in every

month, and for more if the magistrates think fit, having no regard to winter

cold or summer heat; and they should go out en masse, including their wives

and their children, when the magistrates determine to lead forth the whole

people, or in separate portions when summoned by them; and they should

always provide that there should be games and sacrificial feasts, and they

should have tournaments, imitating in as lively a manner as they can real

battles.  And  they  should  distribute  prizes  of  victory  and  valour  to  the

competitors, passing censures and encomiums on one another according to

the  characters  which  they  bear  in  the  contests  and  in  their  whole  life,

honouring  him  who  seems  to  be  the  best,  and  blaming  him  who  is  the

opposite. And let poets celebrate the victors--not however every poet, but

only one who in the first place is not less than fifty years of age; nor should

he be one who, although he may have musical and poetical gifts, has never in

his life done any noble or illustrious action; but those who are themselves

good  and  also  honourable  in  the  state,  creators  of  noble  actions--let  their

poems be sung, even though they be not very musical. And let the judgment

of them rest with the instructor of youth and the other guardians of the laws,

who shall give them this privilege, and they alone shall be free to sing; but

the rest of the world shall not have this liberty. Nor shall any one dare to sing

a song which has not been approved by the judgment of the guardians of the

laws,  not  even  if  his  strain  be  sweeter  than  the  songs  of  Thamyras  and

Orpheus; but only such poems as have been judged sacred and dedicated to

the Gods, and such as are the works of good men, in which praise or blame

has been awarded and which have been deemed to fulfil their design fairly.


The regulations about war, and about liberty of speech in poetry, ought to

apply equally to men and women. The legislator may be supposed to argue

the question in his own mind: Who are my citizens for whom I have set in

order the city? Are they not competitors in the greatest of all contests, and

have they not innumerable rivals? To be sure, will be the natural reply. Well,

but if we were training boxers, or pancratiasts, or any other sort of athletes,

would they never meet until the hour of contest arrived; and should we donothing to prepare ourselves previously by daily practice? Surely, if we were

boxers, we should have been learning to fight for many days before, and

exercising ourselves in imitating all those blows and wards which we were

intending to use in the hour of conflict; and in order that we might come as

near  to  reality  as  possible,  instead  of  cestuses  we  should  put  on  boxing-

gloves, that the blows and the wards might be practised by us to the utmost of

our power. And if there were a lack of competitors, the ridicule of fools

would not deter us from hanging up a lifeless image and practising at that. Or

if we had no adversary at all, animate or inanimate, should we not venture in

the dearth of antagonists to spar by ourselves? In what other manner could we

ever study the art of self-defence?


CLEINIAS: The way which you mention, Stranger, would be the only way.


ATHENIAN:  And  shall  the  warriors  of  our  city,  who  are  destined  when

occasion calls to enter the greatest of all contests, and to fight for their lives,

and their children, and their property, and the whole city, be worse prepared

than boxers? And will the legislator, because he is afraid that their practising

with one another may appear to some ridiculous, abstain from commanding

them to go out and fight; will he not ordain that soldiers shall perform lesser

exercises without arms every day, making dancing and all gymnastic tend to

this end; and also will he not require that they shall practise some gymnastic

exercises, greater as well as lesser, as often as every month; and that they

shall have contests one with another in every part of the country, seizing

upon posts and lying in ambush, and imitating in every respect the reality of

war; fighting with boxing-gloves and hurling javelins, and using weapons

somewhat dangerous, and as nearly as possible like the true ones, in order

that the sport may not be altogether without fear, but may have terrors and to

a certain degree show the man who has and who has not courage; and that the

honour and dishonour which are assigned to them respectively, may prepare

the whole city for the true conflict of life? If any one dies in these mimic

contests, the homicide is involuntary, and we will make the slayer, when he

has been purified according to law, to be pure of blood, considering that if a

few men should die, others as good as they will be born; but that if fear is

dead, then the citizens will never find a test of superior and inferior natures,

which is a far greater evil to the state than the loss of a few.CLEINIAS: We are quite agreed, Stranger, that we should legislate about

such things, and that the whole state should practise them.


ATHENIAN: And what is the reason that dances and contests of this sort

hardly ever exist in states, at least not to any extent worth speaking of? Is this

due to the ignorance of mankind and their legislators?


CLEINIAS: Perhaps.


ATHENIAN: Certainly not, sweet Cleinias; there are two causes, which are

quite enough to account for the deficiency.


CLEINIAS: What are they?


ATHENIAN: One cause is the love of wealth, which wholly absorbs men,

and  never  for  a  moment  allows  them  to  think  of  anything  but  their  own

private possessions; on this the soul of every citizen hangs suspended, and

can  attend  to  nothing  but  his  daily  gain;  mankind  are  ready  to  learn  any

branch of knowledge, and to follow any pursuit which tends to this end, and

they laugh at every other: that is one reason why a city will not be in earnest

about such contests or any other good and honourable pursuit. But from an

insatiable  love  of  gold  and  silver,  every  man  will  stoop  to  any  art  or

contrivance, seemly  or unseemly, in the hope of becoming rich; and will

make no objection to performing any action, holy, or unholy and utterly base;

if only like a beast he have the power of eating and drinking all kinds of

things, and procuring for himself in every sort of way the gratification of his

lusts.


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN:  Let  this,  then,  be  deemed  one  of  the  causes  which  prevent

states from pursuing in an efficient manner the art of war, or any other noble

aim, but makes the orderly and temperate part of mankind into merchants,

and captains of ships, and servants, and converts the valiant sort into thieves

and burglars, and robbers of temples, and violent, tyrannical persons; many

of whom are not without ability, but they are unfortunate.CLEINIAS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN: Must not they be truly unfortunate whose souls are compelled

to pass through life always hungering?


CLEINIAS: Then that is one cause, Stranger; but you spoke of another.


ATHENIAN: Thank you for reminding me.


CLEINIAS: The insatiable lifelong love of wealth, as you were saying, is one

cause which absorbs mankind, and prevents them from rightly practising the

arts of war: Granted; and now tell me, what is the other?


ATHENIAN: Do you imagine that I delay because I am in a perplexity?


CLEINIAS: No; but we think that you are too severe upon the money-loving

temper,  of  which  you  seem  in  the  present  discussion  to  have  a  peculiar

dislike.


ATHENIAN: That is a very fair rebuke, Cleinias; and I will now proceed to

the second cause.


CLEINIAS: Proceed.


ATHENIAN:  I  say  that  governments  are  a  cause--democracy,  oligarchy,

tyranny, concerning which I have often spoken in the previous discourse; or

rather governments they are not, for none of them exercises a voluntary rule

over voluntary subjects; but they may be truly called states of discord, in

which while the government is voluntary, the subjects always obey against

their will, and have to be coerced; and the ruler fears the subject, and will not,

if he can help, allow him to become either noble, or rich, or strong, or valiant,

or warlike at all. These two are the chief causes of almost all evils, and of the

evils of which I have been speaking they are notably the causes. But our state

has escaped both of them; for her citizens have the greatest leisure, and they

are not subject to one another, and will, I think, be made by these laws the

reverse of lovers of money. Such a constitution may be reasonably supposed

to be the only one existing which will accept the education which we havedescribed, and the martial pastimes which have been perfected according to

our idea.


CLEINIAS: True.


ATHENIAN: Then next we must remember, about all gymnastic contests,

that only the warlike sort of them are to be practised and to have prizes of

victory; and those which are not military are to be given up. The military sort

had better be completely described and established by law; and first, let us

speak of running and swiftness.


CLEINIAS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: Certainly the most military of all qualities is general activity of

body,  whether  of  foot  or  hand.  For  escaping  or  for  capturing  an  enemy,

quickness  of  foot  is  required;  but  hand-to-hand  conflict  and  combat  need

vigour and strength.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN:  Neither  of  them  can  attain  their  greatest  efficiency  without

arms.


CLEINIAS: How can they?


ATHENIAN: Then our herald, in accordance with the prevailing practice,

will  first  summon  the  runner--he  will  appear  armed,  for  to  an  unarmed

competitor we will not give a prize. And he shall enter first who is to run the

single course bearing arms; next, he who is to run the double course; third, he

who is to run the horse-course; and fourthly, he who is to run the long course;

the fifth whom we start, shall be the first sent forth in heavy armour, and shall

run a course of sixty stadia to some temple of Ares--and we will send forth

another, whom we will style the more heavily armed, to run over smoother

ground. There remains the archer; and he shall run in the full equipments of

an archer a distance of 100 stadia over mountains, and across every sort of

country, to a temple of Apollo and Artemis; this shall be the order of the

contest, and we will wait for them until they return, and will give a prize tothe conqueror in each.


CLEINIAS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: Let us suppose that there are three kinds of contests--one of

boys, another of beardless youths, and a third of men. For the youths we will

fix the length of the contest at two-thirds, and for the boys at half of the entire

course, whether they contend as archers or as heavy-armed. Touching the

women, let the girls who are not grown up compete naked in the stadium and

the double course, and the horse-course and the long course, and let them run

on the race-ground itself; those who are thirteen years of age and upwards

until their marriage shall continue to share in contests if they are not more

than twenty, and shall be compelled to run up to eighteen; and they shall

descend into the arena in suitable dresses. Let these be the regulations about

contests in running both for men and women.


Respecting contests of strength, instead of wrestling and similar contests of

the heavier sort, we will institute conflicts in armour of one against one, and

two against two, and so on up to ten against ten. As to what a man ought not

to  suffer  or  do,  and  to  what  extent,  in  order  to  gain  the  victory--as  in

wrestling, the masters of the art have laid down what is fair and what is not

fair, so in fighting in armour--we ought to call in skilful persons, who shall

judge for us and be our assessors in the work of legislation; they shall say

who deserves to be victor in combats of this sort, and what he is not to do or

have done to him, and in like manner what rule determines who is defeated;

and let these ordinances apply to women until they are married as well as to

men. The pancration shall have a counterpart in a combat of the light-armed;

they shall contend with bows and with light shields and with javelins and in

the throwing of stones by slings and by hand: and laws shall be made about

it, and rewards and prizes given to him who best fulfils the ordinances of the

law.


Next in order we shall have to legislate about the horse contests. Now we do

not need many horses, for they cannot be of much use in a country like Crete,

and hence we naturally do not take great pains about the rearing of them or

about horse races. There is no one who keeps a chariot among us, and any

rivalry in such matters would be altogether out of place; there would be nosense nor any shadow of sense in instituting contests which are not after the

manner of our country. And therefore we give our prizes for single horses--

for colts who have not yet cast their teeth, and for those who are intermediate,

and for the full-grown horses themselves; and thus our equestrian games will

accord with the nature of the country. Let them have conflict and rivalry in

these matters in accordance with the law, and let the colonels and generals of

horse decide together about all courses and about the armed competitors in

them.  But  we  have  nothing  to  say  to  the  unarmed  either  in  gymnastic

exercises  or  in  these  contests.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Cretan  bowman  or

javelin-man who fights in armour on horseback is useful, and therefore we

may as well place a competition of this sort among our amusements. Women

are not to be forced to compete by laws and ordinances; but if from previous

training they have acquired the habit and are strong enough and like to take

part, let them do so, girls as well as boys, and no blame to them.


Thus the competition in gymnastic and the mode of learning it have been

described; and we have spoken also of the toils of the contest, and of daily

exercises  under  the  superintendence  of  masters.  Likewise,  what  relates  to

music has been, for the most part, completed. But as to rhapsodes and the

like, and the contests of choruses which are to perform at feasts, all this shall

be arranged when the months and days and years have been appointed for

Gods and demi-gods, whether every third year, or again every fifth year, or in

whatever way or manner the Gods may put into men's minds the distribution

and order of them. At the same time, we may expect that the musical contests

will be celebrated in their turn by the command of the judges and the director

of education and the guardians of the law meeting together for this purpose,

and themselves becoming legislators of the times and nature and conditions

of the choral contests and of dancing in general. What they ought severally to

be in language and song, and in the admixture of harmony with rhythm and

the  dance,  has  been  often  declared  by  the  original  legislator;  and  his

successors ought to follow him, making the games and sacrifices duly to

correspond at fitting times, and appointing public festivals. It is not difficult

to determine how these and the like matters may have a regular order; nor,

again, will the alteration of them do any great good or harm to the state.

There  is,  however,  another  matter  of  great  importance  and  difficulty,

concerning  which  God  should  legislate,  if  there  were  any  possibility  of

obtaining from Him an ordinance about it. But seeing that divine aid is not tobe had, there appears to be a need of some bold man who specially honours

plainness of speech, and will say outright what he thinks best for the city and

citizens--ordaining what is good and convenient for the whole state amid the

corruptions of human souls, opposing the mightiest lusts, and having no man

his helper but himself standing alone and following reason only.


CLEINIAS: What is this, Stranger, that you are saying? For we do not as yet

understand your meaning.


ATHENIAN: Very likely; I will endeavour to explain myself more clearly.

When I came to the subject of education, I beheld young men and maidens

holding friendly intercourse with one another. And there naturally arose in

my mind a sort of apprehension--I could not help thinking how one is to deal

with a city in which youths and maidens are well nurtured, and have nothing

to do, and are not undergoing the excessive and servile toils which extinguish

wantonness, and whose only cares during their whole life are sacrifices and

festivals and dances. How, in such a state as this, will they abstain from

desires which thrust many a man and woman into perdition; and from which

reason,  assuming  the  functions  of  law,  commands  them  to  abstain?  The

ordinances already made may possibly get the better of most of these desires;

the  prohibition  of  excessive  wealth  is  a  very  considerable  gain  in  the

direction of temperance, and the whole education of our youth imposes a law

of moderation on them; moreover, the eye of the rulers is required always to

watch over the young, and never to lose sight of them; and these provisions

do, as far as human means can effect anything, exercise a regulating influence

upon the desires in general. But how can we take precautions against the

unnatural loves of either sex, from which innumerable evils have come upon

individuals and cities? How shall we devise a remedy and way of escape out

of so great a danger? Truly, Cleinias, here is a difficulty. In many ways Crete

and Lacedaemon furnish a great help to those who make peculiar laws; but in

the matter of love, as we are alone, I must confess that they are quite against

us. For if any one following nature should lay down the law which existed

before the days of Laius, and denounce these lusts as contrary to nature,

adducing the animals as a proof that such unions were monstrous, he might

prove his point, but he would be wholly at variance with the custom of your

states.  Further,  they  are  repugnant  to  a  principle  which  we  say  that  a

legislator should always observe; for we are always enquiring which of ourenactments tends to virtue and which not. And suppose we grant that these

loves are accounted by law to the honourable, or at least not disgraceful, in

what degree will they contribute to virtue? Will such passions implant in the

soul of him who is seduced the habit of courage, or in the soul of the seducer

the principle of temperance? Who will ever believe this? or rather, who will

not blame the effeminacy of him who yields to pleasures and is unable to

hold  out  against  them?  Will  not  all  men  censure  as  womanly  him  who

imitates  the  woman?  And  who  would  ever  think  of  establishing  such  a

practice by law? certainly no one who had in his mind the image of true law.

How can we prove that what I am saying is true? He who would rightly

consider these matters must see the nature of friendship and desire, and of

these so-called loves, for they are of two kinds, and out of the two arises a

third kind, having the same name; and this similarity of name causes all the

difficulty and obscurity.


CLEINIAS: How is that?


ATHENIAN: Dear is the like in virtue to the like, and the equal to the equal;

dear also, though unlike, is he who has abundance to him who is in want.

And when either of these friendships becomes excessive, we term the excess

love.


CLEINIAS: Very true.


ATHENIAN:  The  friendship  which  arises  from  contraries  is  horrible  and

coarse,  and  has  often  no  tie  of  communion;  but  that  which  arises  from

likeness is gentle, and has a tie of communion which lasts through life. As to

the mixed sort which is made up of them both, there is, first of all, a difficulty

in determining what he who is possessed by this third love desires; moreover,

he is drawn different ways, and is in doubt between the two principles; the

one exhorting him to enjoy the beauty of youth, and the other forbidding him.

For the one is a lover of the body, and hungers after beauty, like ripe fruit,

and would fain satisfy himself without any regard to the character of the

beloved; the other holds the desire of the body to be a secondary matter, and

looking rather than loving and with his soul desiring the soul of the other in a

becoming manner, regards the satisfaction of the bodily love as wantonness;

he reverences and respects temperance and courage and magnanimity andwisdom, and wishes to live chastely with the chaste object of his affection.

Now the sort of love which is made up of the other two is that which we have

described as the third. Seeing then that there are these three sorts of love,

ought the law to prohibit and forbid them all to exist among us? Is it not

rather clear that we should wish to have in the state the love which is of

virtue and which desires the beloved youth to be the best possible; and the

other two, if possible, we should hinder? What do you say, friend Megillus?


MEGILLUS: I think, Stranger, that you are perfectly right in what you have

been now saying.


Athenian: I knew well, my friend, that I should obtain your assent, which I

accept,  and  therefore  have  no  need  to  analyze  your  custom  any  further.

Cleinias shall be prevailed upon to give me his assent at some other time.

Enough of this; and now let us proceed to the laws.


MEGILLUS: Very good.


ATHENIAN: Upon reflection I see a way of imposing the law, which, in one

respect, is easy, but, in another, is of the utmost difficulty.


MEGILLUS: What do you mean?


ATHENIAN:  We  are  all  aware  that  most  men,  in  spite  of  their  lawless

natures, are very strictly and precisely restrained from intercourse with the

fair, and this is not at all against their will, but entirely with their will.


MEGILLUS: When do you mean?


ATHENIAN: When any one has a brother or sister who is fair; and about a

son  or  daughter  the  same  unwritten  law  holds,  and  is  a  most  perfect

safeguard,  so  that  no  open  or  secret  connexion  ever  takes  place  between

them. Nor does the thought of such a thing ever enter at all into the minds of

most of them.


MEGILLUS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: Does not a little word extinguish all pleasures of that sort?MEGILLUS: What word?


ATHENIAN: The declaration that they are unholy, hated of God, and most

infamous; and is not the reason of this that no one has ever said the opposite,

but every one from his earliest childhood has heard men speaking in the same

manner about them always and everywhere, whether in comedy or in the

graver  language  of  tragedy?  When  the  poet  introduces  on  the  stage  a

Thyestes or an Oedipus, or a Macareus having secret intercourse with his

sister, he represents him, when found out, ready to kill himself as the penalty

of his sin.


MEGILLUS:  You  are  very  right  in  saying  that  tradition,  if  no  breath  of

opposition ever assails it, has a marvellous power.


ATHENIAN: Am I not also right in saying that the legislator who wants to

master  any  of  the  passions  which  master  man  may  easily  know  how  to

subdue them? He will consecrate the tradition of their evil character among

all, slaves and freemen, women and children, throughout the city: that will be

the surest foundation of the law which he can make.


MEGILLUS: Yes; but will he ever succeed in making all mankind use the

same language about them?


ATHENIAN: A good objection; but was I not just now saying that I had a

way  to  make  men  use  natural  love  and  abstain  from  unnatural,  not

intentionally destroying the seeds of human increase, or sowing them in stony

places, in which they will take no root; and that I would command them to

abstain too from any female field of increase in which that which is sown is

not likely to grow? Now if a law to this effect could only be made perpetual,

and gain an authority such as already prevents intercourse of parents and

children--such  a  law,  extending  to  other  sensual  desires,  and  conquering

them, would be the source of ten thousand blessings. For, in the first place,

moderation is the appointment of nature, and deters men from all frenzy and

madness of love, and from all adulteries and immoderate use of meats and

drinks, and makes them good friends to their own wives. And innumerable

other  benefits  would  result  if  such  a  law  could  only  be  enforced.  I  canimagine  some  lusty  youth  who  is  standing  by,  and  who,  on  hearing  this

enactment,  declares  in  scurrilous  terms  that  we  are  making  foolish  and

impossible laws, and fills the world with his outcry. And therefore I said that

I knew a way of enacting and perpetuating such a law, which was very easy

in one respect, but in another most difficult. There is no difficulty in seeing

that  such  a  law  is  possible,  and  in  what  way;  for,  as  I  was  saying,  the

ordinance once consecrated would master the soul of every man, and terrify

him into obedience. But matters have now come to such a pass that even then

the desired result seems as if it could not be attained, just as the continuance

of an entire state in the practice of common meals is also deemed impossible.

And although this latter is partly disproven by the fact of their existence

among you, still even in your cities the common meals of women would be

regarded as unnatural and impossible. I was thinking of the rebelliousness of

the human heart when I said that the permanent establishment of these things

is very difficult.


MEGILLUS: Very true.


ATHENIAN: Shall I try and find some sort of persuasive argument which

will prove to you that such enactments are possible, and not beyond human

nature?


CLEINIAS: By all means.


ATHENIAN: Is a man more likely to abstain from the pleasures of love and

to do what he is bidden about them, when his body is in a good condition, or

when he is in an ill condition, and out of training?


CLEINIAS: He will be far more temperate when he is in training.


ATHENIAN: And have we not heard of Iccus of Tarentum, who, with a view

to the Olympic and other contests, in his zeal for his art, and also because he

was of a manly and temperate disposition, never had any connexion with a

woman or a youth during the whole time of his training? And the same is said

of Crison and Astylus and Diopompus and many others; and yet, Cleinias,

they were far worse educated in their minds than your and my citizens, and in

their bodies far more lusty.