Then wisdom always makes men fortunate: for by wisdom no man would

ever err, and therefore he must act rightly and succeed, or his wisdom would

be wisdom no longer.


We contrived at last, somehow or other, to agree in a general conclusion, that

he who had wisdom had no need of fortune. I then recalled to his mind the

previous  state  of  the  question.  You  remember,  I  said,  our  making  the

admission that we should be happy and fortunate if many good things were

present with us?


He assented.


And should we be happy by reason of the presence of good things, if they

profited us not, or if they profited us?


If they profited us, he said.


And would they profit us, if we only had them and did not use them? For

example, if we had a great deal of food and did not eat, or a great deal of

drink and did not drink, should we be profited?


Certainly not, he said.


Or would an artisan, who had all the implements necessary for his work, and

did not use them, be any the better for the possession of them? For example,

would a carpenter be any the better for having all his tools and plenty of

wood, if he never worked?


Certainly not, he said.


And if a person had wealth and all the goods of which we were just now

speaking, and did not use them, would he be happy because he possessed

them?


No indeed, Socrates.


Then, I said, a man who would be happy must not only have the good things,

but he must also use them; there is no advantage in merely having them?True.


Well, Cleinias, but if you have the use as well as the possession of good

things, is that sufficient to confer happiness?


Yes, in my opinion.


And may a person use them either rightly or wrongly?


He must use them rightly.


That is quite true, I said. And the wrong use of a thing is far worse than the

non-use; for the one is an evil, and the other is neither a good nor an evil.

You admit that?


He assented.


Now in the working and use of wood, is not that which gives the right use

simply the knowledge of the carpenter?


Nothing else, he said.


And surely, in the manufacture of vessels, knowledge is that which gives the

right way of making them?


He agreed.


And in the use of the goods of which we spoke at first--wealth and health and

beauty, is not knowledge that which directs us to the right use of them, and

regulates our practice about them?


He assented.


Then in every possession and every use of a thing, knowledge is that which

gives a man not only good-fortune but success?


He again assented.And tell me, I said, O tell me, what do possessions profit a man, if he have

neither good sense nor wisdom? Would a man be better off, having and doing

many things without wisdom, or a few things with wisdom? Look at the

matter thus: If he did fewer things would he not make fewer mistakes? if he

made fewer mistakes would he not have fewer misfortunes? and if he had

fewer misfortunes would he not be less miserable?


Certainly, he said.


And who would do least--a poor man or a rich man?


A poor man.


A weak man or a strong man?


A weak man.


A noble man or a mean man?


A mean man.


And a coward would do less than a courageous and temperate man?


Yes.


And an indolent man less than an active man?


He assented.


And a slow man less than a quick; and one who had dull perceptions of

seeing and hearing less than one who had keen ones?


All this was mutually allowed by us.


Then, I said, Cleinias, the sum of the matter appears to be that the goods of

which we spoke before are not to be regarded as goods in themselves, but the

degree of good and evil in them depends on whether they are or are not under

the guidance of knowledge: under the guidance of ignorance, they are greaterevils than their opposites, inasmuch as they are more able to minister to the

evil principle which rules them; and when under the guidance of wisdom and

prudence, they are greater goods: but in themselves they are nothing?


That, he replied, is obvious.


What then is the result of what has been said? Is not this the result-- that other

things are indifferent, and that wisdom is the only good, and ignorance the

only evil?


He assented.


Let us consider a further point, I said: Seeing that all men desire happiness,

and happiness, as has been shown, is gained by a use, and a right use, of the

things of life, and the right use of them, and good- fortune in the use of them,

is given by knowledge,--the inference is that everybody ought by all means to

try and make himself as wise as he can?


Yes, he said.


And when a man thinks that he ought to obtain this treasure, far more than

money, from a father or a guardian or a friend or a suitor, whether citizen or

stranger--the eager desire and prayer to them that they would impart wisdom

to you, is not at all dishonourable, Cleinias; nor is any one to be blamed for

doing any honourable service or ministration to any man, whether a lover or

not, if his aim is to get wisdom. Do you agree? I said.


Yes, he said, I quite agree, and think that you are right.


Yes, I said, Cleinias, if only wisdom can be taught, and does not come to man

spontaneously; for this is a point which has still to be considered, and is not

yet agreed upon by you and me--


But I think, Socrates, that wisdom can be taught, he said.


Best of men, I said, I am delighted to hear you say so; and I am also grateful

to you for having saved me from a long and tiresome investigation as to

whether wisdom can be taught or not. But now, as you think that wisdom canbe taught, and that wisdom only can make a man happy and fortunate, will

you  not  acknowledge  that  all  of  us  ought  to  love  wisdom,  and  you

individually will try to love her?


Certainly, Socrates, he said; I will do my best.


I was pleased at hearing this; and I turned to Dionysodorus and Euthydemus

and said: That is an example, clumsy and tedious I admit, of the sort of

exhortations which I would have you give; and I hope that one of you will set

forth what I have been saying in a more artistic style: or at least take up the

enquiry where I left off, and proceed to show the youth whether he should

have all knowledge; or whether there is one sort of knowledge only which

will make him good and happy, and what that is. For, as I was saying at first,

the improvement of this young man in virtue and wisdom is a matter which

we have very much at heart.


Thus I spoke, Crito, and was all attention to what was coming. I wanted to

see how they would approach the question, and where they would start in

their exhortation to the young man that he should practise wisdom and virtue.

Dionysodorus, who was the elder, spoke first. Everybody's eyes were directed

towards him, perceiving that something wonderful might shortly be expected.

And  certainly  they  were  not  far  wrong;  for  the  man,  Crito,  began  a

remarkable  discourse  well  worth  hearing,  and  wonderfully  persuasive

regarded as an exhortation to virtue.


Tell me, he said, Socrates and the rest of you who say that you want this

young man to become wise, are you in jest or in real earnest?


I was led by this to imagine that they fancied us to have been jesting when we

asked them to converse with the youth, and that this made them jest and play,

and being under this impression, I was the more decided in saying that we

were in profound earnest. Dionysodorus said:


Reflect, Socrates; you may have to deny your words.


I have reflected, I said; and I shall never deny my words.Well, said he, and so you say that you wish Cleinias to become wise?


Undoubtedly.


And he is not wise as yet?


At least his modesty will not allow him to say that he is.


You wish him, he said, to become wise and not, to be ignorant?


That we do.


You wish him to be what he is not, and no longer to be what he is?


I was thrown into consternation at this.


Taking advantage of my consternation he added: You wish him no longer to

be what he is, which can only mean that you wish him to perish. Pretty lovers

and friends they must be who want their favourite not to be, or to perish!


When Ctesippus heard this he got very angry (as a lover well might) and said:

Stranger of Thurii--if politeness would allow me I should say, A plague upon

you! What can make you tell such a lie about me and the others, which I

hardly like to repeat, as that I wish Cleinias to perish?


Euthydemus replied: And do you think, Ctesippus, that it is possible to tell a

lie?


Yes, said Ctesippus; I should be mad to say anything else.


And in telling a lie, do you tell the thing of which you speak or not?


You tell the thing of which you speak.


And he who tells, tells that thing which he tells, and no other?


Yes, said Ctesippus.And that is a distinct thing apart from other things?


Certainly.


And he who says that thing says that which is?


Yes.


And he who says that which is, says the truth. And therefore Dionysodorus, if

he says that which is, says the truth of you and no lie.


Yes, Euthydemus, said Ctesippus; but in saying this, he says what is not.


Euthydemus answered: And that which is not is not?


True.


And that which is not is nowhere?


Nowhere.


And can any one do anything about that which has no existence, or do to

Cleinias that which is not and is nowhere?


I think not, said Ctesippus.


Well, but do rhetoricians, when they speak in the assembly, do nothing?


Nay, he said, they do something.


And doing is making?


Yes.


And speaking is doing and making?


He agreed.Then no one says that which is not, for in saying what is not he would be

doing something; and you have already acknowledged that no one can do

what is not. And therefore, upon your own showing, no one says what is

false; but if Dionysodorus says anything, he says what is true and what is.


Yes, Euthydemus, said Ctesippus; but he speaks of things in a certain way

and manner, and not as they really are.


Why, Ctesippus, said Dionysodorus, do you mean to say that any one speaks

of things as they are?


Yes, he said--all gentlemen and truth-speaking persons.


And are not good things good, and evil things evil?


He assented.


And you say that gentlemen speak of things as they are?


Yes.


Then the good speak evil of evil things, if they speak of them as they are?


Yes, indeed, he said; and they speak evil of evil men. And if I may give you a

piece of advice, you had better take care that they do not speak evil of you,

since I can tell you that the good speak evil of the evil.


And do they speak great things of the great, rejoined Euthydemus, and warm

things of the warm?


To be sure they do, said Ctesippus; and they speak coldly of the insipid and

cold dialectician.


You are abusive, Ctesippus, said Dionysodorus, you are abusive!


Indeed, I am not, Dionysodorus, he replied; for I love you and am giving you

friendly advice, and, if I could, would persuade you not like a boor to say in

my presence that I desire my beloved, whom I value above all men, to perish.I saw that they were getting exasperated with one another, so I made a joke

with him and said: O Ctesippus, I think that we must allow the strangers to

use language in their own way, and not quarrel with them about words, but be

thankful for what they give us. If they know how to destroy men in such a

way as to make good and sensible men out of bad and foolish ones-- whether

this is a discovery of their own, or whether they have learned from some one

else this new sort of death and destruction which enables them to get rid of a

bad man and turn him into a good one--if they know this (and they do know

this--at any rate they said just now that this was the secret of their newly-

discovered art)--let them, in their phraseology, destroy the youth and make

him wise, and all of us with him. But if you young men do not like to trust

yourselves with them, then fiat experimentum in corpore senis; I will be the

Carian  on  whom  they  shall  operate.  And  here  I  offer  my  old  person  to

Dionysodorus; he may put me into the pot, like Medea the Colchian, kill me,

boil me, if he will only make me good.


Ctesippus said: And I, Socrates, am ready to commit myself to the strangers;

they may skin me alive, if they please (and I am pretty well skinned by them

already), if only my skin is made at last, not like that of Marsyas, into a

leathern bottle, but into a piece of virtue. And here is Dionysodorus fancying

that  I  am  angry  with  him,  when  really  I  am  not  angry  at  all;  I  do  but

contradict him when I think that he is speaking improperly to me: and you

must not confound abuse and contradiction, O illustrious Dionysodorus; for

they are quite different things.


Contradiction! said Dionysodorus; why, there never was such a thing.


Certainly  there  is,  he  replied;  there  can  be  no  question  of  that.  Do  you,

Dionysodorus, maintain that there is not?


You  will  never  prove  to  me,  he  said,  that  you  have  heard  any  one

contradicting any one else.


Indeed,  said  Ctesippus;  then  now  you  may  hear  me  contradicting

Dionysodorus.


Are you prepared to make that good?Certainly, he said.


Well, have not all things words expressive of them?


Yes.


Of their existence or of their non-existence?


Of their existence.


Yes, Ctesippus, and we just now proved, as you may remember, that no man

could affirm a negative; for no one could affirm that which is not.


And what does that signify? said Ctesippus; you and I may contradict all the

same for that.


But can we contradict one another, said Dionysodorus, when both of us are

describing the same thing? Then we must surely be speaking the same thing?


He assented.


Or when neither of us is speaking of the same thing? For then neither of us

says a word about the thing at all?


He granted that proposition also.


But  when  I  describe  something  and  you  describe  another  thing,  or  I  say

something and you say nothing--is there any contradiction? How can he who

speaks contradict him who speaks not?


Here  Ctesippus  was  silent;  and  I  in  my  astonishment  said:  What  do  you

mean, Dionysodorus? I have often heard, and have been amazed to hear, this

thesis  of  yours,  which  is  maintained  and  employed  by  the  disciples  of

Protagoras, and others before them, and which to me appears to be quite

wonderful, and suicidal as well as destructive, and I think that I am most

likely to hear the truth about it from you. The dictum is that there is no such

thing as falsehood; a man must either say what is true or say nothing. Is not

that your position?He assented.


But if he cannot speak falsely, may he not think falsely?


No, he cannot, he said.


Then there is no such thing as false opinion?


No, he said.


Then there is no such thing as ignorance, or men who are ignorant; for is not

ignorance, if there be such a thing, a mistake of fact?


Certainly, he said.


And that is impossible?


Impossible, he replied.


Are you saying this as a paradox, Dionysodorus; or do you seriously maintain

no man to be ignorant?


Refute me, he said.


But how can I refute you, if, as you say, to tell a falsehood is impossible?


Very true, said Euthydemus.


Neither did I tell you just now to refute me, said Dionysodorus; for how can I

tell you to do that which is not?


O Euthydemus, I said, I have but a dull conception of these subtleties and

excellent devices of wisdom; I am afraid that I hardly understand them, and

you must forgive me therefore if I ask a very stupid question: if there be no

falsehood  or  false  opinion  or  ignorance,  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as

erroneous action, for a man cannot fail of acting as he is acting--that is what

you mean?Yes, he replied.


And now, I said, I will ask my stupid question: If there is no such thing as

error in deed, word, or thought, then what, in the name of goodness, do you

come hither to teach? And were you not just now saying that you could teach

virtue best of all men, to any one who was willing to learn?


And  are  you  such  an  old  fool,  Socrates,  rejoined  Dionysodorus,  that  you

bring  up  now  what  I  said  at  first--and  if  I  had  said  anything  last  year,  I

suppose that you would bring that up too--but are non-plussed at the words

which I have just uttered?


Why, I said, they are not easy to answer; for they are the words of wise men:

and indeed I know not what to make of this word 'nonplussed,' which you

used last: what do you mean by it, Dionysodorus? You must mean that I

cannot refute your argument. Tell me if the words have any other sense.


No, he replied, they mean what you say. And now answer.


What, before you, Dionysodorus? I said.


Answer, said he.


And is that fair?


Yes, quite fair, he said.


Upon what principle? I said. I can only suppose that you are a very wise man

who comes to us in the character of a great logician, and who knows when to

answer and when not to answer--and now you will not open your mouth at

all, because you know that you ought not.


You prate, he said, instead of answering. But if, my good sir, you admit that I

am wise, answer as I tell you.


I suppose that I must obey, for you are master. Put the question.


Are the things which have sense alive or lifeless?They are alive.


And do you know of any word which is alive?


I cannot say that I do.


Then why did you ask me what sense my words had?


Why, because I was stupid and made a mistake. And yet, perhaps, I was right

after all in saying that words have a sense;--what do you say, wise man? If I

was not in error, even you will not refute me, and all your wisdom will be

non-plussed; but if I did fall into error, then again you are wrong in saying

that there is no error,--and this remark was made by you not quite a year ago.

I am inclined to think, however, Dionysodorus and Euthydemus, that this

argument lies where it was and is not very likely to advance: even your skill

in the subtleties of logic, which is really amazing, has not found out the way

of throwing another and not falling yourself, now any more than of old.


Ctesippus  said:  Men  of  Chios,  Thurii,  or  however  and  whatever  you  call

yourselves, I wonder at you, for you seem to have no objection to talking

nonsense.


Fearing  that  there  would  be  high  words,  I  again  endeavoured  to  soothe

Ctesippus, and said to him: To you, Ctesippus, I must repeat what I said

before to Cleinias--that you do not understand the ways of these philosophers

from abroad. They are not serious, but, like the Egyptian wizard, Proteus,

they take different forms and deceive us by their enchantments: and let us,

like Menelaus, refuse to let them go until they show themselves to us in

earnest. When they begin to be in earnest their full beauty will appear: let us

then beg and entreat and beseech them to shine forth. And I think that I had

better once more exhibit the form in which I pray to behold them; it might be

a guide to them. I will go on therefore where I left off, as well as I can, in the

hope that I may touch their hearts and move them to pity, and that when they

see me deeply serious and interested, they also may be serious. You, Cleinias,

I  said,  shall  remind  me  at  what  point  we  left  off.  Did  we  not  agree  that

philosophy should be studied? and was not that our conclusion?Yes, he replied.


And philosophy is the acquisition of knowledge?


Yes, he said.


And what knowledge ought we to acquire? May we not answer with absolute

truth--A knowledge which will do us good?


Certainly, he said.


And should we be any the better if we went about having a knowledge of the

places where most gold was hidden in the earth?


Perhaps we should, he said.


But have we not already proved, I said, that we should be none the better off,

even if without trouble and digging all the gold which there is in the earth

were ours? And if we knew how to convert stones into gold, the knowledge

would be of no value to us, unless we also knew how to use the gold? Do you

not remember? I said.


I quite remember, he said.


Nor would any other knowledge, whether of money-making, or of medicine,

or of any other art which knows only how to make a thing, and not to use it

when made, be of any good to us. Am I not right?


He agreed.


And  if  there  were  a  knowledge  which  was  able  to  make  men  immortal,

without giving them the knowledge of the way to use the immortality, neither

would there be any use in that, if we may argue from the analogy of the

previous instances?


To all this he agreed.


Then, my dear boy, I said, the knowledge which we want is one that uses aswell as makes?


True, he said.


And our desire is not to be skilful lyre-makers, or artists of that sort-- far

otherwise; for with them the art which makes is one, and the art which uses is

another. Although they have to do with the same, they are divided: for the art

which makes and the art which plays on the lyre differ widely from one

another. Am I not right?


He agreed.


And clearly we do not want the art of the flute-maker; this is only another of

the same sort?


He assented.


But suppose, I said, that we were to learn the art of making speeches-- would

that be the art which would make us happy?


I should say, no, rejoined Cleinias.


And why should you say so? I asked.


I see, he replied, that there are some composers of speeches who do not know

how to use the speeches which they make, just as the makers of lyres do not

know how to use the lyres; and also some who are of themselves unable to

compose speeches, but are able to use the speeches which the others make for

them; and this proves that the art of making speeches is not the same as the

art of using them.


Yes, I said; and I take your words to be a sufficient proof that the art of

making speeches is not one which will make a man happy. And yet I did

think that the art which we have so long been seeking might be discovered in

that direction; for the composers of speeches, whenever I meet them, always

appear to me to be very extraordinary men, Cleinias, and their art is lofty and

divine, and no wonder. For their art is a part of the great art of enchantment,

and hardly, if at all, inferior to it: and whereas the art of the enchanter is amode of charming snakes and spiders and scorpions, and other monsters and

pests, this art of their's acts upon dicasts and ecclesiasts and bodies of men,

for the charming and pacifying of them. Do you agree with me?


Yes, he said, I think that you are quite right.


Whither then shall we go, I said, and to what art shall we have recourse?


I do not see my way, he said.


But I think that I do, I replied.


And what is your notion? asked Cleinias.


I think that the art of the general is above all others the one of which the

possession is most likely to make a man happy.


I do not think so, he said.


Why not? I said.


The art of the general is surely an art of hunting mankind.


What of that? I said.


Why, he said, no art of hunting extends beyond hunting and capturing; and

when the prey is taken the huntsman or fisherman cannot use it; but they

hand  it  over  to  the  cook,  and  the  geometricians  and  astronomers  and

calculators (who all belong to the hunting class, for they do not make their

diagrams, but only find out that which was previously contained in them)--

they, I say, not being able to use but only to catch their prey, hand over their

inventions to the dialectician to be applied by him, if they have any sense in

them.


Good, I said, fairest and wisest Cleinias. And is this true?


Certainly, he said; just as a general when he takes a city or a camp hands over

his new acquisition to the statesman, for he does not know how to use themhimself; or as the quail-taker transfers the quails to the keeper of them. If we

are looking for the art which is to make us blessed, and which is able to use

that which it makes or takes, the art of the general is not the one, and some

other must be found.


CRITO: And do you mean, Socrates, that the youngster said all this?


SOCRATES: Are you incredulous, Crito?


CRITO: Indeed, I am; for if he did say so, then in my opinion he needs

neither Euthydemus nor any one else to be his instructor.


SOCRATES:  Perhaps  I  may  have  forgotten,  and  Ctesippus  was  the  real

answerer.


CRITO: Ctesippus! nonsense.


SOCRATES: All I know is that I heard these words, and that they were not

spoken either by Euthydemus or Dionysodorus. I dare say, my good Crito,

that they may have been spoken by some superior person: that I heard them I

am certain.


CRITO: Yes, indeed, Socrates, by some one a good deal superior, as I should

be disposed to think. But did you carry the search any further, and did you

find the art which you were seeking?


SOCRATES: Find! my dear sir, no indeed. And we cut a poor figure; we

were like children after larks, always on the point of catching the art, which

was always getting away from us. But why should I repeat the whole story?

At last we came to the kingly art, and enquired whether that gave and caused

happiness, and then we got into a labyrinth, and when we thought we were at

the end, came out again at the beginning, having still to seek as much as ever.


CRITO: How did that happen, Socrates?


SOCRATES: I will tell you; the kingly art was identified by us with the

political.CRITO: Well, and what came of that?


SOCRATES: To this royal or political art all the arts, including the art of the

general, seemed to render up the supremacy, that being the only one which

knew how to use what they produce. Here obviously was the very art which

we were seeking--the art which is the source of good government, and which

may be described, in the language of Aeschylus, as alone sitting at the helm

of the vessel of state, piloting and governing all things, and utilizing them.


CRITO: And were you not right, Socrates?


SOCRATES:  You  shall  judge,  Crito,  if  you  are  willing  to  hear  what

followed; for we resumed the enquiry, and a question of this sort was asked:

Does the kingly art, having this supreme authority, do anything for us? To be

sure, was the answer. And would not you, Crito, say the same?


CRITO: Yes, I should.


SOCRATES: And what would you say that the kingly art does? If medicine

were supposed to have supreme authority over the subordinate arts, and I

were to ask you a similar question about that, you would say--it produces

health?


CRITO: I should.


SOCRATES: And what of your own art of husbandry, supposing that to have

supreme  authority  over  the  subject  arts--what  does  that  do?  Does  it  not

supply us with the fruits of the earth?


CRITO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And what does the kingly art do when invested with supreme

power? Perhaps you may not be ready with an answer?


CRITO: Indeed I am not, Socrates.


SOCRATES: No more were we, Crito. But at any rate you know that if this is

the art which we were seeking, it ought to be useful.CRITO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And surely it ought to do us some good?


CRITO: Certainly, Socrates.


SOCRATES:  And  Cleinias  and  I  had  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that

knowledge of some kind is the only good.


CRITO: Yes, that was what you were saying.


SOCRATES:  All  the  other  results  of  politics,  and  they  are  many,  as  for

example,  wealth,  freedom,  tranquillity,  were  neither  good  nor  evil  in

themselves;  but  the  political  science  ought  to  make  us  wise,  and  impart

knowledge to us, if that is the science which is likely to do us good, and make

us happy.


CRITO: Yes; that was the conclusion at which you had arrived, according to

your report of the conversation.


SOCRATES: And does the kingly art make men wise and good?


CRITO: Why not, Socrates?


SOCRATES: What, all men, and in every respect? and teach them all the

arts,--carpentering, and cobbling, and the rest of them?


CRITO: I think not, Socrates.


SOCRATES: But then what is this knowledge, and what are we to do with it?

For it is not the source of any works which are neither good nor evil, and

gives no knowledge, but the knowledge of itself; what then can it be, and

what are we to do with it? Shall we say, Crito, that it is the knowledge by

which we are to make other men good?


CRITO: By all means.


SOCRATES: And in what will they be good and useful? Shall we repeat thatthey will make others good, and that these others will make others again,

without ever determining in what they are to be good; for we have put aside

the results of politics, as they are called. This is the old, old song over again;

and we are just as far as ever, if not farther, from the knowledge of the art or

science of happiness.


CRITO: Indeed, Socrates, you do appear to have got into a great perplexity.


SOCRATES: Thereupon, Crito, seeing that I was on the point of shipwreck, I

lifted up my voice, and earnestly entreated and called upon the strangers to

save me and the youth from the whirlpool of the argument; they were our

Castor and Pollux, I said, and they should be serious, and show us in sober

earnest what that knowledge was which would enable us to pass the rest of

our lives in happiness.


CRITO: And did Euthydemus show you this knowledge?


SOCRATES: Yes, indeed; he proceeded in a lofty strain to the following

effect:  Would  you  rather,  Socrates,  said  he,  that  I  should  show  you  this

knowledge about which you have been doubting, or shall I prove that you

already have it?


What, I said, are you blessed with such a power as this?


Indeed I am.


Then  I  would  much  rather  that  you  should  prove  me  to  have  such  a

knowledge; at my time of life that will be more agreeable than having to

learn.


Then tell me, he said, do you know anything?


Yes, I said, I know many things, but not anything of much importance.


That will do, he said: And would you admit that anything is what it is, and at

the same time is not what it is?


Certainly not.And did you not say that you knew something?


I did.


If you know, you are knowing.


Certainly, of the knowledge which I have.


That makes no difference;--and must you not, if you are knowing, know all

things?


Certainly not, I said, for there are many other things which I do not know.


And if you do not know, you are not knowing.


Yes, friend, of that which I do not know.


Still you are not knowing, and you said just now that you were knowing; and

therefore you are and are not at the same time, and in reference to the same

things.


A pretty clatter, as men say, Euthydemus, this of yours! and will you explain

how I possess that knowledge for which we were seeking? Do you mean to

say that the same thing cannot be and also not be; and therefore, since I know

one thing, that I know all, for I cannot be knowing and not knowing at the

same time, and if I know all things, then I must have the knowledge for

which we are seeking--May I assume this to be your ingenious notion?


Out of your own mouth, Socrates, you are convicted, he said.


Well, but, Euthydemus, I said, has that never happened to you? for if I am

only  in  the  same  case  with  you  and  our  beloved  Dionysodorus,  I  cannot

complain. Tell me, then, you two, do you not know some things, and not

know others?


Certainly not, Socrates, said Dionysodorus.


What do you mean, I said; do you know nothing?Nay, he replied, we do know something.


Then, I said, you know all things, if you know anything?


Yes, all things, he said; and that is as true of you as of us.


O, indeed, I said, what a wonderful thing, and what a great blessing! And do

all other men know all things or nothing?


Certainly, he replied; they cannot know some things, and not know others,

and be at the same time knowing and not knowing.


Then what is the inference? I said.


They all know all things, he replied, if they know one thing.


O heavens, Dionysodorus, I said, I see now that you are in earnest; hardly

have I got you to that point. And do you really and truly know all things,

including carpentering and leather-cutting?


Certainly, he said.


And do you know stitching?


Yes, by the gods, we do, and cobbling, too.


And do you know things such as the numbers of the stars and of the sand?


Certainly; did you think we should say No to that?


By Zeus, said Ctesippus, interrupting, I only wish that you would give me

some proof which would enable me to know whether you speak truly.


What proof shall I give you? he said.


Will you tell me how many teeth Euthydemus has? and Euthydemus shall tell

how many teeth you have.Will you not take our word that we know all things?


Certainly not, said Ctesippus: you must further tell us this one thing, and then

we shall know that you are speak the truth; if you tell us the number, and we

count them, and you are found to be right, we will believe the rest. They

fancied that Ctesippus was making game of them, and they refused, and they

would only say in answer to each of his questions, that they knew all things.

For at last Ctesippus began to throw off all restraint; no question in fact was

too bad for him; he would ask them if they knew the foulest things, and they,

like wild boars, came rushing on his blows, and fearlessly replied that they

did.  At  last,  Crito,  I  too  was  carried  away  by  my  incredulity,  and  asked

Euthydemus whether Dionysodorus could dance.


Certainly, he replied.


And can he vault among swords, and turn upon a wheel, at his age? has he

got to such a height of skill as that?


He can do anything, he said.


And did you always know this?


Always, he said.


When you were children, and at your birth?


They both said that they did.


This  we  could  not  believe.  And  Euthydemus  said:  You  are  incredulous,

Socrates.


Yes, I said, and I might well be incredulous, if I did not know you to be wise

men.


But if you will answer, he said, I will make you confess to similar marvels.


Well,  I  said,  there  is  nothing  that  I  should  like  better  than  to  be  self-

convicted of this, for if I am really a wise man, which I never knew before,and you will prove to me that I know and have always known all things,

nothing in life would be a greater gain to me.


Answer then, he said.


Ask, I said, and I will answer.


Do you know something, Socrates, or nothing?


Something, I said.


And do you know with what you know, or with something else?


With what I know; and I suppose that you mean with my soul?


Are you not ashamed, Socrates, of asking a question when you are asked

one?


Well, I said; but then what am I to do? for I will do whatever you bid; when I

do not know what you are asking, you tell me to answer nevertheless, and not

to ask again.


Why, you surely have some notion of my meaning, he said.


Yes, I replied.


Well, then, answer according to your notion of my meaning.


Yes, I said; but if the question which you ask in one sense is understood and

answered by me in another, will that please you--if I answer what is not to the

point?


That will please me very well; but will not please you equally well, as I

imagine.


I certainly will not answer unless I understand you, I said.


You will not answer, he said, according to your view of the meaning, becauseyou will be prating, and are an ancient.


Now I saw that he was getting angry with me for drawing distinctions, when

he  wanted  to  catch  me  in  his  springes  of  words.  And  I  remembered  that

Connus  was  always  angry  with  me  when  I  opposed  him,  and  then  he

neglected me, because he thought that I was stupid; and as I was intending to

go to Euthydemus as a pupil, I reflected that I had better let him have his

way, as he might think me a blockhead, and refuse to take me. So I said: You

are a far better dialectician than myself, Euthydemus, for I have never made a

profession of the art, and therefore do as you say; ask your questions once

more, and I will answer.


Answer  then,  he  said,  again,  whether  you  know  what  you  know  with

something, or with nothing.


Yes, I said; I know with my soul.


The man will answer more than the question; for I did not ask you, he said,

with what you know, but whether you know with something.


Again I replied, Through ignorance I have answered too much, but I hope

that you will forgive me. And now I will answer simply that I always know

what I know with something.


And is that something, he rejoined, always the same, or sometimes one thing,

and sometimes another thing?


Always, I replied, when I know, I know with this.


Will you not cease adding to your answers?


My fear is that this word 'always' may get us into trouble.


You, perhaps, but certainly not us. And now answer: Do you always know

with this?


Always; since I am required to withdraw the words 'when I know.'You always know with this, or, always knowing, do you know some things

with this, and some things with something else, or do you know all things

with this?


All that I know, I replied, I know with this.


There again, Socrates, he said, the addition is superfluous.


Well, then, I said, I will take away the words 'that I know.'


Nay, take nothing away; I desire no favours of you; but let me ask: Would

you be able to know all things, if you did not know all things?


Quite impossible.


And now, he said, you may add on whatever you like, for you confess that

you know all things.


I suppose that is true, I said, if my qualification implied in the words 'that I

know' is not allowed to stand; and so I do know all things.


And have you not admitted that you always know all things with that which

you know, whether you make the addition of 'when you know them' or not?

for you have acknowledged that you have always and at once known all

things, that is to say, when you were a child, and at your birth, and when you

were growing up, and before you were born, and before the heaven and earth

existed, you knew all things, if you always know them; and I swear that you

shall always continue to know all things, if I am of the mind to make you.


But I hope that you will be of that mind, reverend Euthydemus, I said, if you

are really speaking the truth, and yet I a little doubt your power to make good

your words unless you have the help of your brother Dionysodorus; then you

may do it. Tell me now, both of you, for although in the main I cannot doubt

that I really do know all things, when I am told so by men of your prodigious

wisdom--how can I say that I know such things, Euthydemus, as that the

good are unjust; come, do I know that or not?


Certainly, you know that.What do I know?


That the good are not unjust.


Quite true, I said; and that I have always known; but the question is, where

did I learn that the good are unjust?


Nowhere, said Dionysodorus.


Then, I said, I do not know this.


You are ruining the argument, said Euthydemus to Dionysodorus; he will be

proved not to know, and then after all he will be knowing and not knowing at

the same time.


Dionysodorus blushed.


I turned to the other, and said, What do you think, Euthydemus? Does not

your omniscient brother appear to you to have made a mistake?


What, replied Dionysodorus in a moment; am I the brother of Euthydemus?


Thereupon  I  said,  Please  not  to  interrupt,  my  good  friend,  or  prevent

Euthydemus from proving to me that I know the good to be unjust; such a

lesson you might at least allow me to learn.


You are running away, Socrates, said Dionysodorus, and refusing to answer.


No wonder, I said, for I am not a match for one of you, and a fortiori I must

run away from two. I am no Heracles; and even Heracles could not fight

against the Hydra, who was a she-Sophist, and had the wit to shoot up many

new heads when one of them was cut off; especially when he saw a second

monster of a sea-crab, who was also a Sophist, and appeared to have newly

arrived from a sea-voyage, bearing down upon him from the left, opening his

mouth  and  biting.  When  the  monster  was  growing  troublesome  he  called

Iolaus, his nephew, to his help, who ably succoured him; but if my Iolaus,

who is my brother Patrocles (the statuary), were to come, he would onlymake a bad business worse.


And now that you have delivered yourself of this strain, said Dionysodorus,

will you inform me whether Iolaus was the nephew of Heracles any more

than he is yours?


I suppose that I had best answer you, Dionysodorus, I said, for you will insist

on asking--that I pretty well know--out of envy, in order to prevent me from

learning the wisdom of Euthydemus.


Then answer me, he said.


Well then, I said, I can only reply that Iolaus was not my nephew at all, but

the nephew of Heracles; and his father was not my brother Patrocles, but

Iphicles, who has a name rather like his, and was the brother of Heracles.


And is Patrocles, he said, your brother?


Yes, I said, he is my half-brother, the son of my mother, but not of my father.


Then he is and is not your brother.


Not  by  the  same  father,  my  good  man,  I  said,  for  Chaeredemus  was  his

father, and mine was Sophroniscus.


And was Sophroniscus a father, and Chaeredemus also?


Yes, I said; the former was my father, and the latter his.


Then, he said, Chaeredemus is not a father.


He is not my father, I said.


But can a father be other than a father? or are you the same as a stone?


I certainly do not think that I am a stone, I said, though I am afraid that you

may prove me to be one.Are you not other than a stone?


I am.


And being other than a stone, you are not a stone; and being other than gold,

you are not gold?


Very true.


And so Chaeredemus, he said, being other than a father, is not a father?


I suppose that he is not a father, I replied.


For if, said Euthydemus, taking up the argument, Chaeredemus is a father,

then  Sophroniscus,  being  other  than  a  father,  is  not  a  father;  and  you,

Socrates, are without a father.


Ctesippus, here taking up the argument, said: And is not your father in the

same case, for he is other than my father?


Assuredly not, said Euthydemus.


Then he is the same?


He is the same.


I cannot say that I like the connection; but is he only my father, Euthydemus,

or is he the father of all other men?


Of all other men, he replied. Do you suppose the same person to be a father

and not a father?


Certainly, I did so imagine, said Ctesippus.


And do you suppose that gold is not gold, or that a man is not a man?


They  are  not  'in  pari  materia,'  Euthydemus,  said  Ctesippus,  and  you  had

better take care, for it is monstrous to suppose that your father is the father ofall.


But he is, he replied.


What, of men only, said Ctesippus, or of horses and of all other animals?


Of all, he said.


And your mother, too, is the mother of all?


Yes, our mother too.


Yes; and your mother has a progeny of sea-urchins then?


Yes; and yours, he said.


And gudgeons and puppies and pigs are your brothers?


And yours too.


And your papa is a dog?


And so is yours, he said.


If you will answer my questions, said Dionysodorus, I will soon extract the

same admissions from you, Ctesippus. You say that you have a dog.


Yes, a villain of a one, said Ctesippus.


And he has puppies?


Yes, and they are very like himself.


And the dog is the father of them?


Yes,  he  said,  I  certainly  saw  him  and  the  mother  of  the  puppies  come

together.And is he not yours?


To be sure he is.


Then he is a father, and he is yours; ergo, he is your father, and the puppies

are your brothers.


Let  me  ask  you  one  little  question  more,  said  Dionysodorus,  quickly

interposing, in order that Ctesippus might not get in his word: You beat this

dog?


Ctesippus said, laughing, Indeed I do; and I only wish that I could beat you

instead of him.


Then you beat your father, he said.


I should have far more reason to beat yours, said Ctesippus; what could he

have been thinking of when he begat such wise sons? much good has this

father of you and your brethren the puppies got out of this wisdom of yours.


But neither he nor you, Ctesippus, have any need of much good.


And have you no need, Euthydemus? he said.


Neither I nor any other man; for tell me now, Ctesippus, if you think it good

or evil for a man who is sick to drink medicine when he wants it; or to go to

war armed rather than unarmed.


Good, I say. And yet I know that I am going to be caught in one of your

charming puzzles.


That, he replied, you will discover, if you answer; since you admit medicine

to be good for a man to drink, when wanted, must it not be good for him to

drink  as  much  as  possible;  when  he  takes  his  medicine,  a  cartload  of

hellebore will not be too much for him?


Ctesippus said: Quite so, Euthydemus, that is to say, if he who drinks is as

big as the statue of Delphi.And seeing that in war to have arms is a good thing, he ought to have as

many spears and shields as possible?


Very true, said Ctesippus; and do you think, Euthydemus, that he ought to

have one shield only, and one spear?


I do.


And would you arm Geryon and Briareus in that way? Considering that you

and your companion fight in armour, I thought that you would have known

better...Here Euthydemus held his peace, but Dionysodorus returned to the

previous answer of Ctesippus and said:--


Do you not think that the possession of gold is a good thing?


Yes, said Ctesippus, and the more the better.


And to have money everywhere and always is a good?


Certainly, a great good, he said.


And you admit gold to be a good?


Certainly, he replied.


And ought not a man then to have gold everywhere and always, and as much

as possible in himself, and may he not be deemed the happiest of men who

has three talents of gold in his belly, and a talent in his pate, and a stater of

gold in either eye?


Yes, Euthydemus, said Ctesippus; and the Scythians reckon those who have

gold in their own skulls to be the happiest and bravest of men (that is only

another instance of your manner of speaking about the dog and father), and

what is still more extraordinary, they drink out of their own skulls gilt, and

see the inside of them, and hold their own head in their hands.


And do the Scythians and others see that which has the quality of vision, or

that which has not? said Euthydemus.That which has the quality of vision clearly.


And you also see that which has the quality of vision? he said. (Note: the

ambiguity of (Greek), 'things visible and able to see,' (Greek), 'the speaking

of  the  silent,'  the  silent  denoting  either  the  speaker  or  the  subject  of  the

speech,  cannot  be  perfectly  rendered  in  English.  Compare  Aristot.  Soph.

Elenchi (Poste's translation):--


'Of ambiguous propositions the following are instances:--


'I hope that you the enemy may slay.


'Whom  one  knows,  he  knows.  Either  the  person  knowing  or  the  person

known is here affirmed to know.


'What one sees, that one sees: one sees a pillar: ergo, that one pillar sees.


'What you ARE holding, that you are: you are holding a stone: ergo, a stone

you are.


'Is a speaking of the silent possible? "The silent" denotes either the speaker

are the subject of speech.


'There are three kinds of ambiguity of term or proposition. The first is when

there is an equal linguistic propriety in several interpretations; the second

when one is improper but customary; the third when the ambiguity arises in

the  combination  of  elements  that  are  in  themselves  unambiguous,  as  in

"knowing  letters."  "Knowing"  and  "letters"  are  perhaps  separately

unambiguous, but in combination may imply either that the letters are known,

or  that  they  themselves  have  knowledge.  Such  are  the  modes  in  which

propositions and terms may be ambiguous.'


Yes, I do.


Then do you see our garments?


Yes.Then our garments have the quality of vision.


They can see to any extent, said Ctesippus.


What can they see?


Nothing; but you, my sweet man, may perhaps imagine that they do not see;

and certainly, Euthydemus, you do seem to me to have been caught napping

when you were not asleep, and that if it be possible to speak and say nothing-

-you are doing so.


And may there not be a silence of the speaker? said Dionysodorus.


Impossible, said Ctesippus.


Or a speaking of the silent?


That is still more impossible, he said.


But when you speak of stones, wood, iron bars, do you not speak of the

silent?


Not when I pass a smithy; for then the iron bars make a tremendous noise and

outcry if they are touched: so that here your wisdom is strangely mistaken;

please, however, to tell me how you can be silent when speaking (I thought

that Ctesippus was put upon his mettle because Cleinias was present).


When you are silent, said Euthydemus, is there not a silence of all things?


Yes, he said.


But if speaking things are included in all things, then the speaking are silent.


What, said Ctesippus; then all things are not silent?


Certainly not, said Euthydemus.


Then, my good friend, do they all speak?Yes; those which speak.


Nay, said Ctesippus, but the question which I ask is whether all things are

silent or speak?


Neither and both, said Dionysodorus, quickly interposing; I am sure that you

will be 'non-plussed' at that answer.


Here Ctesippus, as his manner was, burst into a roar of laughter; he said, That

brother of yours, Euthydemus, has got into a dilemma; all is over with him.

This  delighted  Cleinias,  whose  laughter  made  Ctesippus  ten  times  as

uproarious; but I cannot help thinking that the rogue must have picked up this

answer from them; for there has been no wisdom like theirs in our time. Why

do you laugh, Cleinias, I said, at such solemn and beautiful things?


Why, Socrates, said Dionysodorus, did you ever see a beautiful thing?


Yes, Dionysodorus, I replied, I have seen many.


Were they other than the beautiful, or the same as the beautiful?


Now  I  was  in  a  great  quandary  at  having  to  answer  this  question,  and  I

thought that I was rightly served for having opened my mouth at all: I said

however, They are not the same as absolute beauty, but they have beauty

present with each of them.


And  are  you  an  ox  because  an  ox  is  present  with  you,  or  are  you

Dionysodorus, because Dionysodorus is present with you?


God forbid, I replied.


But how, he said, by reason of one thing being present with another, will one

thing be another?


Is that your difficulty? I said. For I was beginning to imitate their skill, on

which my heart was set.


Of course, he replied, I and all the world are in a difficulty about the non-existent.


What do you mean, Dionysodorus? I said. Is not the honourable honourable

and the base base?


That, he said, is as I please.


And do you please?


Yes, he said.


And you will admit that the same is the same, and the other other; for surely

the other is not the same; I should imagine that even a child will hardly deny

the  other  to  be  other.  But  I  think,  Dionysodorus,  that  you  must  have

intentionally missed the last question; for in general you and your brother

seem to me to be good workmen in your own department, and to do the

dialectician's business excellently well.


What, said he, is the business of a good workman? tell me, in the first place,

whose business is hammering?


The smith's.


And whose the making of pots?


The potter's.


And who has to kill and skin and mince and boil and roast?


The cook, I said.


And if a man does his business he does rightly?


Certainly.


And the business of the cook is to cut up and skin; you have admitted that?


Yes, I have admitted that, but you must not be too hard upon me.Then if some one were to kill, mince, boil, roast the cook, he would do his

business, and if he were to hammer the smith, and make a pot of the potter,

he would do their business.


Poseidon, I said, this is the crown of wisdom; can I ever hope to have such

wisdom of my own?


And  would  you  be  able,  Socrates,  to  recognize  this  wisdom  when  it  has

become your own?


Certainly, I said, if you will allow me.


What, he said, do you think that you know what is your own?


Yes, I do, subject to your correction; for you are the bottom, and Euthydemus

is the top, of all my wisdom.


Is not that which you would deem your own, he said, that which you have in

your own power, and which you are able to use as you would desire, for

example, an ox or a sheep--would you not think that which you could sell and

give and sacrifice to any god whom you pleased, to be your own, and that

which you could not give or sell or sacrifice you would think not to be in

your own power?


Yes, I said (for I was certain that something good would come out of the

questions, which I was impatient to hear); yes, such things, and such things

only are mine.


Yes, he said, and you would mean by animals living beings?


Yes, I said.


You agree then, that those animals only are yours with which you have the

power to do all these things which I was just naming?


I agree.


Then, after a pause, in which he seemed to be lost in the contemplation ofsomething great, he said: Tell me, Socrates, have you an ancestral Zeus?

Here, anticipating the final move, like a person caught in a net, who gives a

desperate twist that he may get away, I said: No, Dionysodorus, I have not.


What a miserable man you must be then, he said; you are not an Athenian at

all if you have no ancestral gods or temples, or any other mark of gentility.


Nay, Dionysodorus, I said, do not be rough; good words, if you please; in the

way of religion I have altars and temples, domestic and ancestral, and all that

other Athenians have.


And have not other Athenians, he said, an ancestral Zeus?


That name, I said, is not to be found among the Ionians, whether colonists or

citizens of Athens; an ancestral Apollo there is, who is the father of Ion, and a

family Zeus, and a Zeus guardian of the phratry, and an Athene guardian of

the phratry. But the name of ancestral Zeus is unknown to us.


No matter, said Dionysodorus, for you admit that you have Apollo, Zeus, and

Athene.


Certainly, I said.


And they are your gods, he said.


Yes, I said, my lords and ancestors.


At any rate they are yours, he said, did you not admit that?


I did, I said; what is going to happen to me?


And are not these gods animals? for you admit that all things which have life

are animals; and have not these gods life?


They have life, I said.


Then are they not animals?They are animals, I said.


And you admitted that of animals those are yours which you could give away

or sell or offer in sacrifice, as you pleased?


I did admit that, Euthydemus, and I have no way of escape.


Well then, said he, if you admit that Zeus and the other gods are yours, can

you sell them or give them away or do what you will with them, as you

would with other animals?


At this I was quite struck dumb, Crito, and lay prostrate. Ctesippus came to

the rescue.


Bravo, Heracles, brave words, said he.


Bravo Heracles, or is Heracles a Bravo? said Dionysodorus.


Poseidon, said Ctesippus, what awful distinctions. I will have no more of

them; the pair are invincible.


Then, my dear Crito, there was universal applause of the speakers and their

words, and what with laughing and clapping of hands and rejoicings the two

men were quite overpowered; for hitherto their partisans only had cheered at

each successive hit, but now the whole company shouted with delight until

the columns of the Lyceum returned the sound, seeming to sympathize in

their joy. To such a pitch was I affected myself, that I made a speech, in

which I acknowledged that I had never seen the like of their wisdom; I was

their  devoted  servant,  and  fell  to  praising  and  admiring  of  them.  What

marvellous  dexterity  of  wit,  I  said,  enabled  you  to  acquire  this  great

perfection in such a short time? There is much, indeed, to admire in your

words,  Euthydemus  and  Dionysodorus,  but  there  is  nothing  that  I  admire

more than your magnanimous disregard of any opinion--whether of the many,

or of the grave and reverend seigniors--you regard only those who are like

yourselves. And I do verily believe that there are few who are like you, and

who  would  approve  of  such  arguments;  the  majority  of  mankind  are  so

ignorant of their value, that they would be more ashamed of employing themin  the  refutation  of  others  than  of  being  refuted  by  them.  I  must  further

express  my  approval  of  your  kind  and  public-spirited  denial  of  all

differences, whether of good and evil, white or black, or any other; the result

of which is that, as you say, every mouth is sewn up, not excepting your own,

which  graciously  follows  the  example  of  others;  and  thus  all  ground  of

offence is taken away. But what appears to me to be more than all is, that this

art and invention of yours has been so admirably contrived by you, that in a

very  short  time  it  can  be  imparted  to  any  one.  I  observed  that  Ctesippus

learned to imitate you in no time. Now this quickness of attainment is an

excellent thing; but at the same time I would advise you not to have any more

public  entertainments;  there  is  a  danger  that  men  may  undervalue  an  art

which they have so easy an opportunity of acquiring; the exhibition would be

best of all, if the discussion were confined to your two selves; but if there

must  be  an  audience,  let  him  only  be  present  who  is  willing  to  pay  a

handsome fee;--you should be careful of this;--and if you are wise, you will

also bid your disciples discourse with no man but you and themselves. For

only what is rare is valuable; and 'water,' which, as Pindar says, is the 'best of

all things,' is also the cheapest. And now I have only to request that you will

receive Cleinias and me among your pupils.


Such  was  the  discussion,  Crito;  and  after  a  few  more  words  had  passed

between us we went away. I hope that you will come to them with me, since

they say that they are able to teach any one who will give them money; no

age or want of capacity is an impediment. And I must repeat one thing which

they said, for your especial benefit,--that the learning of their art did not at all

interfere with the business of money-making.


CRITO: Truly, Socrates, though I am curious and ready to learn, yet I fear

that I am not like-minded with Euthydemus, but one of the other sort, who, as

you were saying, would rather be refuted by such arguments than use them in

refutation  of  others.  And  though  I  may  appear  ridiculous  in  venturing  to

advise you, I think that you may as well hear what was said to me by a man

of very considerable pretensions--he was a professor of legal oratory-- who

came away from you while I was walking up and down. 'Crito,' said he to me,

'are you giving no attention to these wise men?' 'No, indeed,' I said to him; 'I

could not get within hearing of them--there was such a crowd.' 'You would

have heard something worth hearing if you had.' 'What was that?' I said. 'Youwould have heard the greatest masters of the art of rhetoric discoursing.' 'And

what did you think of them?' I said. 'What did I think of them?' he said:--

'theirs was the sort of discourse which anybody might hear from men who

were playing the fool, and making much ado about nothing.' That was the

expression which he used. 'Surely,' I said, 'philosophy is a charming thing.'

'Charming!' he said; 'what simplicity! philosophy is nought; and I think that if

you  had  been  present  you  would  have  been  ashamed  of  your  friend--his

conduct was so very strange in placing himself at the mercy of men who care

not what they say, and fasten upon every word. And these, as I was telling

you, are supposed to be the most eminent professors of their time. But the

truth is, Crito, that the study itself and the men themselves are utterly mean

and ridiculous.' Now censure of the pursuit, Socrates, whether coming from

him or from others, appears to me to be undeserved; but as to the impropriety

of holding a public discussion with such men, there, I confess that, in my

opinion, he was in the right.


SOCRATES: O Crito, they are marvellous men; but what was I going to say?

First of all let me know;--What manner of man was he who came up to you

and  censured  philosophy;  was  he  an  orator  who  himself  practises  in  the

courts, or an instructor of orators, who makes the speeches with which they

do battle?


CRITO: He was certainly not an orator, and I doubt whether he had ever been

into court; but they say that he knows the business, and is a clever man, and

composes wonderful speeches.


SOCRATES: Now I understand, Crito; he is one of an amphibious class,

whom  I  was  on  the  point  of  mentioning--one  of  those  whom  Prodicus

describes as on the border-ground between philosophers and statesmen--they

think that they are the wisest of all men, and that they are generally esteemed

the wisest; nothing but the rivalry of the philosophers stands in their way; and

they are of the opinion that if they can prove the philosophers to be good for

nothing, no one will dispute their title to the palm of wisdom, for that they are

themselves  really  the  wisest,  although  they  are  apt  to  be  mauled  by

Euthydemus and his friends, when they get hold of them in conversation.

This opinion which they entertain of their own wisdom is very natural; for

they have a certain amount of philosophy, and a certain amount of politicalwisdom; there is reason in what they say, for they argue that they have just

enough of both, and so they keep out of the way of all risks and conflicts and

reap the fruits of their wisdom.


CRITO: What do you say of them, Socrates? There is certainly something

specious in that notion of theirs.


SOCRATES: Yes, Crito, there is more speciousness than truth; they cannot

be made to understand the nature of intermediates. For all persons or things,

which are intermediate between two other things, and participate in both of

them--if one of these two things is good and the other evil, are better than the

one and worse than the other; but if they are in a mean between two good

things which do not tend to the same end, they fall short of either of their

component elements in the attainment of their ends. Only in the case when

the two component elements which do not tend to the same end are evil is the

participant better than either. Now, if philosophy and political action are both

good, but tend to different ends, and they participate in both, and are in a

mean between them, then they are talking nonsense, for they are worse than

either; or, if the one be good and the other evil, they are better than the one

and worse than the other; only on the supposition that they are both evil could

there be any truth in what they say. I do not think that they will admit that

their two pursuits are either wholly or partly evil; but the truth is, that these

philosopher- politicians who aim at both fall short of both in the attainment of

their respective ends, and are really third, although they would like to stand

first. There is no need, however, to be angry at this ambition of theirs-- which

may be forgiven; for every man ought to be loved who says and manfully

pursues and works out anything which is at all like wisdom: at the same time

we shall do well to see them as they really are.


CRITO: I have often told you, Socrates, that I am in a constant difficulty

about my two sons. What am I to do with them? There is no hurry about the

younger one, who is only a child; but the other, Critobulus, is getting on, and

needs some one who will improve him. I cannot help thinking, when I hear

you talk, that there is a sort of madness in many of our anxieties about our

children:--in the first place, about marrying a wife of good family to be the

mother of them, and then about heaping up money for them-- and yet taking

no care about their education. But then again, when I contemplate any ofthose who pretend to educate others, I am amazed. To me, if I am to confess

the truth, they all seem to be such outrageous beings: so that I do not know

how I can advise the youth to study philosophy.


SOCRATES:  Dear  Crito,  do  you  not  know  that  in  every  profession  the

inferior sort are numerous and good for nothing, and the good are few and

beyond all price: for example, are not gymnastic and rhetoric and money-

making and the art of the general, noble arts?


CRITO: Certainly they are, in my judgment.


SOCRATES: Well, and do you not see that in each of these arts the many are

ridiculous performers?


CRITO: Yes, indeed, that is very true.


SOCRATES: And will you on this account shun all these pursuits yourself

and refuse to allow them to your son?


CRITO: That would not be reasonable, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Do you then be reasonable, Crito, and do not mind whether the

teachers of philosophy are good or bad, but think only of philosophy herself.

Try and examine her well and truly, and if she be evil seek to turn away all

men from her, and not your sons only; but if she be what I believe that she is,

then follow her and serve her, you and your house, as the saying is, and be of

good cheer.


THE END                        Euthyphro Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    Beginning of EuthyphroIntroduction to Plato's Euthyphro


  In the Meno, Anytus had parted from Socrates with the significant words:

'That in any city, and particularly in the city of Athens, it is easier to do men

harm  than  to  do  them  good;'  and  Socrates  was  anticipating  another

opportunity of talking with him. In the Euthyphro, Socrates is awaiting his

trial for impiety. But before the trial begins, Plato would like to put the world

on their trial, and convince them of ignorance in that very matter touching

which  Socrates  is  accused.  An  incident  which  may  perhaps  really  have

occurred  in  the  family  of  Euthyphro,  a  learned  Athenian  diviner  and

soothsayer, furnishes the occasion of the discussion.


  This Euthyphro and Socrates are represented as meeting in the porch of

the  King  Archon.  (Compare  Theaet.)  Both  have  legal  business  in  hand.

Socrates is defendant in a suit for impiety which Meletus has brought against

him (it is remarked by the way that he is not a likely man himself to have

brought a suit against another); and Euthyphro too is plaintiff in an action for

murder,  which  he  has  brought  against  his  own  father.  The  latter  has

originated  in  the  following  manner:--A  poor  dependant  of  the  family  had

slain one of their domestic slaves in Naxos. The guilty person was bound and

thrown into a ditch by the command of Euthyphro's father, who sent to the

interpreters  of  religion  at  Athens  to  ask  what  should  be  done  with  him.

Before  the  messenger  came  back  the  criminal  had  died  from  hunger  and

exposure.


  This is the origin of the charge of murder which Euthyphro brings against

his father. Socrates is confident that before he could have undertaken the

responsibility of such a prosecution, he must have been perfectly informed of

the nature of piety and impiety; and as he is going to be tried for impiety

himself, he thinks that he cannot do better than learn of Euthyphro (who will

be  admitted  by  everybody,  including  the  judges,  to  be  an  unimpeachable

authority) what piety is, and what is impiety. What then is piety?


    Euthyphro, who, in the abundance of his knowledge, is very willing to

undertake  all  the  responsibility,  replies:  That  piety  is  doing  as  I  do,

prosecuting your father (if he is guilty) on a charge of murder; doing as thegods do--as Zeus did to Cronos, and Cronos to Uranus.


  Socrates has a dislike to these tales of mythology, and he fancies that this

dislike of his may be the reason why he is charged with impiety. 'Are they

really true?' 'Yes, they are;' and Euthyphro will gladly tell Socrates some

more of them. But Socrates would like first of all to have a more satisfactory

answer to the question, 'What is piety?' 'Doing as I do, charging a father with

murder,' may be a single instance of piety, but can hardly be regarded as a

general definition.


    Euthyphro replies, that 'Piety is what is dear to the gods, and impiety is

what is not dear to them.' But may there not be differences of opinion, as

among men, so also among the gods? Especially, about good and evil, which

have no fixed rule; and these are precisely the sort of differences which give

rise to quarrels. And therefore what may be dear to one god may not be dear

to another, and the same action may be both pious and impious; e.g. your

chastisement  of  your  father,  Euthyphro,  may  be  dear  or  pleasing  to  Zeus

(who  inflicted  a  similar  chastisement  on  his  own  father),  but  not  equally

pleasing to Cronos or Uranus (who suffered at the hands of their sons).


    Euthyphro answers that there is no difference of opinion, either among

gods  or  men,  as  to  the  propriety  of  punishing  a  murderer.  Yes,  rejoins

Socrates, when they know him to be a murderer; but you are assuming the

point at issue. If all the circumstances of the case are considered, are you able

to show that your father was guilty of murder, or that all the gods are agreed

in approving of our prosecution of him? And must you not allow that what is

hated  by  one  god  may  be  liked  by  another?  Waiving  this  last,  however,

Socrates proposes to amend the definition, and say that 'what all the gods

love is pious, and what they all hate is impious.' To this Euthyphro agrees.


  Socrates proceeds to analyze the new form of the definition. He shows

that in other cases the act precedes the state; e.g. the act of being carried,

loved, etc. precedes the state of being carried, loved, etc., and therefore that

which is dear to the gods is dear to the gods because it is first loved of them,

not loved of them because it is dear to them. But the pious or holy is loved by

the gods because it is pious or holy, which is equivalent to saying, that it is

loved  by  them  because  it  is  dear  to  them.  Here  then  appears  to  be  acontradiction,--Euthyphro has been giving an attribute or accident of piety

only,  and  not  the  essence.  Euthyphro  acknowledges  himself  that  his

explanations seem to walk away or go round in a circle, like the moving

figures of Daedalus, the ancestor of Socrates, who has communicated his art

to his descendants.


  Socrates,  who  is  desirous  of  stimulating  the  indolent  intelligence  of

Euthyphro, raises the question in another manner: 'Is all the pious just?' 'Yes.'

'Is all the just pious?' 'No.' 'Then what part of justice is piety?' Euthyphro

replies that piety is that part of justice which 'attends' to the gods, as there is

another part of justice which 'attends' to men. But what is the meaning of

'attending' to the gods? The word 'attending,' when applied to dogs, horses,

and men, implies that in some way they are made better. But how do pious or

holy acts make the gods any better? Euthyphro explains that he means by

pious acts, acts of service or ministration. Yes; but the ministrations of the

husbandman, the physician, and the builder have an end. To what end do we

serve the gods, and what do we help them to accomplish? Euthyphro replies,

that all these difficult questions cannot be resolved in a short time; and he

would rather say simply that piety is knowing how to please the gods in word

and deed, by prayers and sacrifices. In other words, says Socrates, piety is 'a

science of asking and giving'--asking what we want and giving what they

want;  in  short,  a  mode  of  doing  business  between  gods  and  men.  But

although they are the givers of all good, how can we give them any good in

return?  'Nay,  but  we  give  them  honour.'  Then  we  give  them  not  what  is

beneficial, but what is pleasing or dear to them; and this is the point which

has been already disproved.


  Socrates, although weary of the subterfuges and evasions of Euthyphro,

remains unshaken in his conviction that he must know the nature of piety, or

he would never have prosecuted his old father. He is still hoping that he will

condescend to instruct him. But Euthyphro is in a hurry and cannot stay. And

Socrates' last hope of knowing the nature of piety before he is prosecuted for

impiety has disappeared. As in the Euthydemus the irony is carried on to the

end.


  The Euthyphro is manifestly designed to contrast the real nature of piety

and impiety with the popular conceptions of them. But when the popularconceptions  of  them  have  been  overthrown,  Socrates  does  not  offer  any

definition of his own: as in the Laches and Lysis, he prepares the way for an

answer to the question which he has raised; but true to his own character,

refuses to answer himself.


    Euthyphro is a religionist, and is elsewhere spoken of, if he be the same

person, as the author of a philosophy of names, by whose 'prancing steeds'

Socrates  in  the  Cratylus  is  carried  away.  He  has  the  conceit  and  self-

confidence of a Sophist; no doubt that he is right in prosecuting his father has

ever  entered  into  his  mind.  Like  a  Sophist  too,  he  is  incapable  either  of

framing a general definition or of following the course of an argument. His

wrong-headedness,  one-sidedness,  narrowness,  positiveness,  are

characteristic of his priestly office. His failure to apprehend an argument may

be compared to a similar defect which is observable in the rhapsode Ion. But

he is not a bad man, and he is friendly to Socrates, whose familiar sign he

recognizes with interest. Though unable to follow him he is very willing to be

led by him, and eagerly catches at any suggestion which saves him from the

trouble of thinking. Moreover he is the enemy of Meletus, who, as he says, is

availing himself of the popular dislike to innovations in religion in order to

injure  Socrates;  at  the  same  time  he  is  amusingly  confident  that  he  has

weapons in his own armoury which would be more than a match for him. He

is quite sincere in his prosecution of his father, who has accidentally been

guilty of homicide, and is not wholly free from blame. To purge away the

crime appears to him in the light of a duty, whoever may be the criminal.


  Thus  begins  the  contrast  between  the  religion  of  the  letter,  or  of  the

narrow  and  unenlightened  conscience,  and  the  higher  notion  of  religion

which Socrates vainly endeavours to elicit from him. 'Piety is doing as I do' is

the idea of religion which first occurs to him, and to many others who do not

say what they think with equal frankness. For men are not easily persuaded

that any other religion is better than their own; or that other nations, e.g. the

Greeks in the time of Socrates, were equally serious in their religious beliefs

and difficulties. The chief difference between us and them is, that they were

slowly learning what we are in process of forgetting. Greek mythology hardly

admitted of the distinction between accidental homicide and murder: that the

pollution  of  blood  was  the  same  in  both  cases  is  also  the  feeling  of  the

Athenian diviner. He had not as yet learned the lesson, which philosophy wasteaching, that Homer and Hesiod, if not banished from the state, or whipped

out of the assembly, as Heracleitus more rudely proposed, at any rate were

not to be appealed to as authorities in religion; and he is ready to defend his

conduct by the examples of the gods. These are the very tales which Socrates

cannot abide; and his dislike of them, as he suspects, has branded him with

the reputation of impiety. Here is one answer to the question, 'Why Socrates

was put to death,' suggested by the way. Another is conveyed in the words,

'The Athenians do not care about any man being thought wise until he begins

to make other men wise; and then for some reason or other they are angry:'

which may be said to be the rule of popular toleration in most other countries,

and not at Athens only. In the course of the argument Socrates remarks that

the controversial nature of morals and religion arises out of the difficulty of

verifying  them.  There  is  no  measure  or  standard  to  which  they  can  be

referred.


  The  next  definition,  'Piety  is  that  which  is  loved  of  the  gods,'  is

shipwrecked  on  a  refined  distinction  between  the  state  and  the  act,

corresponding  respectively  to  the  adjective  (philon)  and  the  participle

(philoumenon), or rather perhaps to the participle and the verb (philoumenon

and  phileitai).  The  act  is  prior  to  the  state  (as  in  Aristotle  the  energeia

precedes the dunamis); and the state of being loved is preceded by the act of

being loved. But piety or holiness is preceded by the act of being pious, not

by the act of being loved; and therefore piety and the state of being loved are

different. Through such subtleties of dialectic Socrates is working his way

into a deeper region of thought and feeling. He means to say that the words

'loved of the gods' express an attribute only, and not the essence of piety.


  Then follows the third and last definition, 'Piety is a part of justice.' Thus

far Socrates has proceeded in placing religion on a moral foundation. He is

seeking to realize the harmony of religion and morality, which the great poets

Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Pindar had unconsciously anticipated, and which

is the universal want of all men. To this the soothsayer adds the ceremonial

element, 'attending upon the gods.' When further interrogated by Socrates as

to the nature of this 'attention to the gods,' he replies, that piety is an affair of

business, a science of giving and asking, and the like. Socrates points out the

anthropomorphism of these notions, (compare Symp.; Republic; Politicus.)

But when we expect him to go on and show that the true service of the godsis the service of the spirit and the co-operation with them in all things true

and good, he stops short; this was a lesson which the soothsayer could not

have been made to understand, and which every one must learn for himself.


  There seem to be altogether three aims or interests in this little Dialogue:

(1) the dialectical development of the idea of piety; (2) the antithesis of true

and false religion, which is carried to a certain extent only; (3) the defence of

Socrates.


  The subtle connection with the Apology and the Crito; the holding back

of the conclusion, as in the Charmides, Lysis, Laches, Protagoras, and other

Dialogues; the deep insight into the religious world; the dramatic power and

play of the two characters; the inimitable irony, are reasons for believing that

the Euthyphro is a genuine Platonic writing. The spirit in which the popular

representations of mythology are denounced recalls Republic II. The virtue of

piety has been already mentioned as one of five in the Protagoras, but is not

reckoned  among  the  four  cardinal  virtues  of  Republic  IV.  The  figure  of

Daedalus has occurred in the Meno; that of Proteus in the Euthydemus and

Io. The kingly science has already appeared in the Euthydemus, and will

reappear in the Republic and Statesman. But neither from these nor any other

indications  of  similarity  or  difference,  and  still  less  from  arguments

respecting the suitableness of this little work to aid Socrates at the time of his

trial or the reverse, can any evidence of the date be obtained.Euthyphro


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettPersons of the Dialogue: SOCRATES, EUTHYPHRO


Scene: The Porch of the King Archon.


EUTHYPHRO: Why have you left the Lyceum, Socrates? and what are you

doing in the Porch of the King Archon? Surely you cannot be concerned in a

suit before the King, like myself?


SOCRATES: Not in a suit, Euthyphro; impeachment is the word which the

Athenians use.


EUTHYPHRO: What! I suppose that some one has been prosecuting you, for

I cannot believe that you are the prosecutor of another.


SOCRATES: Certainly not.


EUTHYPHRO: Then some one else has been prosecuting you?


SOCRATES: Yes.


EUTHYPHRO: And who is he?


SOCRATES: A young man who is little known, Euthyphro; and I hardly

know him: his name is Meletus, and he is of the deme of Pitthis. Perhaps you

may remember his appearance; he has a beak, and long straight hair, and a

beard which is ill grown.


EUTHYPHRO: No, I do not remember him, Socrates. But what is the charge

which he brings against you?


SOCRATES: What is the charge? Well, a very serious charge, which shows a

good deal of character in the young man, and for which he is certainly not to

be despised. He says he knows how the youth are corrupted and who are their

corruptors. I fancy that he must be a wise man, and seeing that I am the

reverse of a wise man, he has found me out, and is going to accuse me of

corrupting his young friends. And of this our mother the state is to be the

judge. Of all our political men he is the only one who seems to me to begin inthe  right  way,  with  the  cultivation  of  virtue  in  youth;  like  a  good

husbandman, he makes the young shoots his first care, and clears away us

who are the destroyers of them. This is only the first step; he will afterwards

attend to the elder branches; and if he goes on as he has begun, he will be a

very great public benefactor.


EUTHYPHRO:  I  hope  that  he  may;  but  I  rather  fear,  Socrates,  that  the

opposite will turn out to be the truth. My opinion is that in attacking you he is

simply aiming a blow at the foundation of the state. But in what way does he

say that you corrupt the young?


SOCRATES: He brings a wonderful accusation against me, which at first

hearing excites surprise: he says that I am a poet or maker of gods, and that I

invent new gods and deny the existence of old ones; this is the ground of his

indictment.


EUTHYPHRO:  I  understand,  Socrates;  he  means  to  attack  you  about  the

familiar sign which occasionally, as you say, comes to you. He thinks that

you are a neologian, and he is going to have you up before the court for this.

He knows that such a charge is readily received by the world, as I myself

know too well; for when I speak in the assembly about divine things, and

foretell the future to them, they laugh at me and think me a madman. Yet

every word that I say is true. But they are jealous of us all; and we must be

brave and go at them.


SOCRATES:  Their  laughter,  friend  Euthyphro,  is  not  a  matter  of  much

consequence. For a man may be thought wise; but the Athenians, I suspect,

do  not  much  trouble  themselves  about  him  until  he  begins  to  impart  his

wisdom to others, and then for some reason or other, perhaps, as you say,

from jealousy, they are angry.


EUTHYPHRO: I am never likely to try their temper in this way.


SOCRATES: I dare say not, for you are reserved in your behaviour, and

seldom impart your wisdom. But I have a benevolent habit of pouring out

myself to everybody, and would even pay for a listener, and I am afraid that

the Athenians may think me too talkative. Now if, as I was saying, theywould only laugh at me, as you say that they laugh at you, the time might

pass gaily enough in the court; but perhaps they may be in earnest, and then

what the end will be you soothsayers only can predict.


EUTHYPHRO: I dare say that the affair will end in nothing, Socrates, and

that you will win your cause; and I think that I shall win my own.


SOCRATES: And what is your suit, Euthyphro? are you the pursuer or the

defendant?


EUTHYPHRO: I am the pursuer.


SOCRATES: Of whom?


EUTHYPHRO: You will think me mad when I tell you.


SOCRATES: Why, has the fugitive wings?


EUTHYPHRO: Nay, he is not very volatile at his time of life.


SOCRATES: Who is he?


EUTHYPHRO: My father.


SOCRATES: Your father! my good man?


EUTHYPHRO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And of what is he accused?


EUTHYPHRO: Of murder, Socrates.


SOCRATES: By the powers, Euthyphro! how little does the common herd

know of the nature of right and truth. A man must be an extraordinary man,

and have made great strides in wisdom, before he could have seen his way to

bring such an action.


EUTHYPHRO: Indeed, Socrates, he must.SOCRATES: I suppose that the man whom your father murdered was one of

your relatives--clearly he was; for if he had been a stranger you would never

have thought of prosecuting him.


EUTHYPHRO: I am amused, Socrates, at your making a distinction between

one who is a relation and one who is not a relation; for surely the pollution is

the same in either case, if you knowingly associate with the murderer when

you ought to clear yourself and him by proceeding against him. The real

question is whether the murdered man has been justly slain. If justly, then

your duty is to let the matter alone; but if unjustly, then even if the murderer

lives under the same roof with you and eats at the same table, proceed against

him. Now the man who is dead was a poor dependant of mine who worked

for us as a field labourer on our farm in Naxos, and one day in a fit of

drunken passion he got into a quarrel with one of our domestic servants and

slew him. My father bound him hand and foot and threw him into a ditch, and

then  sent  to  Athens  to  ask  of  a  diviner  what  he  should  do  with  him.

Meanwhile he never attended to him and took no care about him, for he

regarded him as a murderer; and thought that no great harm would be done

even if he did die. Now this was just what happened. For such was the effect

of cold and hunger and chains upon him, that before the messenger returned

from the diviner, he was dead. And my father and family are angry with me

for taking the part of the murderer and prosecuting my father. They say that

he did not kill him, and that if he did, the dead man was but a murderer, and I

ought not to take any notice, for that a son is impious who prosecutes a

father. Which shows, Socrates, how little they know what the gods think

about piety and impiety.


SOCRATES: Good heavens, Euthyphro! and is your knowledge of religion

and  of  things  pious  and  impious  so  very  exact,  that,  supposing  the

circumstances to be as you state them, you are not afraid lest you too may be

doing an impious thing in bringing an action against your father?


EUTHYPHRO: The best of Euthyphro, and that which distinguishes him,

Socrates, from other men, is his exact knowledge of all such matters. What

should I be good for without it?


SOCRATES:  Rare  friend!  I  think  that  I  cannot  do  better  than  be  yourdisciple. Then before the trial with Meletus comes on I shall challenge him,

and say that I have always had a great interest in religious questions, and

now, as he charges me with rash imaginations and innovations in religion, I

have become your disciple. You, Meletus, as I shall say to him, acknowledge

Euthyphro to be a great theologian, and sound in his opinions; and if you

approve of him you ought to approve of me, and not have me into court; but

if you disapprove, you should begin by indicting him who is my teacher, and

who will be the ruin, not of the young, but of the old; that is to say, of myself

whom he instructs, and of his old father whom he admonishes and chastises.

And if Meletus refuses to listen to me, but will go on, and will not shift the

indictment from me to you, I cannot do better than repeat this challenge in the

court.


EUTHYPHRO: Yes, indeed, Socrates; and if he attempts to indict me I am

mistaken if I do not find a flaw in him; the court shall have a great deal more

to say to him than to me.


SOCRATES: And I, my dear friend, knowing this, am desirous of becoming

your disciple. For I observe that no one appears to notice you--not even this

Meletus; but his sharp eyes have found me out at once, and he has indicted

me for impiety. And therefore, I adjure you to tell me the nature of piety and

impiety, which you said that you knew so well, and of murder, and of other

offences against the gods. What are they? Is not piety in every action always

the same? and impiety, again--is it not always the opposite of piety, and also

the same with itself, having, as impiety, one notion which includes whatever

is impious?


EUTHYPHRO: To be sure, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And what is piety, and what is impiety?


EUTHYPHRO: Piety is doing as I am doing; that is to say, prosecuting any

one who is guilty of murder, sacrilege, or of any similar crime--whether he be

your father or mother, or whoever he may be--that makes no difference; and

not to prosecute them is impiety. And please to consider, Socrates, what a

notable proof I will give you of the truth of my words, a proof which I have

already given to others:--of the principle, I mean, that the impious, whoeverhe may be, ought not to go unpunished. For do not men regard Zeus as the

best and most righteous of the gods?--and yet they admit that he bound his

father (Cronos) because he wickedly devoured his sons, and that he too had

punished his own father (Uranus) for a similar reason, in a nameless manner.

And  yet  when  I  proceed  against  my  father,  they  are  angry  with  me.  So

inconsistent are they in their way of talking when the gods are concerned, and

when I am concerned.


SOCRATES: May not this be the reason, Euthyphro, why I am charged with

impiety--that I cannot away with these stories about the gods? and therefore I

suppose that people think me wrong. But, as you who are well informed

about them approve of them, I cannot do better than assent to your superior

wisdom. What else can I say, confessing as I do, that I know nothing about

them? Tell me, for the love of Zeus, whether you really believe that they are

true.


EUTHYPHRO: Yes, Socrates; and things more wonderful still, of which the

world is in ignorance.


SOCRATES:  And  do  you  really  believe  that  the  gods  fought  with  one

another, and had dire quarrels, battles, and the like, as the poets say, and as

you may see represented in the works of great artists? The temples are full of

them; and notably the robe of Athene, which is carried up to the Acropolis at

the great Panathenaea, is embroidered with them. Are all these tales of the

gods true, Euthyphro?


EUTHYPHRO: Yes, Socrates; and, as I was saying, I can tell you, if you

would like to hear them, many other things about the gods which would quite

amaze you.


SOCRATES: I dare say; and you shall tell me them at some other time when

I have leisure. But just at present I would rather hear from you a more precise

answer, which you have not as yet given, my friend, to the question, What is

'piety'? When asked, you only replied, Doing as you do, charging your father

with murder.


EUTHYPHRO: And what I said was true, Socrates.SOCRATES: No doubt, Euthyphro; but you would admit that there are many

other pious acts?


EUTHYPHRO: There are.


SOCRATES:  Remember  that  I  did  not  ask  you  to  give  me  two  or  three

examples of piety, but to explain the general idea which makes all pious

things to be pious. Do you not recollect that there was one idea which made

the impious impious, and the pious pious?


EUTHYPHRO: I remember.


SOCRATES: Tell me what is the nature of this idea, and then I shall have a

standard to which I may look, and by which I may measure actions, whether

yours or those of any one else, and then I shall be able to say that such and

such an action is pious, such another impious.


EUTHYPHRO: I will tell you, if you like.


SOCRATES: I should very much like.


EUTHYPHRO: Piety, then, is that which is dear to the gods, and impiety is

that which is not dear to them.


SOCRATES: Very good, Euthyphro; you have now given me the sort of

answer which I wanted. But whether what you say is true or not I cannot as

yet tell, although I make no doubt that you will prove the truth of your words.


EUTHYPHRO: Of course.


SOCRATES: Come, then, and let us examine what we are saying. That thing

or person which is dear to the gods is pious, and that thing or person which is

hateful to the gods is impious, these two being the extreme opposites of one

another. Was not that said?


EUTHYPHRO: It was.


SOCRATES: And well said?EUTHYPHRO: Yes, Socrates, I thought so; it was certainly said.


SOCRATES:  And  further,  Euthyphro,  the  gods  were  admitted  to  have

enmities and hatreds and differences?


EUTHYPHRO: Yes, that was also said.


SOCRATES: And what sort of difference creates enmity and anger? Suppose

for  example  that  you  and  I,  my  good  friend,  differ  about  a  number;  do

differences of this sort make us enemies and set us at variance with one

another? Do we not go at once to arithmetic, and put an end to them by a

sum?


EUTHYPHRO: True.


SOCRATES: Or suppose that we differ about magnitudes, do we not quickly

end the differences by measuring?


EUTHYPHRO: Very true.


SOCRATES: And we end a controversy about heavy and light by resorting to

a weighing machine?


EUTHYPHRO: To be sure.


SOCRATES: But what differences are there which cannot be thus decided,

and which therefore make us angry and set us at enmity with one another? I

dare say the answer does not occur to you at the moment, and therefore I will

suggest that these enmities arise when the matters of difference are the just

and unjust, good and evil, honourable and dishonourable. Are not these the

points  about  which  men  differ,  and  about  which  when  we  are  unable

satisfactorily to decide our differences, you and I and all of us quarrel, when

we do quarrel? (Compare Alcib.)


EUTHYPHRO: Yes, Socrates, the nature of the differences about which we

quarrel is such as you describe.


SOCRATES:  And  the  quarrels  of  the  gods,  noble  Euthyphro,  when  theyoccur, are of a like nature?


EUTHYPHRO: Certainly they are.


SOCRATES: They have differences of opinion, as you say, about good and

evil, just and unjust, honourable and dishonourable: there would have been

no quarrels among them, if there had been no such differences--would there

now?


EUTHYPHRO: You are quite right.


SOCRATES: Does not every man love that which he deems noble and just

and good, and hate the opposite of them?


EUTHYPHRO: Very true.


SOCRATES: But, as you say, people regard the same things, some as just

and others as unjust,--about these they dispute; and so there arise wars and

fightings among them.


EUTHYPHRO: Very true.


SOCRATES: Then the same things are hated by the gods and loved by the

gods, and are both hateful and dear to them?


EUTHYPHRO: True.


SOCRATES: And upon this view the same things, Euthyphro, will be pious

and also impious?


EUTHYPHRO: So I should suppose.


SOCRATES:  Then,  my  friend,  I  remark  with  surprise  that  you  have  not

answered the question which I asked. For I certainly did not ask you to tell

me what action is both pious and impious: but now it would seem that what is

loved by the gods is also hated by them. And therefore, Euthyphro, in thus

chastising your father you may very likely be doing what is agreeable to Zeus

but disagreeable to Cronos or Uranus, and what is acceptable to Hephaestusbut unacceptable to Here, and there may be other gods who have similar

differences of opinion.


EUTHYPHRO: But I believe, Socrates, that all the gods would be agreed as

to the propriety of punishing a murderer: there would be no difference of

opinion about that.


SOCRATES: Well, but speaking of men, Euthyphro, did you ever hear any

one arguing that a murderer or any sort of evil-doer ought to be let off?


EUTHYPHRO: I should rather say that these are the questions which they are

always arguing, especially in courts of law: they commit all sorts of crimes,

and there is nothing which they will not do or say in their own defence.


SOCRATES: But do they admit their guilt, Euthyphro, and yet say that they

ought not to be punished?


EUTHYPHRO: No; they do not.


SOCRATES: Then there are some things which they do not venture to say

and do: for they do not venture to argue that the guilty are to be unpunished,

but they deny their guilt, do they not?


EUTHYPHRO: Yes.


SOCRATES:  Then  they  do  not  argue  that  the  evil-doer  should  not  be

punished, but they argue about the fact of who the evil-doer is, and what he

did and when?


EUTHYPHRO: True.


SOCRATES: And the gods are in the same case, if as you assert they quarrel

about just and unjust, and some of them say while others deny that injustice is

done among them. For surely neither God nor man will ever venture to say

that the doer of injustice is not to be punished?


EUTHYPHRO: That is true, Socrates, in the main.SOCRATES: But they join issue about the particulars--gods and men alike;

and, if they dispute at all, they dispute about some act which is called in

question, and which by some is affirmed to be just, by others to be unjust. Is

not that true?


EUTHYPHRO: Quite true.


SOCRATES: Well then, my dear friend Euthyphro, do tell me, for my better

instruction and information, what proof have you that in the opinion of all the

gods a servant who is guilty of murder, and is put in chains by the master of

the dead man, and dies because he is put in chains before he who bound him

can learn from the interpreters of the gods what he ought to do with him, dies

unjustly; and that on behalf of such an one a son ought to proceed against his

father and accuse him of murder. How would you show that all the gods

absolutely agree in approving of his act? Prove to me that they do, and I will

applaud your wisdom as long as I live.


EUTHYPHRO: It will be a difficult task; but I could make the matter very

clear indeed to you.


SOCRATES:  I  understand;  you  mean  to  say  that  I  am  not  so  quick  of

apprehension as the judges: for to them you will be sure to prove that the act

is unjust, and hateful to the gods.


EUTHYPHRO: Yes indeed, Socrates; at least if they will listen to me.


SOCRATES: But they will be sure to listen if they find that you are a good

speaker.  There  was  a  notion  that  came  into  my  mind  while  you  were

speaking; I said to myself: 'Well, and what if Euthyphro does prove to me

that all the gods regarded the death of the serf as unjust, how do I know

anything more of the nature of piety and impiety? for granting that this action

may be hateful to the gods, still piety and impiety are not adequately defined

by these distinctions, for that which is hateful to the gods has been shown to

be also pleasing and dear to them.' And therefore, Euthyphro, I do not ask

you to prove this; I will suppose, if you like, that all the gods condemn and

abominate such an action. But I will amend the definition so far as to say that

what all the gods hate is impious, and what they love pious or holy; and whatsome  of  them  love  and  others  hate  is  both  or  neither.  Shall  this  be  our

definition of piety and impiety?


EUTHYPHRO: Why not, Socrates?


SOCRATES: Why not! certainly, as far as I am concerned, Euthyphro, there

is no reason why not. But whether this admission will greatly assist you in the

task of instructing me as you promised, is a matter for you to consider.


EUTHYPHRO: Yes, I should say that what all the gods love is pious and

holy, and the opposite which they all hate, impious.


SOCRATES: Ought we to enquire into the truth of this, Euthyphro, or simply

to accept the mere statement on our own authority and that of others? What

do you say?


EUTHYPHRO:  We  should  enquire;  and  I  believe  that  the  statement  will

stand the test of enquiry.


SOCRATES: We shall know better, my good friend, in a little while. The

point which I should first wish to understand is whether the pious or holy is

beloved by the gods because it is holy, or holy because it is beloved of the

gods.


EUTHYPHRO: I do not understand your meaning, Socrates.


SOCRATES: I will endeavour to explain: we, speak of carrying and we speak

of being carried, of leading and being led, seeing and being seen. You know

that in all such cases there is a difference, and you know also in what the

difference lies?


EUTHYPHRO: I think that I understand.


SOCRATES:  And  is  not  that  which  is  beloved  distinct  from  that  which

loves?


EUTHYPHRO: Certainly.SOCRATES: Well; and now tell me, is that which is carried in this state of

carrying because it is carried, or for some other reason?


EUTHYPHRO: No; that is the reason.


SOCRATES: And the same is true of what is led and of what is seen?


EUTHYPHRO: True.


SOCRATES: And a thing is not seen because it is visible, but conversely,

visible because it is seen; nor is a thing led because it is in the state of being

led, or carried because it is in the state of being carried, but the converse of

this. And now I think, Euthyphro, that my meaning will be intelligible; and

my meaning is, that any state of action or passion implies previous action or

passion. It does not become because it is becoming, but it is in a state of

becoming because it becomes; neither does it suffer because it is in a state of

suffering, but it is in a state of suffering because it suffers. Do you not agree?


EUTHYPHRO: Yes.


SOCRATES: Is not that which is loved in some state either of becoming or

suffering?


EUTHYPHRO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And the same holds as in the previous instances; the state of

being loved follows the act of being loved, and not the act the state.


EUTHYPHRO: Certainly.


SOCRATES:  And  what  do  you  say  of  piety,  Euthyphro:  is  not  piety,

according to your definition, loved by all the gods?


EUTHYPHRO: Yes.


SOCRATES: Because it is pious or holy, or for some other reason?


EUTHYPHRO: No, that is the reason.SOCRATES: It is loved because it is holy, not holy because it is loved?


EUTHYPHRO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And that which is dear to the gods is loved by them, and is in a

state to be loved of them because it is loved of them?


EUTHYPHRO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Then that which is dear to the gods, Euthyphro, is not holy, nor

is that which is holy loved of God, as you affirm; but they are two different

things.


EUTHYPHRO: How do you mean, Socrates?


SOCRATES: I mean to say that the holy has been acknowledged by us to be

loved of God because it is holy, not to be holy because it is loved.


EUTHYPHRO: Yes.


SOCRATES: But that which is dear to the gods is dear to them because it is

loved by them, not loved by them because it is dear to them.


EUTHYPHRO: True.


SOCRATES: But, friend Euthyphro, if that which is holy is the same with

that which is dear to God, and is loved because it is holy, then that which is

dear to God would have been loved as being dear to God; but if that which is

dear to God is dear to him because loved by him, then that which is holy

would  have  been  holy  because  loved  by  him.  But  now  you  see  that  the

reverse is the case, and that they are quite different from one another. For one

(theophiles) is of a kind to be loved cause it is loved, and the other (osion) is

loved because it is of a kind to be loved. Thus you appear to me, Euthyphro,

when I ask you what is the essence of holiness, to offer an attribute only, and

not the essence--the attribute of being loved by all the gods. But you still

refuse to explain to me the nature of holiness. And therefore, if you please, I

will ask you not to hide your treasure, but to tell me once more what holiness

or piety really is, whether dear to the gods or not (for that is a matter aboutwhich we will not quarrel); and what is impiety?


EUTHYPHRO: I really do not know, Socrates, how to express what I mean.

For somehow or other our arguments, on whatever ground we rest them,

seem to turn round and walk away from us.


SOCRATES: Your words, Euthyphro, are like the handiwork of my ancestor

Daedalus; and if I were the sayer or propounder of them, you might say that

my arguments walk away and will not remain fixed where they are placed

because I am a descendant of his. But now, since these notions are your own,

you must find some other gibe, for they certainly, as you yourself allow,

show an inclination to be on the move.


EUTHYPHRO: Nay, Socrates, I shall still say that you are the Daedalus who

sets arguments in motion; not I, certainly, but you make them move or go

round, for they would never have stirred, as far as I am concerned.


SOCRATES: Then I must be a greater than Daedalus: for whereas he only

made his own inventions to move, I move those of other people as well. And

the beauty of it is, that I would rather not. For I would give the wisdom of

Daedalus, and the wealth of Tantalus, to be able to detain them and keep

them fixed. But enough of this. As I perceive that you are lazy, I will myself

endeavour to show you how you might instruct me in the nature of piety; and

I hope that you will not grudge your labour. Tell me, then--Is not that which

is pious necessarily just?


EUTHYPHRO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And is, then, all which is just pious? or, is that which is pious

all just, but that which is just, only in part and not all, pious?


EUTHYPHRO: I do not understand you, Socrates.


SOCRATES: And yet I know that you are as much wiser than I am, as you

are younger. But, as I was saying, revered friend, the abundance of your

wisdom  makes  you  lazy.  Please  to  exert  yourself,  for  there  is  no  real

difficulty in understanding me. What I mean I may explain by an illustrationof what I do not mean. The poet (Stasinus) sings--


'Of Zeus, the author and creator of all these things, You will not tell: for

where there is fear there is also reverence.'


Now I disagree with this poet. Shall I tell you in what respect?


EUTHYPHRO: By all means.


SOCRATES: I should not say that where there is fear there is also reverence;

for I am sure that many persons fear poverty and disease, and the like evils,

but I do not perceive that they reverence the objects of their fear.


EUTHYPHRO: Very true.


SOCRATES: But where reverence is, there is fear; for he who has a feeling

of reverence and shame about the commission of any action, fears and is

afraid of an ill reputation.


EUTHYPHRO: No doubt.


SOCRATES: Then we are wrong in saying that where there is fear there is

also reverence; and we should say, where there is reverence there is also fear.

But there is not always reverence where there is fear; for fear is a more

extended notion, and reverence is a part of fear, just as the odd is a part of

number, and number is a more extended notion than the odd. I suppose that

you follow me now?


EUTHYPHRO: Quite well.


SOCRATES: That was the sort of question which I meant to raise when I

asked whether the just is always the pious, or the pious always the just; and

whether there may not be justice where there is not piety; for justice is the

more extended notion of which piety is only a part. Do you dissent?


EUTHYPHRO: No, I think that you are quite right.


SOCRATES: Then, if piety is a part of justice, I suppose that we shouldenquire what part? If you had pursued the enquiry in the previous cases; for

instance, if you had asked me what is an even number, and what part of

number the even is, I should have had no difficulty in replying, a number

which represents a figure having two equal sides. Do you not agree?


EUTHYPHRO: Yes, I quite agree.


SOCRATES: In like manner, I want you to tell me what part of justice is

piety or holiness, that I may be able to tell Meletus not to do me injustice, or

indict me for impiety, as I am now adequately instructed by you in the nature

of piety or holiness, and their opposites.


EUTHYPHRO: Piety or holiness, Socrates, appears to me to be that part of

justice which attends to the gods, as there is the other part of justice which

attends to men.


SOCRATES: That is good, Euthyphro; yet still there is a little point about

which  I  should  like  to  have  further  information,  What  is  the  meaning  of

'attention'? For attention can hardly be used in the same sense when applied

to the gods as when applied to other things. For instance, horses are said to

require attention, and not every person is able to attend to them, but only a

person skilled in horsemanship. Is it not so?


EUTHYPHRO: Certainly.


SOCRATES:  I  should  suppose  that  the  art  of  horsemanship  is  the  art  of

attending to horses?


EUTHYPHRO: Yes.


SOCRATES:  Nor  is  every  one  qualified  to  attend  to  dogs,  but  only  the

huntsman?


EUTHYPHRO: True.


SOCRATES: And I should also conceive that the art of the huntsman is the

art of attending to dogs?EUTHYPHRO: Yes.


SOCRATES: As the art of the oxherd is the art of attending to oxen?


EUTHYPHRO: Very true.


SOCRATES: In like manner holiness or piety is the art of attending to the

gods?--that would be your meaning, Euthyphro?


EUTHYPHRO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And is not attention always designed for the good or benefit of

that  to  which  the  attention  is  given?  As  in  the  case  of  horses,  you  may

observe that when attended to by the horseman's art they are benefited and

improved, are they not?


EUTHYPHRO: True.


SOCRATES: As the dogs are benefited by the huntsman's art, and the oxen

by the art of the oxherd, and all other things are tended or attended for their

good and not for their hurt?


EUTHYPHRO: Certainly, not for their hurt.


SOCRATES: But for their good?


EUTHYPHRO: Of course.


SOCRATES: And does piety or holiness, which has been defined to be the

art of attending to the gods, benefit or improve them? Would you say that

when you do a holy act you make any of the gods better?


EUTHYPHRO: No, no; that was certainly not what I meant.


SOCRATES: And I, Euthyphro, never supposed that you did. I asked you the

question about the nature of the attention, because I thought that you did not.


EUTHYPHRO: You do me justice, Socrates; that is not the sort of attentionwhich I mean.


SOCRATES: Good: but I must still ask what is this attention to the gods

which is called piety?


EUTHYPHRO: It is such, Socrates, as servants show to their masters.


SOCRATES: I understand--a sort of ministration to the gods.


EUTHYPHRO: Exactly.


SOCRATES: Medicine is also a sort of ministration or service, having in

view the attainment of some object--would you not say of health?


EUTHYPHRO: I should.


SOCRATES: Again, there is an art which ministers to the ship-builder with a

view to the attainment of some result?


EUTHYPHRO: Yes, Socrates, with a view to the building of a ship.


SOCRATES: As there is an art which ministers to the house-builder with a

view to the building of a house?


EUTHYPHRO: Yes.


SOCRATES: And now tell me, my good friend, about the art which ministers

to the gods: what work does that help to accomplish? For you must surely

know if, as you say, you are of all men living the one who is best instructed

in religion.


EUTHYPHRO: And I speak the truth, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Tell me then, oh tell me--what is that fair work which the gods

do by the help of our ministrations?


EUTHYPHRO: Many and fair, Socrates, are the works which they do.SOCRATES: Why, my friend, and so are those of a general. But the chief of

them is easily told. Would you not say that victory in war is the chief of

them?


EUTHYPHRO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Many and fair, too, are the works of the husbandman, if I am

not mistaken; but his chief work is the production of food from the earth?


EUTHYPHRO: Exactly.


SOCRATES: And of the many and fair things done by the gods, which is the

chief or principal one?


EUTHYPHRO:  I  have  told  you  already,  Socrates,  that  to  learn  all  these

things  accurately  will  be  very  tiresome.  Let  me  simply  say  that  piety  or

holiness is learning how to please the gods in word and deed, by prayers and

sacrifices.  Such  piety  is  the  salvation  of  families  and  states,  just  as  the

impious, which is unpleasing to the gods, is their ruin and destruction.


SOCRATES: I think that you could have answered in much fewer words the

chief question which I asked, Euthyphro, if you had chosen. But I see plainly

that you are not disposed to instruct me--clearly not: else why, when we

reached the point, did you turn aside? Had you only answered me I should

have truly learned of you by this time the nature of piety. Now, as the asker

of a question is necessarily dependent on the answerer, whither he leads I

must follow; and can only ask again, what is the pious, and what is piety? Do

you mean that they are a sort of science of praying and sacrificing?


EUTHYPHRO: Yes, I do.


SOCRATES: And sacrificing is giving to the gods, and prayer is asking of

the gods?


EUTHYPHRO: Yes, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Upon this view, then, piety is a science of asking and giving?EUTHYPHRO: You understand me capitally, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Yes, my friend; the reason is that I am a votary of your science,

and give my mind to it, and therefore nothing which you say will be thrown

away upon me. Please then to tell me, what is the nature of this service to the

gods? Do you mean that we prefer requests and give gifts to them?


EUTHYPHRO: Yes, I do.


SOCRATES: Is not the right way of asking to ask of them what we want?


EUTHYPHRO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And the right way of giving is to give to them in return what

they want of us. There would be no meaning in an art which gives to any one

that which he does not want.


EUTHYPHRO: Very true, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Then piety, Euthyphro, is an art which gods and men have of

doing business with one another?


EUTHYPHRO: That is an expression which you may use, if you like.


SOCRATES: But I have no particular liking for anything but the truth. I

wish, however, that you would tell me what benefit accrues to the gods from

our gifts. There is no doubt about what they give to us; for there is no good

thing which they do not give; but how we can give any good thing to them in

return is far from being equally clear. If they give everything and we give

nothing, that must be an affair of business in which we have very greatly the

advantage of them.


EUTHYPHRO: And do you imagine, Socrates, that any benefit accrues to the

gods from our gifts?


SOCRATES: But if not, Euthyphro, what is the meaning of gifts which are

conferred by us upon the gods?EUTHYPHRO: What else, but tributes of honour; and, as I was just now

saying, what pleases them?


SOCRATES: Piety, then, is pleasing to the gods, but not beneficial or dear to

them?


EUTHYPHRO: I should say that nothing could be dearer.


SOCRATES: Then once more the assertion is repeated that piety is dear to

the gods?


EUTHYPHRO: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And when you say this, can you wonder at your words not

standing firm, but walking away? Will you accuse me of being the Daedalus

who makes them walk away, not perceiving that there is another and far

greater artist than Daedalus who makes them go round in a circle, and he is

yourself; for the argument, as you will perceive, comes round to the same

point. Were we not saying that the holy or pious was not the same with that

which is loved of the gods? Have you forgotten?


EUTHYPHRO: I quite remember.


SOCRATES: And are you not saying that what is loved of the gods is holy;

and is not this the same as what is dear to them--do you see?


EUTHYPHRO: True.


SOCRATES: Then either we were wrong in our former assertion; or, if we

were right then, we are wrong now.


EUTHYPHRO: One of the two must be true.


SOCRATES: Then we must begin again and ask, What is piety? That is an

enquiry which I shall never be weary of pursuing as far as in me lies; and I

entreat you not to scorn me, but to apply your mind to the utmost, and tell me

the truth. For, if any man knows, you are he; and therefore I must detain you,

like Proteus, until you tell. If you had not certainly known the nature of pietyand impiety, I am confident that you would never, on behalf of a serf, have

charged your aged father with murder. You would not have run such a risk of

doing wrong in the sight of the gods, and you would have had too much

respect  for  the  opinions  of  men.  I  am  sure,  therefore,  that  you  know  the

nature of piety and impiety. Speak out then, my dear Euthyphro, and do not

hide your knowledge.


EUTHYPHRO: Another time, Socrates; for I am in a hurry, and must go

now.


SOCRATES: Alas! my companion, and will you leave me in despair? I was

hoping that you would instruct me in the nature of piety and impiety; and

then I might have cleared myself of Meletus and his indictment. I would have

told him that I had been enlightened by Euthyphro, and had given up rash

innovations and speculations, in which I indulged only through ignorance,

and that now I am about to lead a better life.


THE END                          Gorgias Table of Contents



    Introduction by Benjamin Jowett

    Beginning of GorgiasIntroduction to Plato's Gorgias


  In  several  of  the  dialogues  of  Plato,  doubts  have  arisen  among  his

interpreters as to which of the various subjects discussed in them is the main

thesis. The speakers have the freedom of conversation; no severe rules of art

restrict  them,  and  sometimes  we  are  inclined  to  think,  with  one  of  the

dramatis personae in the Theaetetus, that the digressions have the greater

interest. Yet in the most irregular of the dialogues there is also a certain

natural  growth  or  unity;  the  beginning  is  not  forgotten  at  the  end,  and

numerous  allusions  and  references  are  interspersed,  which  form  the  loose

connecting links of the whole. We must not neglect this unity, but neither

must we attempt to confine the Platonic dialogue on the Procrustean bed of a

single idea. (Compare Introduction to the Phaedrus.)


  Two tendencies seem to have beset the interpreters of Plato in this matter.

First, they have endeavoured to hang the dialogues upon one another by the

slightest  threads;  and  have  thus  been  led  to  opposite  and  contradictory

assertions respecting their order and sequence. The mantle of Schleiermacher

has descended upon his successors, who have applied his method with the

most various results. The value and use of the method has been hardly, if at

all, examined either by him or them. Secondly, they have extended almost

indefinitely the scope of each separate dialogue; in this way they think that

they have escaped all difficulties, not seeing that what they have gained in

generality they have lost in truth and distinctness. Metaphysical conceptions

easily pass into one another; and the simpler notions of antiquity, which we

can only realize by an effort, imperceptibly blend with the more familiar

theories of modern philosophers. An eye for proportion is needed (his own art

of measuring) in the study of Plato, as well as of other great artists. We may

hardly admit that the moral antithesis of good and pleasure, or the intellectual

antithesis of knowledge and opinion, being and appearance, are never far off

in a Platonic discussion. But because they are in the background, we should

not bring them into the foreground, or expect to discern them equally in all

the dialogues.


  There may be some advantage in drawing out a little the main outlines ofthe building; but the use of this is limited, and may be easily exaggerated. We

may give Plato too much system, and alter the natural form and connection of

his thoughts. Under the idea that his dialogues are finished works of art, we

may find a reason for everything, and lose the highest characteristic of art,

which is simplicity. Most great works receive a new light from a new and

original mind. But whether these new lights are true or only suggestive, will

depend on their agreement with the spirit of Plato, and the amount of direct

evidence which can be urged in support of them. When a theory is running

away with us, criticism does a friendly office in counselling moderation, and

recalling us to the indications of the text.


  Like  the  Phaedrus,  the  Gorgias  has  puzzled  students  of  Plato  by  the

appearance  of  two  or  more  subjects.  Under  the  cover  of  rhetoric  higher

themes are introduced; the argument expands into a general view of the good

and  evil  of  man.  After  making  an  ineffectual  attempt  to  obtain  a  sound

definition  of  his  art  from  Gorgias,  Socrates  assumes  the  existence  of  a

universal art of flattery or simulation having several branches:--this is the

genus of which rhetoric is only one, and not the highest species. To flattery is

opposed the true and noble art of life which he who possesses seeks always to

impart to others, and which at last triumphs, if not here, at any rate in another

world. These two aspects of life and knowledge appear to be the two leading

ideas of the dialogue. The true and the false in individuals and states, in the

treatment of the soul as well as of the body, are conceived under the forms of

true and false art. In the development of this opposition there arise various

other questions, such as the two famous paradoxes of Socrates (paradoxes as

they are to the world in general, ideals as they may be more worthily called):

(1) that to do is worse than to suffer evil; and (2) that when a man has done

evil he had better be punished than unpunished; to which may be added (3) a

third Socratic paradox or ideal, that bad men do what they think best, but not

what they desire, for the desire of all is towards the good. That pleasure is to

be distinguished from good is proved by the simultaneousness of pleasure

and pain, and by the possibility of the bad having in certain cases pleasures as

great as those of the good, or even greater. Not merely rhetoricians, but poets,

musicians, and other artists, the whole tribe of statesmen, past as well as

present,  are  included  in  the  class  of  flatterers.  The  true  and  false  finally

appear before the judgment-seat of the gods below.  The  dialogue  naturally  falls  into  three  divisions,  to  which  the  three

characters of Gorgias, Polus, and Callicles respectively correspond; and the

form  and  manner  change  with  the  stages  of  the  argument.  Socrates  is

deferential  towards  Gorgias,  playful  and  yet  cutting  in  dealing  with  the

youthful Polus, ironical and sarcastic in his encounter with Callicles. In the

first  division  the  question  is  asked--What  is  rhetoric?  To  this  there  is  no

answer given, for Gorgias is soon made to contradict himself by Socrates,

and the argument is transferred to the hands of his disciple Polus, who rushes

to the defence of his master. The answer has at last to be given by Socrates

himself,  but  before  he  can  even  explain  his  meaning  to  Polus,  he  must

enlighten him upon the great subject of shams or flatteries. When Polus finds

his favourite art reduced to the level of cookery, he replies that at any rate

rhetoricians, like despots, have great power. Socrates denies that they have

any  real  power,  and  hence  arise  the  three  paradoxes  already  mentioned.

Although they are strange to him, Polus is at last convinced of their truth; at

least, they seem to him to follow legitimately from the premises. Thus the

second act of the dialogue closes. Then Callicles appears on the scene, at first

maintaining that pleasure is good, and that might is right, and that law is

nothing but the combination of the many weak against the few strong. When

he is confuted he withdraws from the argument, and leaves Socrates to arrive

at the conclusion by himself. The conclusion is that there are two kinds of

statesmanship, a higher and a lower--that which makes the people better, and

that which only flatters them, and he exhorts Callicles to choose the higher.

The dialogue terminates with a mythus of a final judgment, in which there

will be no more flattery or disguise, and no further use for the teaching of

rhetoric.


  The  characters  of  the  three  interlocutors  also  correspond  to  the  parts

which are assigned to them. Gorgias is the great rhetorician, now advanced in

years, who goes from city to city displaying his talents, and is celebrated

throughout Greece. Like all the Sophists in the dialogues of Plato, he is vain

and boastful, yet he has also a certain dignity, and is treated by Socrates with

considerable respect. But he is no match for him in dialectics. Although he

has been teaching rhetoric all his life, he is still incapable of defining his own

art. When his ideas begin to clear up, he is unwilling to admit that rhetoric

can  be  wholly  separated  from  justice  and  injustice,  and  this  lingering

sentiment of morality, or regard for public opinion, enables Socrates to detecthim in a contradiction. Like Protagoras, he is described as of a generous

nature; he expresses his approbation of Socrates' manner of approaching a

question; he is quite 'one of Socrates' sort, ready to be refuted as well as to

refute,' and very eager that Callicles and Socrates should have the game out.

He knows by experience that rhetoric exercises great influence over other

men, but he is unable to explain the puzzle how rhetoric can teach everything

and know nothing.


  Polus is an impetuous youth, a runaway 'colt,' as Socrates describes him,

who wanted originally to have taken the place of Gorgias under the pretext

that the old man was tired, and now avails himself of the earliest opportunity

to enter the lists. He is said to be the author of a work on rhetoric, and is

again mentioned in the Phaedrus, as the inventor of balanced or double forms

of speech (compare Gorg.; Symp.). At first he is violent and ill-mannered,

and is angry at seeing his master overthrown. But in the judicious hands of

Socrates he is soon restored to good-humour, and compelled to assent to the

required  conclusion.  Like  Gorgias,  he  is  overthrown  because  he

compromises; he is unwilling to say that to do is fairer or more honourable

than to suffer injustice. Though he is fascinated by the power of rhetoric, and

dazzled by the splendour of success, he is not insensible to higher arguments.

Plato may have felt that there would be an incongruity in a youth maintaining

the cause of injustice against the world. He has never heard the other side of

the  question,  and  he  listens  to  the  paradoxes,  as  they  appear  to  him,  of

Socrates with evident astonishment. He can hardly understand the meaning of

Archelaus  being  miserable,  or  of  rhetoric  being  only  useful  in  self-

accusation. When the argument with him has fairly run out,


    Callicles, in whose house they are assembled, is introduced on the stage:

he is with difficulty convinced that Socrates is in earnest; for if these things

are true, then, as he says with real emotion, the foundations of society are

upside down. In him another type of character is represented; he is neither

sophist nor philosopher, but man of the world, and an accomplished Athenian

gentleman.  He  might  be  described  in  modern  language  as  a  cynic  or

materialist, a lover of power and also of pleasure, and unscrupulous in his

means  of  attaining  both.  There  is  no  desire  on  his  part  to  offer  any

compromise in the interests of morality; nor is any concession made by him.

Like Thrasymachus in the Republic, though he is not of the same weak andvulgar class, he consistently maintains that might is right. His great motive of

action is political ambition; in this he is characteristically Greek. Like Anytus

in the Meno, he is the enemy of the Sophists; but favours the new art of

rhetoric, which he regards as an excellent weapon of attack and defence. He

is a despiser of mankind as he is of philosophy, and sees in the laws of the

state only a violation of the order of nature, which intended that the stronger

should govern the weaker (compare Republic). Like other men of the world

who are of a speculative turn of mind, he generalizes the bad side of human

nature, and has easily brought down his principles to his practice. Philosophy

and poetry alike supply him with distinctions suited to his view of human

life.  He  has  a  good  will  to  Socrates,  whose  talents  he  evidently  admires,

while he censures the puerile use which he makes of them. He expresses a

keen  intellectual  interest  in  the  argument.  Like  Anytus,  again,  he  has  a

sympathy with other men of the world; the Athenian statesmen of a former

generation,  who  showed  no  weakness  and  made  no  mistakes,  such  as

Miltiades,  Themistocles,  Pericles,  are  his  favourites.  His  ideal  of  human

character  is  a  man  of  great  passions  and  great  powers,  which  he  has

developed to the utmost, and which he uses in his own enjoyment and in the

government of others. Had Critias been the name instead of Callicles, about

whom we know nothing from other sources, the opinions of the man would

have seemed to reflect the history of his life.


  And now the combat deepens. In Callicles, far more than in any sophist or

rhetorician,  is  concentrated  the  spirit  of  evil  against  which  Socrates  is

contending, the spirit of the world, the spirit of the many contending against

the  one  wise  man,  of  which  the  Sophists,  as  he  describes  them  in  the

Republic, are the imitators rather than the authors, being themselves carried

away by the great tide of public opinion. Socrates approaches his antagonist

warily from a distance, with a sort of irony which touches with a light hand

both his personal vices (probably in allusion to some scandal of the day) and

his servility to the populace. At the same time, he is in most profound earnest,

as Chaerephon remarks. Callicles soon loses his temper, but the more he is

irritated, the more provoking and matter of fact does Socrates become. A

repartee of his which appears to have been really made to the 'omniscient'

Hippias, according to the testimony of Xenophon (Mem.), is introduced. He

is called by Callicles a popular declaimer, and certainly shows that he has the

power, in the words of Gorgias, of being 'as long as he pleases,' or 'as short ashe pleases' (compare Protag.). Callicles exhibits great ability in defending

himself  and  attacking  Socrates,  whom  he  accuses  of  trifling  and  word-

splitting;  he  is  scandalized  that  the  legitimate  consequences  of  his  own

argument should be stated in plain terms; after the manner of men of the

world, he wishes to preserve the decencies of life. But he cannot consistently

maintain the bad sense of words; and getting confused between the abstract

notions of better, superior, stronger, he is easily turned round by Socrates,

and only induced to continue the argument by the authority of Gorgias. Once,

when Socrates is describing the manner in which the ambitious citizen has to

identify  himself  with  the  people,  he  partially  recognizes  the  truth  of  his

words.


  The Socrates of the Gorgias may be compared with the Socrates of the

Protagoras and Meno. As in other dialogues, he is the enemy of the Sophists

and  rhetoricians;  and  also  of  the  statesmen,  whom  he  regards  as  another

variety  of  the  same  species.  His  behaviour  is  governed  by  that  of  his

opponents;  the  least  forwardness  or  egotism  on  their  part  is  met  by  a

corresponding irony on the part of Socrates. He must speak, for philosophy

will not allow him to be silent. He is indeed more ironical and provoking than

in any other of Plato's writings: for he is 'fooled to the top of his bent' by the

worldliness  of  Callicles.  But  he  is  also  more  deeply  in  earnest.  He  rises

higher  than  even  in  the  Phaedo  and  Crito:  at  first  enveloping  his  moral

convictions in a cloud of dust and dialectics, he ends by losing his method,

his life, himself, in them. As in the Protagoras and Phaedrus, throwing aside

the veil of irony, he makes a speech, but, true to his character, not until his

adversary has refused to answer any more questions. The presentiment of his

own  fate  is  hanging  over  him.  He  is  aware  that  Socrates,  the  single  real

teacher of politics, as he ventures to call himself, cannot safely go to war with

the whole world, and that in the courts of earth he will be condemned. But he

will  be  justified  in  the  world  below.  Then  the  position  of  Socrates  and

Callicles  will  be  reversed;  all  those  things  'unfit  for  ears  polite'  which

Callicles has prophesied as likely to happen to him in this life, the insulting

language,  the  box  on  the  ears,  will  recoil  upon  his  assailant.  (Compare

Republic,  and  the  similar  reversal  of  the  position  of  the  lawyer  and  the

philosopher in the Theaetetus).


  There is an interesting allusion to his own behaviour at the trial of thegenerals after the battle of Arginusae, which he ironically attributes to his

ignorance of the manner in which a vote of the assembly should be taken.

This  is  said  to  have  happened  'last  year'  (B.C.  406),  and  therefore  the

assumed  date  of  the  dialogue  has  been  fixed  at  405  B.C.,  when  Socrates

would  already  have  been  an  old  man.  The  date  is  clearly  marked,  but  is

scarcely  reconcilable  with  another  indication  of  time,  viz.  the  'recent'

usurpation of Archelaus, which occurred in the year 413; and still less with

the 'recent' death of Pericles, who really died twenty-four years previously

(429 B.C.) and is afterwards reckoned among the statesmen of a past age; or

with the mention of Nicias, who died in 413, and is nevertheless spoken of as

a living witness. But we shall hereafter have reason to observe, that although

there is a general consistency of times and persons in the Dialogues of Plato,

a  precise  dramatic  date  is  an  invention  of  his  commentators  (Preface  to

Republic).


  The  conclusion  of  the  Dialogue  is  remarkable,  (1)  for  the  truly

characteristic declaration of Socrates that he is ignorant of the true nature and

bearing of these things, while he affirms at the same time that no one can

maintain  any  other  view  without  being  ridiculous.  The  profession  of

ignorance reminds us of the earlier and more exclusively Socratic Dialogues.

But  neither  in  them,  nor  in  the  Apology,  nor  in  the  Memorabilia  of

Xenophon,  does  Socrates  express  any  doubt  of  the  fundamental  truths  of

morality. He evidently regards this 'among the multitude of questions' which

agitate human life 'as the principle which alone remains unshaken.' He does

not insist here, any more than in the Phaedo, on the literal truth of the myth,

but only on the soundness of the doctrine which is contained in it, that doing

wrong is worse than suffering, and that a man should be rather than seem; for

the next best thing to a man's being just is that he should be corrected and

become just; also that he should avoid all flattery, whether of himself or of

others; and that rhetoric should be employed for the maintenance of the right

only. The revelation of another life is a recapitulation of the argument in a

figure.


  (2) Socrates makes the singular remark, that he is himself the only true

politician  of  his  age.  In  other  passages,  especially  in  the  Apology,  he

disclaims being a politician at all. There he is convinced that he or any other

good man who attempted to resist the popular will would be put to deathbefore he had done any good to himself or others. Here he anticipates such a

fate for himself, from the fact that he is 'the only man of the present day who

performs  his  public  duties  at  all.'  The  two  points  of  view  are  not  really

inconsistent, but the difference between them is worth noticing: Socrates is

and is not a public man. Not in the ordinary sense, like Alcibiades or Pericles,

but in a higher one; and this will sooner or later entail the same consequences

on him. He cannot be a private man if he would; neither can he separate

morals  from  politics.  Nor  is  he  unwilling  to  be  a  politician,  although  he

foresees the dangers which await him; but he must first become a better and

wiser  man,  for  he  as  well  as  Callicles  is  in  a  state  of  perplexity  and

uncertainty. And yet there is an inconsistency: for should not Socrates too

have taught the citizens better than to put him to death?


  And now, as he himself says, we will 'resume the argument from the

beginning.'


  Socrates, who is attended by his inseparable disciple, Chaerephon, meets

Callicles in the streets of Athens. He is informed that he has just missed an

exhibition  of  Gorgias,  which  he  regrets,  because  he  was  desirous,  not  of

hearing Gorgias display his rhetoric, but of interrogating him concerning the

nature of his art. Callicles proposes that they shall go with him to his own

house, where Gorgias is staying. There they find the great rhetorician and his

younger friend and disciple Polus.


    SOCRATES: Put the question to him, Chaerephon.


    CHAEREPHON: What question?


    SOCRATES: Who is he?--such a question as would elicit from a man the

answer, 'I am a cobbler.'


  Polus suggests that Gorgias may be tired, and desires to answer for him.

'Who  is  Gorgias?'  asks  Chaerephon,  imitating  the  manner  of  his  master

Socrates. 'One of the best of men, and a proficient in the best and noblest of

experimental  arts,'  etc.,  replies  Polus,  in  rhetorical  and  balanced  phrases.

Socrates is dissatisfied at the length and unmeaningness of the answer; he

tells the disconcerted volunteer that he has mistaken the quality for the natureof  the  art,  and  remarks  to  Gorgias,  that  Polus  has  learnt  how  to  make  a

speech, but not how to answer a question. He wishes that Gorgias would

answer him. Gorgias is willing enough, and replies to the question asked by

Chaerephon,--that  he  is  a  rhetorician,  and  in  Homeric  language,  'boasts

himself to be a good one.' At the request of Socrates he promises to be brief;

for 'he can be as long as he pleases, and as short as he pleases.' Socrates

would  have  him  bestow  his  length  on  others,  and  proceeds  to  ask  him  a

number  of  questions,  which  are  answered  by  him  to  his  own  great

satisfaction, and with a brevity which excites the admiration of Socrates. The

result of the discussion may be summed up as follows:--


  Rhetoric treats of discourse; but music and medicine, and other particular

arts, are also concerned with discourse; in what way then does rhetoric differ

from them? Gorgias draws a distinction between the arts which deal with

words, and the arts which have to do with external actions. Socrates extends

this distinction further, and divides all productive arts into two classes: (1)

arts which may be carried on in silence; and (2) arts which have to do with

words, or in which words are coextensive with action, such as arithmetic,

geometry, rhetoric. But still Gorgias could hardly have meant to say that

arithmetic was the same as rhetoric. Even in the arts which are concerned

with words there are differences. What then distinguishes rhetoric from the

other arts which have to do with words? 'The words which rhetoric uses relate

to the best and greatest of human things.' But tell me, Gorgias, what are the

best? 'Health first, beauty next, wealth third,' in the words of the old song, or

how  would  you  rank  them?  The  arts  will  come  to  you  in  a  body,  each

claiming precedence and saying that her own good is superior to that of the

rest--How will you choose between them? 'I should say, Socrates, that the art

of persuasion, which gives freedom to all men, and to individuals power in

the state, is the greatest good.' But what is the exact nature of this persuasion?

--is the persevering retort: You could not describe Zeuxis as a painter, or

even as a painter of figures, if there were other painters of figures; neither can

you define rhetoric simply as an art of persuasion, because there are other arts

which persuade, such as arithmetic, which is an art of persuasion about odd

and  even  numbers.  Gorgias  is  made  to  see  the  necessity  of  a  further

limitation, and he now defines rhetoric as the art of persuading in the law

courts, and in the assembly, about the just and unjust. But still there are two

sorts of persuasion: one which gives knowledge, and another which givesbelief without knowledge; and knowledge is always true, but belief may be

either true or false,--there is therefore a further question: which of the two

sorts  of  persuasion  does  rhetoric  effect  in  courts  of  law  and  assemblies?

Plainly that which gives belief and not that which gives knowledge; for no

one can impart a real knowledge of such matters to a crowd of persons in a

few  minutes.  And  there  is  another  point  to  be  considered:--when  the

assembly meets to advise about walls or docks or military expeditions, the

rhetorician is not taken into counsel, but the architect, or the general. How

would  Gorgias  explain  this  phenomenon?  All  who  intend  to  become

disciples, of whom there are several in the company, and not Socrates only,

are eagerly asking:--About what then will rhetoric teach us to persuade or

advise the state?


  Gorgias  illustrates  the  nature  of  rhetoric  by  adducing  the  example  of

Themistocles, who persuaded the Athenians to build their docks and walls,

and of Pericles, whom Socrates himself has heard speaking about the middle

wall of the Piraeus. He adds that he has exercised a similar power over the

patients of his brother Herodicus. He could be chosen a physician by the

assembly if he pleased, for no physician could compete with a rhetorician in

popularity and influence. He could persuade the multitude of anything by the

power of his rhetoric; not that the rhetorician ought to abuse this power any

more than a boxer should abuse the art of self- defence. Rhetoric is a good

thing, but, like all good things, may be unlawfully used. Neither is the teacher

of the art to be deemed unjust because his pupils are unjust and make a bad

use of the lessons which they have learned from him.


  Socrates  would  like  to  know  before  he  replies,  whether  Gorgias  will

quarrel with him if he points out a slight inconsistency into which he has

fallen, or whether he, like himself, is one who loves to be refuted. Gorgias

declares that he is quite one of his sort, but fears that the argument may be

tedious to the company. The company cheer, and Chaerephon and Callicles

exhort  them  to  proceed.  Socrates  gently  points  out  the  supposed

inconsistency into which Gorgias appears to have fallen, and which he is

inclined  to  think  may  arise  out  of  a  misapprehension  of  his  own.  The

rhetorician  has  been  declared  by  Gorgias  to  be  more  persuasive  to  the

ignorant than the physician, or any other expert. And he is said to be ignorant,

and this ignorance of his is regarded by Gorgias as a happy condition, for hehas escaped the trouble of learning. But is he as ignorant of just and unjust as

he is of medicine or building? Gorgias is compelled to admit that if he did not

know them previously he must learn them from his teacher as a part of the art

of rhetoric. But he who has learned carpentry is a carpenter, and he who has

learned  music  is  a  musician,  and  he  who  has  learned  justice  is  just.  The

rhetorician then must be a just man, and rhetoric is a just thing. But Gorgias

has already admitted the opposite of this, viz. that rhetoric may be abused,

and that the rhetorician may act unjustly. How is the inconsistency to be

explained?


  The fallacy of this argument is twofold; for in the first place, a man may

know justice and not be just--here is the old confusion of the arts and the

virtues;--nor can any teacher be expected to counteract wholly the bent of

natural character; and secondly, a man may have a degree of justice, but not

sufficient  to  prevent  him  from  ever  doing  wrong.  Polus  is  naturally

exasperated at the sophism, which he is unable to detect; of course, he says,

the rhetorician, like every one else, will admit that he knows justice (how can

he do otherwise when pressed by the interrogations of Socrates?), but he

thinks that great want of manners is shown in bringing the argument to such a

pass. Socrates ironically replies, that when old men trip, the young set them

on their legs again; and he is quite willing to retract, if he can be shown to be

in error, but upon one condition, which is that Polus studies brevity. Polus is

in great indignation at not being allowed to use as many words as he pleases

in the free state of Athens. Socrates retorts, that yet harder will be his own

case, if he is compelled to stay and listen to them. After some altercation they

agree (compare Protag.), that Polus shall ask and Socrates answer.


  'What is the art of Rhetoric?' says Polus. Not an art at all, replies Socrates,

but a thing which in your book you affirm to have created art. Polus asks,

'What thing?' and Socrates answers, An experience or routine of making a

sort of delight or gratification. 'But is not rhetoric a fine thing?' I have not yet

told  you  what  rhetoric  is.  Will  you  ask  me  another  question--What  is

cookery? 'What is cookery?' An experience or routine of making a sort of

delight or gratification. Then they are the same, or rather fall under the same

class,  and  rhetoric  has  still  to  be  distinguished  from  cookery.  'What  is

rhetoric?' asks Polus once more. A part of a not very creditable whole, which

may be termed flattery, is the reply. 'But what part?' A shadow of a part ofpolitics. This, as might be expected, is wholly unintelligible, both to Gorgias

and Polus; and, in order to explain his meaning to them, Socrates draws a

distinction between shadows or appearances and realities; e.g. there is real

health of body or soul, and the appearance of them; real arts and sciences,

and the simulations of them. Now the soul and body have two arts waiting

upon  them,  first  the  art  of  politics,  which  attends  on  the  soul,  having  a

legislative part and a judicial part; and another art attending on the body,

which  has  no  generic  name,  but  may  also  be  described  as  having  two

divisions, one of which is medicine and the other gymnastic. Corresponding

with these four arts or sciences there are four shams or simulations of them,

mere experiences, as they may be termed, because they give no reason of

their  own  existence.  The  art  of  dressing  up  is  the  sham  or  simulation  of

gymnastic,  the  art  of  cookery,  of  medicine;  rhetoric  is  the  simulation  of

justice,  and  sophistic  of  legislation.  They  may  be  summed  up  in  an

arithmetical formula:--


  Tiring : gymnastic :: cookery : medicine :: sophistic : legislation.


  And,


  Cookery : medicine :: rhetoric : the art of justice.


  And this is the true scheme of them, but when measured only by the

gratification which they procure, they become jumbled together and return to

their aboriginal chaos. Socrates apologizes for the length of his speech, which

was  necessary  to  the  explanation  of  the  subject,  and  begs  Polus  not

unnecessarily to retaliate on him.


  'Do you mean to say that the rhetoricians are esteemed flatterers?' They

are not esteemed at all. 'Why, have they not great power, and can they not do

whatever they desire?' They have no power, and they only do what they think

best,  and  never  what  they  desire;  for  they  never  attain  the  true  object  of

desire, which is the good. 'As if you, Socrates, would not envy the possessor

of despotic power, who can imprison, exile, kill any one whom he pleases.'

But Socrates replies that he has no wish to put any one to death; he who kills

another, even justly, is not to be envied, and he who kills him unjustly is to be

pitied; it is better to suffer than to do injustice. He does not consider thatgoing about with a dagger and putting men out of the way, or setting a house

on fire, is real power. To this Polus assents, on the ground that such acts

would  be  punished,  but  he  is  still  of  opinion  that  evil-doers,  if  they  are

unpunished, may be happy enough. He instances Archelaus, son of Perdiccas,

the  usurper  of  Macedonia.  Does  not  Socrates  think  him  happy?--Socrates

would like to know more about him; he cannot pronounce even the great king

to be happy, unless he knows his mental and moral condition. Polus explains

that Archelaus was a slave, being the son of a woman who was the slave of

Alcetas, brother of Perdiccas king of Macedon--and he, by every species of

crime,  first  murdering  his  uncle  and  then  his  cousin  and  half-brother,

obtained the kingdom. This was very wicked, and yet all the world, including

Socrates,  would  like  to  have  his  place.  Socrates  dismisses  the  appeal  to

numbers; Polus, if he will, may summon all the rich men of Athens, Nicias

and  his  brothers,  Aristocrates,  the  house  of  Pericles,  or  any  other  great

family-- this is the kind of evidence which is adduced in courts of justice,

where truth depends upon numbers. But Socrates employs proof of another

sort; his appeal is to one witness only,--that is to say, the person with whom

he is speaking; him he will convict out of his own mouth. And he is prepared

to show, after his manner, that Archelaus cannot be a wicked man and yet

happy.


  The evil-doer is deemed happy if he escapes, and miserable if he suffers

punishment; but Socrates thinks him less miserable if he suffers than if he

escapes.  Polus  is  of  opinion  that  such  a  paradox  as  this  hardly  deserves

refutation, and is at any rate sufficiently refuted by the fact. Socrates has only

to compare the lot of the successful tyrant who is the envy of the world, and

of the wretch who, having been detected in a criminal attempt against the

state, is crucified or burnt to death. Socrates replies, that if they are both

criminal  they  are  both  miserable,  but  that  the  unpunished  is  the  more

miserable of the two. At this Polus laughs outright, which leads Socrates to

remark that laughter is a new species of refutation. Polus replies, that he is

already refuted; for if he will take the votes of the company, he will find that

no one agrees with him. To this Socrates rejoins, that he is not a public man,

and (referring to his own conduct at the trial of the generals after the battle of

Arginusae) is unable to take the suffrages of any company, as he had shown

on a recent occasion; he can only deal with one witness at a time, and that is

the person with whom he is arguing. But he is certain that in the opinion ofany man to do is worse than to suffer evil.


  Polus, though he will not admit this, is ready to acknowledge that to do

evil is considered the more foul or dishonourable of the two. But what is fair

and what is foul; whether the terms are applied to bodies, colours, figures,

laws, habits, studies, must they not be defined with reference to pleasure and

utility? Polus assents to this latter doctrine, and is easily persuaded that the

fouler of two things must exceed either in pain or in hurt. But the doing

cannot exceed the suffering of evil in pain, and therefore must exceed in hurt.

Thus doing is proved by the testimony of Polus himself to be worse or more

hurtful than suffering.


  There remains the other question: Is a guilty man better off when he is

punished or when he is unpunished? Socrates replies, that what is done justly

is suffered justly: if the act is just, the effect is just; if to punish is just, to be

punished is just, and therefore fair, and therefore beneficent; and the benefit

is that the soul is improved. There are three evils from which a man may

suffer, and which affect him in estate, body, and soul;--these are, poverty,

disease, injustice; and the foulest of these is injustice, the evil of the soul,

because that brings the greatest hurt. And there are three arts which heal these

evils--trading, medicine, justice--and the fairest of these is justice. Happy is

he who has never committed injustice, and happy in the second degree he

who  has  been  healed  by  punishment.  And  therefore  the  criminal  should

himself go to the judge as he would to the physician, and purge away his

crime. Rhetoric will enable him to display his guilt in proper colours, and to

sustain himself and others in enduring the necessary penalty. And similarly if

a man has an enemy, he will desire not to punish him, but that he shall go

unpunished and become worse and worse, taking care only that he does no

injury to himself. These are at least conceivable uses of the art, and no others

have been discovered by us.


  Here  Callicles,  who  has  been  listening  in  silent  amazement,  asks

Chaerephon whether Socrates is in earnest, and on receiving the assurance

that he is, proceeds to ask the same question of Socrates himself. For if such

doctrines are true, life must have been turned upside down, and all of us are

doing the opposite of what we ought to be doing.  Socrates  replies  in  a  style  of  playful  irony,  that  before  men  can

understand one another they must have some common feeling. And such a

community of feeling exists between himself and Callicles, for both of them

are lovers, and they have both a pair of loves; the beloved of Callicles are the

Athenian Demos and Demos the son of Pyrilampes; the beloved of Socrates

are Alcibiades and philosophy. The peculiarity of Callicles is that he can

never  contradict  his  loves;  he  changes  as  his  Demos  changes  in  all  his

opinions; he watches the countenance of both his loves, and repeats their

sentiments,  and  if  any  one  is  surprised  at  his  sayings  and  doings,  the

explanation  of  them  is,  that  he  is  not  a  free  agent,  but  must  always  be

imitating his two loves. And this is the explanation of Socrates' peculiarities

also. He is always repeating what his mistress, Philosophy, is saying to him,

who unlike his other love, Alcibiades, is ever the same, ever true. Callicles

must refute her, or he will never be at unity with himself; and discord in life

is far worse than the discord of musical sounds.


  Callicles answers, that Gorgias was overthrown because, as Polus said, in

compliance with popular prejudice he had admitted that if his pupil did not

know justice the rhetorician must teach him; and Polus has been similarly

entangled,  because  his  modesty  led  him  to  admit  that  to  suffer  is  more

honourable  than  to  do  injustice.  By  custom  'yes,'  but  not  by  nature,  says

Callicles. And Socrates is always playing between the two points of view,

and putting one in the place of the other. In this very argument, what Polus

only meant in a conventional sense has been affirmed by him to be a law of

nature. For convention says that 'injustice is dishonourable,' but nature says

that 'might is right.' And we are always taming down the nobler spirits among

us to the conventional level. But sometimes a great man will rise up and

reassert his original rights, trampling under foot all our formularies, and then

the light of natural justice shines forth. Pindar says, 'Law, the king of all, does

violence with high hand;' as is indeed proved by the example of Heracles,

who drove off the oxen of Geryon and never paid for them.


  This  is  the  truth,  Socrates,  as  you  will  be  convinced,  if  you  leave

philosophy and pass on to the real business of life. A little philosophy is an

excellent thing; too much is the ruin of a man. He who has not 'passed his

metaphysics' before he has grown up to manhood will never know the world.

Philosophers are ridiculous when they take to politics, and I dare say thatpoliticians are equally ridiculous when they take to philosophy: 'Every man,'

as  Euripides  says,  'is  fondest  of  that  in  which  he  is  best.'  Philosophy  is

graceful in youth, like the lisp of infancy, and should be cultivated as a part

of education; but when a grown-up man lisps or studies philosophy, I should

like to beat him. None of those over-refined natures ever come to any good;

they avoid the busy haunts of men, and skulk in corners, whispering to a few

admiring youths, and never giving utterance to any noble sentiments.


  For you, Socrates, I have a regard, and therefore I say to you, as Zethus

says to Amphion in the play, that you have 'a noble soul disguised in a puerile

exterior.' And I would have you consider the danger which you and other

philosophers incur. For you would not know how to defend yourself if any

one accused you in a law-court,--there you would stand, with gaping mouth

and dizzy brain, and might be murdered, robbed, boxed on the ears with

impunity.  Take  my  advice,  then,  and  get  a  little  common  sense;  leave  to

others these frivolities; walk in the ways of the wealthy and be wise.


  Socrates  professes  to  have  found  in  Callicles  the  philosopher's

touchstone; and he is certain that any opinion in which they both agree must

be the very truth. Callicles has all the three qualities which are needed in a

critic--knowledge, good-will, frankness; Gorgias and Polus, although learned

men, were too modest, and their modesty made them contradict themselves.

But Callicles is well-educated; and he is not too modest to speak out (of this

he has already given proof), and his good-will is shown both by his own

profession and by his giving the same caution against philosophy to Socrates,

which Socrates remembers hearing him give long ago to his own clique of

friends. He will pledge himself to retract any error into which he may have

fallen, and which Callicles may point out. But he would like to know first of

all what he and Pindar mean by natural justice. Do they suppose that the rule

of justice is the rule of the stronger or of the better?' 'There is no difference.'

Then are not the many superior to the one, and the opinions of the many

better? And their opinion is that justice is equality, and that to do is more

dishonourable than to suffer wrong. And as they are the superior or stronger,

this  opinion  of  theirs  must  be  in  accordance  with  natural  as  well  as

conventional justice. 'Why will you continue splitting words? Have I not told

you that the superior is the better?' But what do you mean by the better? Tell

me that, and please to be a little milder in your language, if you do not wishto drive me away. 'I mean the worthier, the wiser.' You mean to say that one

man of sense ought to rule over ten thousand fools? 'Yes, that is my meaning.'

Ought the physician then to have a larger share of meats and drinks? or the

weaver to have more coats, or the cobbler larger shoes, or the farmer more

seed? 'You are always saying the same things, Socrates.' Yes, and on the

same subjects too; but you are never saying the same things. For, first, you

defined  the  superior  to  be  the  stronger,  and  then  the  wiser,  and  now

something else;--what DO you mean? 'I mean men of political ability, who

ought  to  govern  and  to  have  more  than  the  governed.'  Than  themselves?

'What do you mean?' I mean to say that every man is his own governor. 'I see

that you mean those dolts, the temperate. But my doctrine is, that a man

should let his desires grow, and take the means of satisfying them. To the

many this is impossible, and therefore they combine to prevent him. But if he

is a king, and has power, how base would he be in submitting to them! To

invite  the  common  herd  to  be  lord  over  him,  when  he  might  have  the

enjoyment  of  all  things!  For  the  truth  is,  Socrates,  that  luxury  and  self-

indulgence are virtue and happiness; all the rest is mere talk.'


  Socrates compliments Callicles on his frankness in saying what other men

only think. According to his view, those who want nothing are not happy.

'Why,' says Callicles, 'if they were, stones and the dead would be happy.'

Socrates in reply is led into a half-serious, half-comic vein of reflection. 'Who

knows,' as Euripides says, 'whether life may not be death, and death life?'

Nay, there are philosophers who maintain that even in life we are dead, and

that the body (soma) is the tomb (sema) of the soul. And some ingenious

Sicilian has made an allegory, in which he represents fools as the uninitiated,

who are supposed to be carrying water to a vessel, which is full of holes, in a

similarly holey sieve, and this sieve is their own soul. The idea is fanciful, but

nevertheless is a figure of a truth which I want to make you acknowledge,

viz. that the life of contentment is better than the life of indulgence. Are you

disposed to admit that? 'Far otherwise.' Then hear another parable. The life of

self-contentment and self-indulgence may be represented respectively by two

men, who are filling jars with streams of wine, honey, milk,--the jars of the

one are sound, and the jars of the other leaky; the first fils his jars, and has no

more trouble with them; the second is always filling them, and would suffer

extreme  misery  if  he  desisted.  Are  you  of  the  same  opinion  still?  'Yes,

Socrates,  and  the  figure  expresses  what  I  mean.  For  true  pleasure  is  aperpetual  stream,  flowing  in  and  flowing  out.  To  be  hungry  and  always

eating, to be thirsty and always drinking, and to have all the other desires and

to satisfy them, that, as I admit, is my idea of happiness.' And to be itching

and always scratching? 'I do not deny that there may be happiness even in

that.'  And  to  indulge  unnatural  desires,  if  they  are  abundantly  satisfied?

Callicles is indignant at the introduction of such topics. But he is reminded by

Socrates that they are introduced, not by him, but by the maintainer of the

identity of pleasure and good. Will Callicles still maintain this? 'Yes, for the

sake of consistency, he will.' The answer does not satisfy Socrates, who fears

that he is losing his touchstone. A profession of seriousness on the part of

Callicles reassures him, and they proceed with the argument. Pleasure and

good are the same, but knowledge and courage are not the same either with

pleasure or good, or with one another. Socrates disproves the first of these

statements by showing that two opposites cannot coexist, but must alternate

with one another--to be well and ill together is impossible. But pleasure and

pain are simultaneous, and the cessation of them is simultaneous; e.g. in the

case of drinking and thirsting, whereas good and evil are not simultaneous,

and do not cease simultaneously, and therefore pleasure cannot be the same

as good.


  Callicles has already lost his temper, and can only be persuaded to go on

by  the  interposition  of  Gorgias.  Socrates,  having  already  guarded  against

objections by distinguishing courage and knowledge from pleasure and good,

proceeds:--The good are good by the presence of good, and the bad are bad

by the presence of evil. And the brave and wise are good, and the cowardly

and foolish are bad. And he who feels pleasure is good, and he who feels pain

is  bad,  and  both  feel  pleasure  and  pain  in  nearly  the  same  degree,  and

sometimes the bad man or coward in a greater degree. Therefore the bad man

or coward is as good as the brave or may be even better.


  Callicles endeavours now to avert the inevitable absurdity by affirming

that he and all mankind admitted some pleasures to be good and others bad.

The  good  are  the  beneficial,  and  the  bad  are  the  hurtful,  and  we  should

choose the one and avoid the other. But this, as Socrates observes, is a return

to the old doctrine of himself and Polus, that all things should be done for the

sake of the good.  Callicles  assents  to  this,  and  Socrates,  finding  that  they  are  agreed  in

distinguishing pleasure from good, returns to his old division of empirical

habits, or shams, or flatteries, which study pleasure only, and the arts which

are concerned with the higher interests of soul and body. Does Callicles agree

to this division? Callicles will agree to anything, in order that he may get

through the argument. Which of the arts then are flatteries? Flute-playing,

harp-playing, choral exhibitions, the dithyrambics of Cinesias are all equally

condemned on the ground that they give pleasure only; and Meles the harp-

player, who was the father of Cinesias, failed even in that. The stately muse

of  Tragedy  is  bent  upon  pleasure,  and  not  upon  improvement.  Poetry  in

general is only a rhetorical address to a mixed audience of men, women, and

children. And the orators are very far from speaking with a view to what is

best; their way is to humour the assembly as if they were children.


  Callicles replies, that this is only true of some of them; others have a real

regard  for  their  fellow-citizens.  Granted;  then  there  are  two  species  of

oratory; the one a flattery, another which has a real regard for the citizens.

But where are the orators among whom you find the latter? Callicles admits

that  there  are  none  remaining,  but  there  were  such  in  the  days  when

Themistocles,  Cimon,  Miltiades,  and  the  great  Pericles  were  still  alive.

Socrates replies that none of these were true artists, setting before themselves

the duty of bringing order out of disorder. The good man and true orator has a

settled design, running through his life, to which he conforms all his words

and actions; he desires to implant justice and eradicate injustice, to implant

all  virtue  and  eradicate  all  vice  in  the  minds  of  his  citizens.  He  is  the

physician who will not allow the sick man to indulge his appetites with a

variety of meats and drinks, but insists on his exercising self-restraint. And

this is good for the soul, and better than the unrestrained indulgence which

Callicles was recently approving.


  Here Callicles, who had been with difficulty brought to this point, turns

restive, and suggests that Socrates shall answer his own questions. 'Then,'

says Socrates, 'one man must do for two;' and though he had hoped to have

given  Callicles  an  'Amphion'  in  return  for  his  'Zethus,'  he  is  willing  to

proceed; at the same time, he hopes that Callicles will correct him, if he falls

into error. He recapitulates the advantages which he has already won:--  The pleasant is not the same as the good--Callicles and I are agreed about

that,--but pleasure is to be pursued for the sake of the good, and the good is

that  of  which  the  presence  makes  us  good;  we  and  all  things  good  have

acquired some virtue or other. And virtue, whether of body or soul, of things

or persons, is not attained by accident, but is due to order and harmonious

arrangement. And the soul which has order is better than the soul which is

without  order,  and  is  therefore  temperate  and  is  therefore  good,  and  the

intemperate is bad. And he who is temperate is also just and brave and pious,

and has attained the perfection of goodness and therefore of happiness, and

the intemperate whom you approve is the opposite of all this and is wretched.

He  therefore  who  would  be  happy  must  pursue  temperance  and  avoid

intemperance, and if possible escape the necessity of punishment, but if he

have  done  wrong  he  must  endure  punishment.  In  this  way  states  and

individuals should seek to attain harmony, which, as the wise tell us, is the

bond of heaven and earth, of gods and men. Callicles has never discovered

the power of geometrical proportion in both worlds; he would have men aim

at disproportion and excess. But if he be wrong in this, and if self-control is

the true secret of happiness, then the paradox is true that the only use of

rhetoric is in self-accusation, and Polus was right in saying that to do wrong

is  worse  than  to  suffer  wrong,  and  Gorgias  was  right  in  saying  that  the

rhetorician must be a just man. And you were wrong in taunting me with my

defenceless condition, and in saying that I might be accused or put to death or

boxed on the ears with impunity. For I may repeat once more, that to strike is

worse than to be stricken--to do than to suffer. What I said then is now made

fast in adamantine bonds. I myself know not the true nature of these things,

but I know that no one can deny my words and not be ridiculous. To do

wrong is the greatest of evils, and to suffer wrong is the next greatest evil. He

who would avoid the last must be a ruler, or the friend of a ruler; and to be

the friend he must be the equal of the ruler, and must also resemble him.

Under his protection he will suffer no evil, but will he also do no evil? Nay,

will he not rather do all the evil which he can and escape? And in this way

the greatest of all evils will befall him. 'But this imitator of the tyrant,' rejoins

Callicles, 'will kill any one who does not similarly imitate him.' Socrates

replies that he is not deaf, and that he has heard that repeated many times, and

can only reply, that a bad man will kill a good one. 'Yes, and that is the

provoking thing.' Not provoking to a man of sense who is not studying the

arts which will preserve him from danger; and this, as you say, is the use ofrhetoric in courts of justice. But how many other arts are there which also

save men from death, and are yet quite humble in their pretensions--such as

the art of swimming, or the art of the pilot? Does not the pilot do men at least

as much service as the rhetorician, and yet for the voyage from Aegina to

Athens he does not charge more than two obols, and when he disembarks is

quite  unassuming  in  his  demeanour?  The  reason  is  that  he  is  not  certain

whether he has done his passengers any good in saving them from death, if

one of them is diseased in body, and still more if he is diseased in mind--who

can say? The engineer too will often save whole cities, and yet you despise

him, and would not allow your son to marry his daughter, or his son to marry

yours. But what reason is there in this? For if virtue only means the saving of

life, whether your own or another's, you have no right to despise him or any

practiser of saving arts. But is not virtue something different from saving and

being saved? I would have you rather consider whether you ought not to

disregard length of life, and think only how you can live best, leaving all

besides to the will of Heaven. For you must not expect to have influence

either with the Athenian Demos or with Demos the son of Pyrilampes, unless

you become like them. What do you say to this?


  'There is some truth in what you are saying, but I do not entirely believe

you.'


  That is because you are in love with Demos. But let us have a little more

conversation. You remember the two processes--one which was directed to

pleasure, the other which was directed to making men as good as possible.

And those who have the care of the city should make the citizens as good as

possible. But who would undertake a public building, if he had never had a

teacher of the art of building, and had never constructed a building before? or

who would undertake the duty of state-physician, if he had never cured either

himself or any one else? Should we not examine him before we entrusted him

with the office? And as Callicles is about to enter public life, should we not

examine him? Whom has he made better? For we have already admitted that

this is the statesman's proper business. And we must ask the same question

about Pericles, and Cimon, and Miltiades, and Themistocles. Whom did they

make better? Nay, did not Pericles make the citizens worse? For he gave

them  pay,  and  at  first  he  was  very  popular  with  them,  but  at  last  they

condemned him to death. Yet surely he would be a bad tamer of animalswho, having received them gentle, taught them to kick and butt, and man is

an animal; and Pericles who had the charge of man only made him wilder,

and more savage and unjust, and therefore he could not have been a good

statesman.  The  same  tale  might  be  repeated  about  Cimon,  Themistocles,

Miltiades. But the charioteer who keeps his seat at first is not thrown out

when  he  gains  greater  experience  and  skill.  The  inference  is,  that  the

statesman of a past age were no better than those of our own. They may have

been cleverer constructors of docks and harbours, but they did not improve

the character of the citizens. I have told you again and again (and I purposely

use the same images) that the soul, like the body, may be treated in two ways-

-there is the meaner and the higher art. You seemed to understand what I said

at the time, but when I ask you who were the really good statesmen, you

answer--as if I asked you who were the good trainers, and you answered,

Thearion,  the  baker,  Mithoecus,  the  author  of  the  Sicilian  cookery-book,

Sarambus, the vintner. And you would be affronted if I told you that these are

a parcel of cooks who make men fat only to make them thin. And those

whom they have fattened applaud them, instead of finding fault with them,

and lay the blame of their subsequent disorders on their physicians. In this

respect, Callicles, you are like them; you applaud the statesmen of old, who

pandered  to  the  vices  of  the  citizens,  and  filled  the  city  with  docks  and

harbours, but neglected virtue and justice. And when the fit of illness comes,

the citizens who in like manner applauded Themistocles, Pericles, and others,

will lay hold of you and my friend Alcibiades, and you will suffer for the

misdeeds of your predecessors. The old story is always being repeated--'after

all his services, the ungrateful city banished him, or condemned him to death.'

As if the statesman should not have taught the city better! He surely cannot

blame the state for having unjustly used him, any more than the sophist or

teacher can find fault with his pupils if they cheat him. And the sophist and

orator  are  in  the  same  case;  although  you  admire  rhetoric  and  despise

sophistic, whereas sophistic is really the higher of the two. The teacher of the

arts  takes  money,  but  the  teacher  of  virtue  or  politics  takes  no  money,

because this is the only kind of service which makes the disciple desirous of

requiting his teacher.


  Socrates  concludes  by  finally  asking,  to  which  of  the  two  modes  of

serving the state Callicles invites him:--'to the inferior and ministerial one,' is

the ingenuous reply. That is the only way of avoiding death, replies Socrates;and he has heard often enough, and would rather not hear again, that the bad

man will kill the good. But he thinks that such a fate is very likely reserved

for him, because he remarks that he is the only person who teaches the true

art of politics. And very probably, as in the case which he described to Polus,

he may be the physician who is tried by a jury of children. He cannot say that

he has procured the citizens any pleasure, and if any one charges him with

perplexing them, or with reviling their elders, he will not be able to make

them understand that he has only been actuated by a desire for their good.

And therefore there is no saying what his fate may be. 'And do you think that

a man who is unable to help himself is in a good condition?' Yes, Callicles, if

he have the true self- help, which is never to have said or done any wrong to

himself or others. If I had not this kind of self-help, I should be ashamed; but

if I die for want of your flattering rhetoric, I shall die in peace. For death is no

evil, but to go to the world below laden with offences is the worst of evils. In

proof of which I will tell you a tale:--


  Under the rule of Cronos, men were judged on the day of their death, and

when judgment had been given upon them they departed--the good to the

islands of the blest, the bad to the house of vengeance. But as they were still

living, and had their clothes on at the time when they were being judged,

there was favouritism, and Zeus, when he came to the throne, was obliged to

alter the mode of procedure, and try them after death, having first sent down

Prometheus  to  take  away  from  them  the  foreknowledge  of  death.  Minos,

Rhadamanthus, and Aeacus were appointed to be the judges; Rhadamanthus

for Asia, Aeacus for Europe, and Minos was to hold the court of appeal. Now

death is the separation of soul and body, but after death soul and body alike

retain their characteristics; the fat man, the dandy, the branded slave, are all

distinguishable.  Some  prince  or  potentate,  perhaps  even  the  great  king

himself, appears before Rhadamanthus, and he instantly detects him, though

he knows not who he is; he sees the scars of perjury and iniquity, and sends

him away to the house of torment.


  For there are two classes of souls who undergo punishment--the curable

and  the  incurable.  The  curable  are  those  who  are  benefited  by  their

punishment;  the  incurable  are  such  as  Archelaus,  who  benefit  others  by

becoming  a  warning  to  them.  The  latter  class  are  generally  kings  and

potentates; meaner persons, happily for themselves, have not the same powerof  doing  injustice.  Sisyphus  and  Tityus,  not  Thersites,  are  supposed  by

Homer to be undergoing everlasting punishment. Not that there is anything to

prevent  a  great  man  from  being  a  good  one,  as  is  shown  by  the  famous

example  of  Aristeides,  the  son  of  Lysimachus.  But  to  Rhadamanthus  the

souls are only known as good or bad; they are stripped of their dignities and

preferments; he despatches the bad to Tartarus, labelled either as curable or

incurable, and looks with love and admiration on the soul of some just one,

whom he sends to the islands of the blest. Similar is the practice of Aeacus;

and Minos overlooks them, holding a golden sceptre, as Odysseus in Homer

saw him


    'Wielding a sceptre of gold, and giving laws to the dead.'


  My wish for myself and my fellow-men is, that we may present our souls

undefiled to the judge in that day; my desire in life is to be able to meet

death. And I exhort you, and retort upon you the reproach which you cast

upon me,--that you will stand before the judge, gaping, and with dizzy brain,

and any one may box you on the ear, and do you all manner of evil.


  Perhaps you think that this is an old wives' fable. But you, who are the

three wisest men in Hellas, have nothing better to say, and no one will ever

show that to do is better than to suffer evil. A man should study to be, and not

merely to seem. If he is bad, he should become good, and avoid all flattery,

whether of the many or of the few.


  Follow me, then; and if you are looked down upon, that will do you no

harm.  And  when  we  have  practised  virtue,  we  will  betake  ourselves  to

politics, but not until we are delivered from the shameful state of ignorance

and uncertainty in which we are at present. Let us follow in the way of virtue

and justice, and not in the way to which you, Callicles, invite us; for that way

is nothing worth.


  We  will  now  consider  in  order  some  of  the  principal  points  of  the

dialogue. Having regard (1) to the age of Plato and the ironical character of

his  writings,  we  may  compare  him  with  himself,  and  with  other  great

teachers, and we may note in passing the objections of his critics. And then

(2)  casting  one  eye  upon  him,  we  may  cast  another  upon  ourselves,  andendeavour  to  draw  out  the  great  lessons  which  he  teaches  for  all  time,

stripped of the accidental form in which they are enveloped.


  (1) In the Gorgias, as in nearly all the other dialogues of Plato, we are

made aware that formal logic has as yet no existence. The old difficulty of

framing a definition recurs. The illusive analogy of the arts and the virtues

also continues. The ambiguity of several words, such as nature, custom, the

honourable, the good, is not cleared up. The Sophists are still floundering

about the distinction of the real and seeming. Figures of speech are made the

basis of arguments. The possibility of conceiving a universal art or science,

which  admits  of  application  to  a  particular  subject-matter,  is  a  difficulty

which remains unsolved, and has not altogether ceased to haunt the world at

the present day (compare Charmides). The defect of clearness is also apparent

in Socrates himself, unless we suppose him to be practising on the simplicity

of his opponent, or rather perhaps trying an experiment in dialectics. Nothing

can  be  more  fallacious  than  the  contradiction  which  he  pretends  to  have

discovered in the answers of Gorgias (see above). The advantages which he

gains over Polus are also due to a false antithesis of pleasure and good, and to

an erroneous assertion that an agent and a patient may be described by similar

predicates;--a mistake which Aristotle partly shares and partly corrects in the

Nicomachean Ethics. Traces of a 'robust sophistry' are likewise discernible in

his argument with Callicles.


  (2) Although Socrates professes to be convinced by reason only, yet the

argument is often a sort of dialectical fiction, by which he conducts himself

and others to his own ideal of life and action. And we may sometimes wish

that we could have suggested answers to his antagonists, or pointed out to

them  the  rocks  which  lay  concealed  under  the  ambiguous  terms  good,

pleasure, and the like. But it would be as useless to examine his arguments by

the requirements of modern logic, as to criticise this ideal from a merely

utilitarian point of view. If we say that the ideal is generally regarded as

unattainable, and that mankind will by no means agree in thinking that the

criminal is happier when punished than when unpunished, any more than

they would agree to the stoical paradox that a man may be happy on the rack,

Plato has already admitted that the world is against him. Neither does he

mean to say that Archelaus is tormented by the stings of conscience; or that

the sensations of the impaled criminal are more agreeable than those of thetyrant  drowned  in  luxurious  enjoyment.  Neither  is  he  speaking,  as  in  the

Protagoras,  of  virtue  as  a  calculation  of  pleasure,  an  opinion  which  he

afterwards repudiates in the Phaedo. What then is his meaning? His meaning

we  shall  be  able  to  illustrate  best  by  parallel  notions,  which,  whether

justifiable by logic or not, have always existed among mankind. We must

remind the reader that Socrates himself implies that he will be understood or

appreciated by very few.


  He is speaking not of the consciousness of happiness, but of the idea of

happiness. When a martyr dies in a good cause, when a soldier falls in battle,

we  do  not  suppose  that  death  or  wounds  are  without  pain,  or  that  their

physical suffering is always compensated by a mental satisfaction. Still we

regard them as happy, and we would a thousand times rather have their death

than a shameful life. Nor is this only because we believe that they will obtain

an immortality of fame, or that they will have crowns of glory in another

world, when their enemies and persecutors will be proportionably tormented.

Men are found in a few instances to do what is right, without reference to

public opinion or to consequences. And we regard them as happy on this

ground  only,  much  as  Socrates'  friends  in  the  opening  of  the  Phaedo  are

described as regarding him; or as was said of another, 'they looked upon his

face  as  upon  the  face  of  an  angel.'  We  are  not  concerned  to  justify  this

idealism by the standard of utility or public opinion, but merely to point out

the existence of such a sentiment in the better part of human nature.


  The idealism of Plato is founded upon this sentiment. He would maintain

that in some sense or other truth and right are alone to be sought, and that all

other goods are only desirable as means towards these. He is thought to have

erred in 'considering the agent only, and making no reference to the happiness

of others, as affected by him.' But the happiness of others or of mankind, if

regarded as an end, is really quite as ideal and almost as paradoxical to the

common understanding as Plato's conception of happiness. For the greatest

happiness of the greatest number may mean also the greatest pain of the

individual which will procure the greatest pleasure of the greatest number.

Ideas of utility, like those of duty and right, may be pushed to unpleasant

consequences. Nor can Plato in the Gorgias be deemed purely self-regarding,

considering that Socrates expressly mentions the duty of imparting the truth

when discovered to others. Nor must we forget that the side of ethics whichregards  others  is  by  the  ancients  merged  in  politics.  Both  in  Plato  and

Aristotle, as well as in the Stoics, the social principle, though taking another

form, is really far more prominent than in most modern treatises on ethics.


  The  idealizing  of  suffering  is  one  of  the  conceptions  which  have

exercised the greatest influence on mankind. Into the theological import of

this, or into the consideration of the errors to which the idea may have given

rise,  we  need  not  now  enter.  All  will  agree  that  the  ideal  of  the  Divine

Sufferer, whose words the world would not receive, the man of sorrows of

whom the Hebrew prophets spoke, has sunk deep into the heart of the human

race.  It  is  a  similar  picture  of  suffering  goodness  which  Plato  desires  to

pourtray, not without an allusion to the fate of his master Socrates. He is

convinced that, somehow or other, such an one must be happy in life or after

death. In the Republic, he endeavours to show that his happiness would be

assured here in a well-ordered state. But in the actual condition of human

things the wise and good are weak and miserable; such an one is like a man

fallen among wild beasts, exposed to every sort of wrong and obloquy.


  Plato, like other philosophers, is thus led on to the conclusion, that if 'the

ways of God' to man are to be 'justified,' the hopes of another life must be

included. If the question could have been put to him, whether a man dying in

torments was happy still, even if, as he suggests in the Apology, 'death be

only a long sleep,' we can hardly tell what would have been his answer. There

have been a few, who, quite independently of rewards and punishments or of

posthumous reputation, or any other influence of public opinion, have been

willing to sacrifice their lives for the good of others. It is difficult to say how

far in such cases an unconscious hope of a future life, or a general faith in the

victory  of  good  in  the  world,  may  have  supported  the  sufferers.  But  this

extreme idealism is not in accordance with the spirit of Plato. He supposes a

day of retribution, in which the good are to be rewarded and the wicked

punished. Though, as he says in the Phaedo, no man of sense will maintain

that the details of the stories about another world are true, he will insist that

something of the kind is true, and will frame his life with a view to this

unknown  future.  Even  in  the  Republic  he  introduces  a  future  life  as  an

afterthought, when the superior happiness of the just has been established on

what is thought to be an immutable foundation. At the same time he makes a

point of determining his main thesis independently of remoter consequences.  (3) Plato's theory of punishment is partly vindictive, partly corrective. In

the Gorgias, as well as in the Phaedo and Republic, a few great criminals,

chiefly tyrants, are reserved as examples. But most men have never had the

opportunity of attaining this pre-eminence of evil. They are not incurable, and

their  punishment  is  intended  for  their  improvement.  They  are  to  suffer

because they have sinned; like sick men, they must go to the physician and be

healed. On this representation of Plato's the criticism has been made, that the

analogy of disease and injustice is partial only, and that suffering, instead of

improving men, may have just the opposite effect.


  Like the general analogy of the arts and the virtues, the analogy of disease

and injustice, or of medicine and justice, is certainly imperfect. But ideas

must be given through something; the nature of the mind which is unseen can

only  be  represented  under  figures  derived  from  visible  objects.  If  these

figures are suggestive of some new aspect under which the mind may be

considered, we cannot find fault with them for not exactly coinciding with the

ideas represented. They partake of the imperfect nature of language, and must

not be construed in too strict a manner. That Plato sometimes reasons from

them as if they were not figures but realities, is due to the defective logical

analysis of his age.


  Nor does he distinguish between the suffering which improves and the

suffering which only punishes and deters. He applies to the sphere of ethics a

conception of punishment which is really derived from criminal law. He does

not see that such punishment is only negative, and supplies no principle of

moral  growth  or  development.  He  is  not  far  off  the  higher  notion  of  an

education of man to be begun in this world, and to be continued in other

stages of existence, which is further developed in the Republic. And Christian

thinkers, who have ventured out of the beaten track in their meditations on

the 'last things,' have found a ray of light in his writings. But he has not

explained  how  or  in  what  way  punishment  is  to  contribute  to  the

improvement of mankind. He has not followed out the principle which he

affirms in the Republic, that 'God is the author of evil only with a view to

good,' and that 'they were the better for being punished.' Still his doctrine of a

future state of rewards and punishments may be compared favourably with

that perversion of Christian doctrine which makes the everlasting punishment

of human beings depend on a brief moment of time, or even on the accidentof  an  accident.  And  he  has  escaped  the  difficulty  which  has  often  beset

divines, respecting the future destiny of the meaner sort of men (Thersites

and the like), who are neither very good nor very bad, by not counting them

worthy of eternal damnation.


  We  do  Plato  violence  in  pressing  his  figures  of  speech  or  chains  of

argument; and not less so in asking questions which were beyond the horizon

of  his  vision,  or  did  not  come  within  the  scope  of  his  design.  The  main

purpose of the Gorgias is not to answer questions about a future world, but to

place in antagonism the true and false life, and to contrast the judgments and

opinions of men with judgment according to the truth. Plato may be accused

of representing a superhuman or transcendental virtue in the description of

the just man in the Gorgias, or in the companion portrait of the philosopher in

the Theaetetus; and at the same time may be thought to be condemning a

state of the world which always has existed and always will exist among

men. But such ideals act powerfully on the imagination of mankind. And

such condemnations are not mere paradoxes of philosophers, but the natural

rebellion of the higher sense of right in man against the ordinary conditions

of  human  life.  The  greatest  statesmen  have  fallen  very  far  short  of  the

political ideal, and are therefore justly involved in the general condemnation.


    Subordinate to the main purpose of the dialogue are some other questions,

which may be briefly considered:--


  a. The antithesis of good and pleasure, which as in other dialogues is

supposed to consist in the permanent nature of the one compared with the

transient and relative nature of the other. Good and pleasure, knowledge and

sense, truth and opinion, essence and generation, virtue and pleasure, the real

and  the  apparent,  the  infinite  and  finite,  harmony  or  beauty  and  discord,

dialectic and rhetoric or poetry, are so many pairs of opposites, which in

Plato easily pass into one another, and are seldom kept perfectly distinct. And

we must not forget that Plato's conception of pleasure is the Heracleitean flux

transferred  to  the  sphere  of  human  conduct.  There  is  some  degree  of

unfairness  in  opposing  the  principle  of  good,  which  is  objective,  to  the

principle of pleasure, which is subjective. For the assertion of the permanence

of good is only based on the assumption of its objective character. Had Plato

fixed  his  mind,  not  on  the  ideal  nature  of  good,  but  on  the  subjectiveconsciousness of happiness, that would have been found to be as transient

and precarious as pleasure.


  b. The arts or sciences, when pursued without any view to truth, or the

improvement of human life, are called flatteries. They are all alike dependent

upon the opinion of mankind, from which they are derived. To Plato the

whole world appears to be sunk in error, based on self-interest. To this is

opposed the one wise man hardly professing to have found truth, yet strong in

the conviction that a virtuous life is the only good, whether regarded with

reference to this world or to another. Statesmen, Sophists, rhetoricians, poets,

are alike brought up for judgment. They are the parodies of wise men, and

their arts are the parodies of true arts and sciences. All that they call science

is merely the result of that study of the tempers of the Great Beast, which he

describes in the Republic.


  c. Various other points of contact naturally suggest themselves between

the Gorgias and other dialogues, especially the Republic, the Philebus, and

the Protagoras. There are closer resemblances both of spirit and language in

the Republic than in any other dialogue, the verbal similarity tending to show

that they were written at the same period of Plato's life. For the Republic

supplies  that  education  and  training  of  which  the  Gorgias  suggests  the

necessity. The theory of the many weak combining against the few strong in

the formation of society (which is indeed a partial truth), is similar in both of

them, and is expressed in nearly the same language. The sufferings and fate

of the just man, the powerlessness of evil, and the reversal of the situation in

another life, are also points of similarity. The poets, like the rhetoricians, are

condemned because they aim at pleasure only, as in the Republic they are

expelled the State, because they are imitators, and minister to the weaker side

of human nature. That poetry is akin to rhetoric may be compared with the

analogous notion, which occurs in the Protagoras, that the ancient poets were

the Sophists of their day. In some other respects the Protagoras rather offers a

contrast than a parallel. The character of Protagoras may be compared with

that  of  Gorgias,  but  the  conception  of  happiness  is  different  in  the  two

dialogues; being described in the former, according to the old Socratic notion,

as deferred or accumulated pleasure, while in the Gorgias, and in the Phaedo,

pleasure and good are distinctly opposed.  This opposition is carried out from a speculative point of view in the

Philebus.  There  neither  pleasure  nor  wisdom  are  allowed  to  be  the  chief

good, but pleasure and good are not so completely opposed as in the Gorgias.

For innocent pleasures, and such as have no antecedent pains, are allowed to

rank in the class of goods. The allusion to Gorgias' definition of rhetoric

(Philebus; compare Gorg.), as the art of persuasion, of all arts the best, for to

it all things submit, not by compulsion, but of their own free will--marks a

close and perhaps designed connection between the two dialogues. In both

the ideas of measure, order, harmony, are the connecting links between the

beautiful and the good.


  In general spirit and character, that is, in irony and antagonism to public

opinion, the Gorgias most nearly resembles the Apology, Crito, and portions

of the Republic, and like the Philebus, though from another point of view,

may be thought to stand in the same relation to Plato's theory of morals which

the Theaetetus bears to his theory of knowledge.


  d. A few minor points still remain to be summed up: (1) The extravagant

irony in the reason which is assigned for the pilot's modest charge; and in the

proposed use of rhetoric as an instrument of self-condemnation; and in the

mighty power of geometrical equality in both worlds. (2) The reference of the

mythus to the previous discussion should not be overlooked: the fate reserved

for incurable criminals such as Archelaus; the retaliation of the box on the

ears; the nakedness of the souls and of the judges who are stript of the clothes

or disguises which rhetoric and public opinion have hitherto provided for

them (compare Swift's notion that the universe is a suit of clothes, Tale of a

Tub). The fiction seems to have involved Plato in the necessity of supposing

that the soul retained a sort of corporeal likeness after death. (3) The appeal

of the authority of Homer, who says that Odysseus saw Minos in his court

'holding a golden sceptre,' which gives verisimilitude to the tale.


  It is scarcely necessary to repeat that Plato is playing 'both sides of the

game,' and that in criticising the characters of Gorgias and Polus, we are not

passing  any  judgment  on  historical  individuals,  but  only  attempting  to

analyze the 'dramatis personae' as they were conceived by him. Neither is it

necessary to enlarge upon the obvious fact that Plato is a dramatic writer,

whose real opinions cannot always be assumed to be those which he puts intothe mouth of Socrates, or any other speaker who appears to have the best of

the  argument;  or  to  repeat  the  observation  that  he  is  a  poet  as  well  as  a

philosopher; or to remark that he is not to be tried by a modern standard, but

interpreted  with  reference  to  his  place  in  the  history  of  thought  and  the

opinion of his time.


  It has been said that the most characteristic feature of the Gorgias is the

assertion of the right of dissent, or private judgment. But this mode of stating

the  question  is  really  opposed  both  to  the  spirit  of  Plato  and  of  ancient

philosophy generally. For Plato is not asserting any abstract right or duty of

toleration, or advantage to be derived from freedom of thought; indeed, in

some other parts of his writings (e.g. Laws), he has fairly laid himself open to

the charge of intolerance. No speculations had as yet arisen respecting the

'liberty of prophesying;' and Plato is not affirming any abstract right of this

nature: but he is asserting the duty and right of the one wise and true man to

dissent  from  the  folly  and  falsehood  of  the  many.  At  the  same  time  he

acknowledges the natural result, which he hardly seeks to avert, that he who

speaks the truth to a multitude, regardless of consequences, will probably

share the fate of Socrates.


  ...


  The irony of Plato sometimes veils from us the height of idealism to

which he soars. When declaring truths which the many will not receive, he

puts on an armour which cannot be pierced by them. The weapons of ridicule

are taken out of their hands and the laugh is turned against themselves. The

disguises  which  Socrates  assumes  are  like  the  parables  of  the  New

Testament, or the oracles of the Delphian God; they half conceal, half reveal,

his meaning. The more he is in earnest, the more ironical he becomes; and he

is never more in earnest or more ironical than in the Gorgias. He hardly

troubles himself to answer seriously the objections of Gorgias and Polus, and

therefore he sometimes appears to be careless of the ordinary requirements of

logic.  Yet  in  the  highest  sense  he  is  always  logical  and  consistent  with

himself. The form of the argument may be paradoxical; the substance is an

appeal  to  the  higher  reason.  He  is  uttering  truths  before  they  can  be

understood,  as  in  all  ages  the  words  of  philosophers,  when  they  are  first

uttered,  have  found  the  world  unprepared  for  them.  A  furthermisunderstanding arises out of the wildness of his humour; he is supposed

not only by Callicles, but by the rest of mankind, to be jesting when he is

profoundly serious. At length he makes even Polus in earnest. Finally, he

drops the argument, and heedless any longer of the forms of dialectic, he

loses himself in a sort of triumph, while at the same time he retaliates upon

his adversaries. From this confusion of jest and earnest, we may now return

to  the  ideal  truth,  and  draw  out  in  a  simple  form  the  main  theses  of  the

dialogue.


  First Thesis:--


  It is a greater evil to do than to suffer injustice.


  Compare the New Testament--


  'It is better to suffer for well doing than for evil doing.'--1 Pet.


  And the Sermon on the Mount--


  'Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness' sake.'--Matt.


  The words of Socrates are more abstract than the words of Christ, but

they equally imply that the only real evil is moral evil. The righteous may

suffer or die, but they have their reward; and even if they had no reward,

would be happier than the wicked. The world, represented by Polus, is ready,

when they are asked, to acknowledge that injustice is dishonourable, and for

their own sakes men are willing to punish the offender (compare Republic).

But  they  are  not  equally  willing  to  acknowledge  that  injustice,  even  if

successful,  is  essentially  evil,  and  has  the  nature  of  disease  and  death.

Especially  when  crimes  are  committed  on  the  great  scale--the  crimes  of

tyrants, ancient or modern--after a while, seeing that they cannot be undone,

and have become a part of history, mankind are disposed to forgive them, not

from any magnanimity or charity, but because their feelings are blunted by

time, and 'to forgive is convenient to them.' The tangle of good and evil can

no longer be unravelled; and although they know that the end cannot justify

the means, they feel also that good has often come out of evil. But Socrates

would have us pass the same judgment on the tyrant now and always; thoughhe is surrounded by his satellites, and has the applauses of Europe and Asia

ringing in his ears; though he is the civilizer or liberator of half a continent,

he  is,  and  always  will  be,  the  most  miserable  of  men.  The  greatest

consequences for good or for evil cannot alter a hair's breadth the morality of

actions which are right or wrong in themselves. This is the standard which

Socrates holds up to us. Because politics, and perhaps human life generally,

are of a mixed nature we must not allow our principles to sink to the level of

our practice.


  And so of private individuals--to them, too, the world occasionally speaks

of the consequences of their actions:--if they are lovers of pleasure, they will

ruin their health; if they are false or dishonest, they will lose their character.

But Socrates would speak to them, not of what will be, but of what is--of the

present  consequence  of  lowering  and  degrading  the  soul.  And  all  higher

natures, or perhaps all men everywhere, if they were not tempted by interest

or passion, would agree with him--they would rather be the victims than the

perpetrators of an act of treachery or of tyranny. Reason tells them that death

comes sooner or later to all, and is not so great an evil as an unworthy life, or

rather, if rightly regarded, not an evil at all, but to a good man the greatest

good. For in all of us there are slumbering ideals of truth and right, which

may at any time awaken and develop a new life in us.


    Second Thesis:--


  It is better to suffer for wrong doing than not to suffer.


  There might have been a condition of human life in which the penalty

followed at once, and was proportioned to the offence. Moral evil would then

be scarcely distinguishable from physical; mankind would avoid vice as they

avoid pain or death. But nature, with a view of deepening and enlarging our

characters, has for the most part hidden from us the consequences of our

actions, and we can only foresee them by an effort of reflection. To awaken

in  us  this  habit  of  reflection  is  the  business  of  early  education,  which  is

continued in maturer years by observation and experience. The spoilt child is

in later life said to be unfortunate--he had better have suffered when he was

young, and been saved from suffering afterwards. But is not the sovereign

equally  unfortunate  whose  education  and  manner  of  life  are  alwaysconcealing from him the consequences of his own actions, until at length they

are revealed to him in some terrible downfall, which may, perhaps, have been

caused not by his own fault? Another illustration is afforded by the pauper

and  criminal  classes,  who  scarcely  reflect  at  all,  except  on  the  means  by

which  they  can  compass  their  immediate  ends.  We  pity  them,  and  make

allowances for them; but we do not consider that the same principle applies to

human actions generally. Not to have been found out in some dishonesty or

folly, regarded from a moral or religious point of view, is the greatest of

misfortunes. The success of our evil doings is a proof that the gods have

ceased to strive with us, and have given us over to ourselves. There is nothing

to remind us of our sins, and therefore nothing to correct them. Like our

sorrows, they are healed by time;


  'While rank corruption, mining all within, Infects unseen.'


  The 'accustomed irony' of Socrates adds a corollary to the argument:--

'Would you punish your enemy, you should allow him to escape unpunished'-

-  this  is  the  true  retaliation.  (Compare  the  obscure  verse  of  Proverbs,

'Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him,' etc., quoted in Romans.)


  Men are not in the habit of dwelling upon the dark side of their own lives:

they do not easily see themselves as others see them. They are very kind and

very blind to their own faults; the rhetoric of self-love is always pleading

with them on their own behalf. Adopting a similar figure of speech, Socrates

would have them use rhetoric, not in defence but in accusation of themselves.

As they are guided by feeling rather than by reason, to their feelings the

appeal must be made. They must speak to themselves; they must argue with

themselves; they must paint in eloquent words the character of their own evil

deeds.  To  any  suffering  which  they  have  deserved,  they  must  persuade

themselves to submit. Under the figure there lurks a real thought, which,

expressed in another form, admits of an easy application to ourselves. For do

not we too accuse as well as excuse ourselves? And we call to our aid the

rhetoric of prayer and preaching, which the mind silently employs while the

struggle  between  the  better  and  the  worse  is  going  on  within  us.  And

sometimes we are too hard upon ourselves, because we want to restore the

balance which self-love has overthrown or disturbed; and then again we may

hear a voice as of a parent consoling us. In religious diaries a sort of drama isoften enacted by the consciences of men 'accusing or else excusing them.' For

all our life long we are talking with ourselves:--What is thought but speech?

What is feeling but rhetoric? And if rhetoric is used on one side only we shall

be always in danger of being deceived. And so the words of Socrates, which

at first sounded paradoxical, come home to the experience of all of us.


  Third Thesis:--


  We do not what we will, but what we wish.


  Socrates would teach us a lesson which we are slow to learn--that good

intentions,  and  even  benevolent  actions,  when  they  are  not  prompted  by

wisdom, are of no value. We believe something to be for our good which we

afterwards  find  out  not  to  be  for  our  good.  The  consequences  may  be

inevitable, for they may follow an invariable law, yet they may often be the

very opposite of what is expected by us. When we increase pauperism by

almsgiving;  when  we  tie  up  property  without  regard  to  changes  of

circumstances; when we say hastily what we deliberately disapprove; when

we do in a moment of passion what upon reflection we regret; when from any

want of self-control we give another an advantage over us--we are doing not

what we will, but what we wish. All actions of which the consequences are

not weighed and foreseen, are of this impotent and paralytic sort; and the

author  of  them  has  'the  least  possible  power'  while  seeming  to  have  the

greatest. For he is actually bringing about the reverse of what he intended.

And yet the book of nature is open to him, in which he who runs may read if

he will exercise ordinary attention; every day offers him experiences of his

own and of other men's characters, and he passes them unheeded by. The

contemplation of the consequences of actions, and the ignorance of men in

regard to them, seems to have led Socrates to his famous thesis:--'Virtue is

knowledge;' which is not so much an error or paradox as a half truth, seen

first in the twilight of ethical philosophy, but also the half of the truth which

is especially needed in the present age. For as the world has grown older men

have been too apt to imagine a right and wrong apart from consequences;

while a few, on the other hand, have sought to resolve them wholly into their

consequences. But Socrates, or Plato for him, neither divides nor identifies

them;  though  the  time  has  not  yet  arrived  either  for  utilitarian  or

transcendental systems of moral philosophy, he recognizes the two elementswhich seem to lie at the basis of morality. (Compare the following: 'Now, and

for us, it is a time to Hellenize and to praise knowing; for we have Hebraized

too much and have overvalued doing. But the habits and discipline received

from Hebraism remain for our race an eternal possession. And as humanity is

constituted,  one  must  never  assign  the  second  rank  to-day  without  being

ready to restore them to the first to-morrow.' Sir William W. Hunter, Preface

to Orissa.)


  Fourth Thesis:--


  To be and not to seem is the end of life.


  The Greek in the age of Plato admitted praise to be one of the chief

incentives to moral virtue, and to most men the opinion of their fellows is a

leading principle of action. Hence a certain element of seeming enters into all

things; all or almost all desire to appear better than they are, that they may

win the esteem or admiration of others. A man of ability can easily feign the

language of piety or virtue; and there is an unconscious as well as a conscious

hypocrisy which, according to Socrates, is the worst of the two. Again, there

is the sophistry of classes and professions. There are the different opinions

about themselves and one another which prevail in different ranks of society.

There is the bias given to the mind by the study of one department of human

knowledge  to  the  exclusion  of  the  rest;  and  stronger  far  the  prejudice

engendered by a pecuniary or party interest in certain tenets. There is the

sophistry  of  law,  the  sophistry  of  medicine,  the  sophistry  of  politics,  the

sophistry of theology. All of these disguises wear the appearance of the truth;

some of them are very ancient, and we do not easily disengage ourselves

from them; for we have inherited them, and they have become a part of us.

The  sophistry  of  an  ancient  Greek  sophist  is  nothing  compared  with  the

sophistry of a religious order, or of a church in which during many ages

falsehood has been accumulating, and everything has been said on one side,

and nothing on the other. The conventions and customs which we observe in

conversation, and the opposition of our interests when we have dealings with

one  another  ('the  buyer  saith,  it  is  nought--it  is  nought,'  etc.),  are  always

obscuring our sense of truth and right. The sophistry of human nature is far

more subtle than the deceit of any one man. Few persons speak freely from

their own natures, and scarcely any one dares to think for himself: most of usimperceptibly fall into the opinions of those around us, which we partly help

to make. A man who would shake himself loose from them, requires great

force of mind; he hardly knows where to begin in the search after truth. On

every side he is met by the world, which is not an abstraction of theologians,

but  the  most  real  of  all  things,  being  another  name  for  ourselves  when

regarded collectively and subjected to the influences of society.


  Then  comes  Socrates,  impressed  as  no  other  man  ever  was,  with  the

unreality and untruthfulness of popular opinion, and tells mankind that they

must be and not seem. How are they to be? At any rate they must have the

spirit and desire to be. If they are ignorant, they must acknowledge their

ignorance to themselves; if they are conscious of doing evil, they must learn

to do well; if they are weak, and have nothing in them which they can call

themselves,  they  must  acquire  firmness  and  consistency;  if  they  are

indifferent, they must begin to take an interest in the great questions which

surround them. They must try to be what they would fain appear in the eyes

of their fellow-men. A single individual cannot easily change public opinion;

but he can be true and innocent, simple and independent; he can know what

he does, and what he does not know; and though not without an effort, he can

form a judgment of his own, at least in common matters. In his most secret

actions he can show the same high principle (compare Republic) which he

shows when supported and watched by public opinion. And on some fitting

occasion, on some question of humanity or truth or right, even an ordinary

man, from the natural rectitude of his disposition, may be found to take up

arms against a whole tribe of politicians and lawyers, and be too much for

them.


  Who is the true and who the false statesman?--


  The  true  statesman  is  he  who  brings  order  out  of  disorder;  who  first

organizes  and  then  administers  the  government  of  his  own  country;  and

having made a nation, seeks to reconcile the national interests with those of

Europe  and  of  mankind.  He  is  not  a  mere  theorist,  nor  yet  a  dealer  in

expedients; the whole and the parts grow together in his mind; while the head

is  conceiving,  the  hand  is  executing.  Although  obliged  to  descend  to  the

world, he is not of the world. His thoughts are fixed not on power or riches or

extension of territory, but on an ideal state, in which all the citizens have anequal chance of health and life, and the highest education is within the reach

of all, and the moral and intellectual qualities of every individual are freely

developed, and 'the idea of good' is the animating principle of the whole. Not

the attainment of freedom alone, or of order alone, but how to unite freedom

with order is the problem which he has to solve.


  The statesman who places before himself these lofty aims has undertaken

a task which will call forth all his powers. He must control himself before he

can control others; he must know mankind before he can manage them. He

has no private likes or dislikes; he does not conceal personal enmity under the

disguise of moral or political principle: such meannesses, into which men too

often fall unintentionally, are absorbed in the consciousness of his mission,

and  in  his  love  for  his  country  and  for  mankind.  He  will  sometimes  ask

himself what the next generation will say of him; not because he is careful of

posthumous fame, but because he knows that the result of his life as a whole

will then be more fairly judged. He will take time for the execution of his

plans; not hurrying them on when the mind of a nation is unprepared for

them; but like the Ruler of the Universe Himself, working in the appointed

time, for he knows that human life, 'if not long in comparison with eternity'

(Republic), is sufficient for the fulfilment of many great purposes. He knows,

too, that the work will be still going on when he is no longer here; and he will

sometimes, especially when his powers are failing, think of that other 'city of

which the pattern is in heaven' (Republic).


  The false politician is the serving-man of the state. In order to govern

men he becomes like them; their 'minds are married in conjunction;' they

'bear themselves' like vulgar and tyrannical masters, and he is their obedient

servant.  The  true  politician,  if  he  would  rule  men,  must  make  them  like

himself; he must 'educate his party' until they cease to be a party; he must

breathe  into  them  the  spirit  which  will  hereafter  give  form  to  their

institutions. Politics with him are not a mechanism for seeming what he is

not, or for carrying out the will of the majority. Himself a representative man,

he is the representative not of the lower but of the higher elements of the

nation. There is a better (as well as a worse) public opinion of which he seeks

to lay hold; as there is also a deeper current of human affairs in which he is

borne  up  when  the  waves  nearer  the  shore  are  threatening  him.  He

acknowledges that he cannot take the world by force--two or three moves onthe political chess board are all that he can fore see--two or three weeks

moves on the political chessboard are all that he can foresee--two or three

weeks  or  months  are  granted  to  him  in  which  he  can  provide  against  a

coming struggle. But he knows also that there are permanent principles of

politics  which  are  always  tending  to  the  well-being  of  states--better

administration, better education, the reconciliation of conflicting elements,

increased  security  against  external  enemies.  These  are  not  'of  to-day  or

yesterday,' but are the same in all times, and under all forms of government.

Then when the storm descends and the winds blow, though he knows not

beforehand  the  hour  of  danger,  the  pilot,  not  like  Plato's  captain  in  the

Republic, half-blind and deaf, but with penetrating eye and quick ear, is ready

to take command of the ship and guide her into port.


  The false politician asks not what is true, but what is the opinion of the

world--not what is right, but what is expedient. The only measures of which

he approves are the measures which will pass. He has no intention of fighting

an uphill battle; he keeps the roadway of politics. He is unwilling to incur the

persecution and enmity which political convictions would entail upon him.

He  begins  with  popularity,  and  in  fair  weather  sails  gallantly  along.  But

unpopularity soon follows him. For men expect their leaders to be better and

wiser  than  themselves:  to  be  their  guides  in  danger,  their  saviours  in

extremity; they do not really desire them to obey all the ignorant impulses of

the popular mind; and if they fail them in a crisis they are disappointed. Then,

as Socrates says, the cry of ingratitude is heard, which is most unreasonable;

for the people, who have been taught no better, have done what might be

expected of them, and their statesmen have received justice at their hands.


  The  true  statesman  is  aware  that  he  must  adapt  himself  to  times  and

circumstances. He must have allies if he is to fight against the world; he must

enlighten  public  opinion;  he  must  accustom  his  followers  to  act  together.

Although he is not the mere executor of the will of the majority, he must win

over the majority to himself. He is their leader and not their follower, but in

order to lead he must also follow. He will neither exaggerate nor undervalue

the power of a statesman, neither adopting the 'laissez faire' nor the 'paternal

government' principle; but he will, whether he is dealing with children in

politics,  or  with  full-  grown  men,  seek  to  do  for  the  people  what  the

government can do for them, and what, from imperfect education or deficientpowers of combination, they cannot do for themselves. He knows that if he

does too much for them they will do nothing; and that if he does nothing for

them they will in some states of society be utterly helpless. For the many

cannot exist without the few, if the material force of a country is from below,

wisdom and experience are from above. It is not a small part of human evils

which kings and governments make or cure. The statesman is well aware that

a great purpose carried out consistently during many years will at last be

executed. He is playing for a stake which may be partly determined by some

accident, and therefore he will allow largely for the unknown element of

politics. But the game being one in which chance and skill are combined, if

he  plays  long  enough  he  is  certain  of  victory.  He  will  not  be  always

consistent,  for  the  world  is  changing;  and  though  he  depends  upon  the

support of a party, he will remember that he is the minister of the whole. He

lives not for the present, but for the future, and he is not at all sure that he

will be appreciated either now or then. For he may have the existing order of

society against him, and may not be remembered by a distant posterity.


  There are always discontented idealists in politics who, like Socrates in

the  Gorgias,  find  fault  with  all  statesmen  past  as  well  as  present,  not

excepting the greatest names of history. Mankind have an uneasy feeling that

they ought to be better governed than they are. Just as the actual philosopher

falls short of the one wise man, so does the actual statesman fall short of the

ideal. And so partly from vanity and egotism, but partly also from a true

sense of the faults of eminent men, a temper of dissatisfaction and criticism

springs up among those who are ready enough to acknowledge the inferiority

of their own powers. No matter whether a statesman makes high professions

or  none  at  all--they  are  reduced  sooner  or  later  to  the  same  level.  And

sometimes  the  more  unscrupulous  man  is  better  esteemed  than  the  more

conscientious,  because  he  has  not  equally  deceived  expectations.  Such

sentiments may be unjust, but they are widely spread; we constantly find

them  recurring  in  reviews  and  newspapers,  and  still  oftener  in  private

conversation.


  We  may  further  observe  that  the  art  of  government,  while  in  some

respects  tending  to  improve,  has  in  others  a  tendency  to  degenerate,  as

institutions become more popular. Governing for the people cannot easily be

combined with governing by the people: the interests of classes are too strongfor the ideas of the statesman who takes a comprehensive view of the whole.

According to Socrates the true governor will find ruin or death staring him in

the face, and will only be induced to govern from the fear of being governed

by a worse man than himself (Republic). And in modern times, though the

world has grown milder, and the terrible consequences which Plato foretells

no longer await an English statesman, any one who is not actuated by a blind

ambition will only undertake from a sense of duty a work in which he is most

likely to fail; and even if he succeed, will rarely be rewarded by the gratitude

of his own generation.


  Socrates, who is not a politician at all, tells us that he is the only real

politician of his time. Let us illustrate the meaning of his words by applying

them to the history of our own country. He would have said that not Pitt or

Fox, or Canning or Sir R. Peel, are the real politicians of their time, but

Locke, Hume, Adam Smith, Bentham, Ricardo. These during the greater part

of their lives occupied an inconsiderable space in the eyes of the public. They

were private persons; nevertheless they sowed in the minds of men seeds

which in the next generation have become an irresistible power. 'Herein is

that saying true, One soweth and another reapeth.' We may imagine with

Plato  an  ideal  statesman  in  whom  practice  and  speculation  are  perfectly

harmonized;  for  there  is  no  necessary  opposition  between  them.  But

experience shows that they are commonly divorced--the ordinary politician is

the interpreter or executor of the thoughts of others, and hardly ever brings to

the birth a new political conception. One or two only in modern times, like

the Italian statesman Cavour, have created the world in which they moved.

The philosopher is naturally unfitted for political life; his great ideas are not

understood by the many; he is a thousand miles away from the questions of

the day. Yet perhaps the lives of thinkers, as they are stiller and deeper, are

also happier than the lives of those who are more in the public eye. They

have the promise of the future, though they are regarded as dreamers and

visionaries by their own contemporaries. And when they are no longer here,

those who would have been ashamed of them during their lives claim kindred

with them, and are proud to be called by their names. (Compare Thucyd.)


  Who is the true poet?


  Plato expels the poets from his Republic because they are allied to sense;because they stimulate the emotions; because they are thrice removed from

the ideal truth. And in a similar spirit he declares in the Gorgias that the

stately muse of tragedy is a votary of pleasure and not of truth. In modern

times we almost ridicule the idea of poetry admitting of a moral. The poet

and the prophet, or preacher, in primitive antiquity are one and the same; but

in  later  ages  they  seem  to  fall  apart.  The  great  art  of  novel  writing,  that

peculiar creation of our own and the last century, which, together with the

sister art of review writing, threatens to absorb all literature, has even less of

seriousness  in  her  composition.  Do  we  not  often  hear  the  novel  writer

censured for attempting to convey a lesson to the minds of his readers?


  Yet the true office of a poet or writer of fiction is not merely to give

amusement, or to be the expression of the feelings of mankind, good or bad,

or even to increase our knowledge of human nature. There have been poets in

modern times, such as Goethe or Wordsworth, who have not forgotten their

high vocation of teachers; and the two greatest of the Greek dramatists owe

their sublimity to their ethical character. The noblest truths, sung of in the

purest and sweetest language, are still the proper material of poetry. The poet

clothes them with beauty, and has a power of making them enter into the

hearts and memories of men. He has not only to speak of themes above the

level of ordinary life, but to speak of them in a deeper and tenderer way than

they are ordinarily felt, so as to awaken the feeling of them in others. The old

he makes young again; the familiar principle he invests with a new dignity;

he finds a noble expression for the common- places of morality and politics.

He uses the things of sense so as to indicate what is beyond; he raises us

through earth to heaven. He expresses what the better part of us would fain

say, and the half-conscious feeling is strengthened by the expression. He is

his own critic, for the spirit of poetry and of criticism are not divided in him.

His mission is not to disguise men from themselves, but to reveal to them

their own nature, and make them better acquainted with the world around

them. True poetry is the remembrance of youth, of love, the embodiment in

words of the happiest and holiest moments of life, of the noblest thoughts of

man, of the greatest deeds of the past. The poet of the future may return to his

greater calling of the prophet or teacher; indeed, we hardly know what may

not  be  effected  for  the  human  race  by  a  better  use  of  the  poetical  and

imaginative faculty. The reconciliation of poetry, as of religion, with truth,

may still be possible. Neither is the element of pleasure to be excluded. Forwhen we substitute a higher pleasure for a lower we raise men in the scale of

existence. Might not the novelist, too, make an ideal, or rather many ideals of

social life, better than a thousand sermons? Plato, like the Puritans, is too

much afraid of poetic and artistic influences. But he is not without a true

sense of the noble purposes to which art may be applied (Republic).


  Modern  poetry  is  often  a  sort  of  plaything,  or,  in  Plato's  language,  a

flattery, a sophistry, or sham, in which, without any serious purpose, the poet

lends wings to his fancy and exhibits his gifts of language and metre. Such an

one seeks to gratify the taste of his readers; he has the 'savoir faire,' or trick of

writing, but he has not the higher spirit of poetry. He has no conception that

true art should bring order out of disorder; that it should make provision for

the soul's highest interest; that it should be pursued only with a view to 'the

improvement  of  the  citizens.'  He  ministers  to  the  weaker  side  of  human

nature (Republic); he idealizes the sensual; he sings the strain of love in the

latest fashion; instead of raising men above themselves he brings them back

to the 'tyranny of the many masters,' from which all his life long a good man

has been praying to be delivered. And often, forgetful of measure and order,

he will express not that which is truest, but that which is strongest. Instead of

a great and nobly-executed subject, perfect in every part, some fancy of a

heated  brain  is  worked  out  with  the  strangest  incongruity.  He  is  not  the

master  of  his  words,  but  his  words--perhaps  borrowed  from  another--the

faded reflection of some French or German or Italian writer, have the better

of him. Though we are not going to banish the poets, how can we suppose

that such utterances have any healing or life-giving influence on the minds of

men?


  'Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter:' Art then must be true,

and politics must be true, and the life of man must be true and not a seeming

or sham. In all of them order has to be brought out of disorder, truth out of

error and falsehood. This is what we mean by the greatest improvement of

man.  And  so,  having  considered  in  what  way  'we  can  best  spend  the

appointed time, we leave the result with God.' Plato does not say that God

will order all things for the best (compare Phaedo), but he indirectly implies

that the evils of this life will be corrected in another. And as we are very far

from the best imaginable world at present, Plato here, as in the Phaedo and

Republic, supposes a purgatory or place of education for mankind in general,and for a very few a Tartarus or hell. The myth which terminates the dialogue

is not the revelation, but rather, like all similar descriptions, whether in the

Bible or Plato, the veil of another life. For no visible thing can reveal the

invisible.  Of  this  Plato,  unlike  some  commentators  on  Scripture,  is  fully

aware. Neither will he dogmatize about the manner in which we are 'born

again' (Republic). Only he is prepared to maintain the ultimate triumph of

truth and right, and declares that no one, not even the wisest of the Greeks,

can affirm any other doctrine without being ridiculous.


  There is a further paradox of ethics, in which pleasure and pain are held

to  be  indifferent,  and  virtue  at  the  time  of  action  and  without  regard  to

consequences is happiness. From this elevation or exaggeration of feeling

Plato  seems  to  shrink:  he  leaves  it  to  the  Stoics  in  a  later  generation  to

maintain that when impaled or on the rack the philosopher may be happy

(compare  Republic).  It  is  observable  that  in  the  Republic  he  raises  this

question, but it is not really discussed; the veil of the ideal state, the shadow

of another life, are allowed to descend upon it and it passes out of sight. The

martyr or sufferer in the cause of right or truth is often supposed to die in

raptures, having his eye fixed on a city which is in heaven. But if there were

no future, might he not still be happy in the performance of an action which

was attended only by a painful death? He himself may be ready to thank God

that he was thought worthy to do Him the least service, without looking for a

reward; the joys of another life may not have been present to his mind at all.

Do  we  suppose  that  the  mediaeval  saint,  St.  Bernard,  St.  Francis,  St.

Catharine of Sienna, or the Catholic priest who lately devoted himself to

death  by  a  lingering  disease  that  he  might  solace  and  help  others,  was

thinking of the 'sweets' of heaven? No; the work was already heaven to him

and enough. Much less will the dying patriot be dreaming of the praises of

man or of an immortality of fame: the sense of duty, of right, and trust in God

will be sufficient, and as far as the mind can reach, in that hour. If he were

certain that there were no life to come, he would not have wished to speak or

act otherwise than he did in the cause of truth or of humanity. Neither, on the

other hand, will he suppose that God has forsaken him or that the future is to

be a mere blank to him. The greatest act of faith, the only faith which cannot

pass away, is his who has not known, but yet has believed. A very few among

the sons of men have made themselves independent of circumstances, past,

present,  or  to  come.  He  who  has  attained  to  such  a  temper  of  mind  hasalready present with him eternal life; he needs no arguments to convince him

of immortality; he has in him already a principle stronger than death. He who

serves man without the thought of reward is deemed to be a more faithful

servant than he who works for hire. May not the service of God, which is the

more disinterested, be in like manner the higher? And although only a very

few in the course of the world's history --Christ himself being one of them--

have attained to such a noble conception of God and of the human soul, yet

the ideal of them may be present to us, and the remembrance of them be an

example to us, and their lives may shed a light on many dark places both of

philosophy and theology.


  THE MYTHS OF PLATO.


  The myths of Plato are a phenomenon unique in literature. There are four

longer ones: these occur in the Phaedrus, Phaedo, Gorgias, and Republic.

That in the Republic is the most elaborate and finished of them. Three of

these greater myths, namely those contained in the Phaedo, the Gorgias and

the  Republic,  relate  to  the  destiny  of  human  souls  in  a  future  life.  The

magnificent  myth  in  the  Phaedrus  treats  of  the  immortality,  or  rather  the

eternity of the soul, in which is included a former as well as a future state of

existence. To these may be added, (1) the myth, or rather fable, occurring in

the Statesman, in which the life of innocence is contrasted with the ordinary

life of man and the consciousness of evil: (2) the legend of the Island of

Atlantis, an imaginary history, which is a fragment only, commenced in the

Timaeus and continued in the Critias: (3) the much less artistic fiction of the

foundation of the Cretan colony which is introduced in the preface to the

Laws, but soon falls into the background: (4) the beautiful but rather artificial

tale  of  Prometheus  and  Epimetheus  narrated  in  his  rhetorical  manner  by

Protagoras in the dialogue called after him: (5) the speech at the beginning of

the Phaedrus, which is a parody of the orator Lysias; the rival speech of

Socrates and the recantation of it. To these may be added (6) the tale of the

grasshoppers, and (7) the tale of Thamus and of Theuth, both in the Phaedrus:

(8) the parable of the Cave (Republic), in which the previous argument is

recapitulated,  and  the  nature  and  degrees  of  knowledge  having  been

previously set forth in the abstract are represented in a picture: (9) the fiction

of the earth-born men (Republic; compare Laws), in which by the adaptation

of an old tradition Plato makes a new beginning for his society: (10) the mythof Aristophanes respecting the division of the sexes, Sym.: (11) the parable of

the noble captain, the pilot, and the mutinous sailors (Republic), in which is

represented the relation of the better part of the world, and of the philosopher,

to the mob of politicians: (12) the ironical tale of the pilot who plies between

Athens  and  Aegina  charging  only  a  small  payment  for  saving  men  from

death, the reason being that he is uncertain whether to live or die is better for

them (Gor.): (13) the treatment of freemen and citizens by physicians and of

slaves by their apprentices,--a somewhat laboured figure of speech intended

to illustrate the two different ways in which the laws speak to men (Laws).

There  also  occur  in  Plato  continuous  images;  some  of  them  extend  over

several  pages,  appearing  and  reappearing  at  intervals:  such  as  the  bees

stinging  and  stingless  (paupers  and  thieves)  in  the  Eighth  Book  of  the

Republic, who are generated in the transition from timocracy to oligarchy: the

sun, which is to the visible world what the idea of good is to the intellectual,

in the Sixth Book of the Republic: the composite animal, having the form of a

man, but containing under a human skin a lion and a many-headed monster

(Republic): the great beast, i.e. the populace: and the wild beast within us,

meaning  the  passions  which  are  always  liable  to  break  out:  the  animated

comparisons of the degradation of philosophy by the arts to the dishonoured

maiden, and of the tyrant to the parricide, who 'beats his father, having first

taken away his arms': the dog, who is your only philosopher: the grotesque

and rather paltry image of the argument wandering about without a head

(Laws), which is repeated, not improved, from the Gorgias: the argument

personified as veiling her face (Republic), as engaged in a chase, as breaking

upon us in a first, second and third wave:--on these figures of speech the

changes  are  rung  many  times  over.  It  is  observable  that  nearly  all  these

parables or continuous images are found in the Republic; that which occurs in

the Theaetetus, of the midwifery of Socrates, is perhaps the only exception.

To make the list complete, the mathematical figure of the number of the state

(Republic),  or  the  numerical  interval  which  separates  king  from  tyrant,

should not be forgotten.


  The  myth  in  the  Gorgias  is  one  of  those  descriptions  of  another  life

which, like the Sixth Aeneid of Virgil, appear to contain reminiscences of the

mysteries. It is a vision of the rewards and punishments which await good

and  bad  men  after  death.  It  supposes  the  body  to  continue  and  to  be  in

another world what it has become in this. It includes a Paradiso, Purgatorio,and Inferno, like the sister myths of the Phaedo and the Republic. The Inferno

is  reserved  for  great  criminals  only.  The  argument  of  the  dialogue  is

frequently referred to, and the meaning breaks through so as rather to destroy

the liveliness and consistency of the picture. The structure of the fiction is

very slight, the chief point or moral being that in the judgments of another

world there is no possibility of concealment: Zeus has taken from men the

power of foreseeing death, and brings together the souls both of them and

their judges naked and undisguised at the judgment-seat. Both are exposed to

view, stripped of the veils and clothes which might prevent them from seeing

into or being seen by one another.


  The myth of the Phaedo is of the same type, but it is more cosmological,

and also more poetical. The beautiful and ingenious fancy occurs to Plato that

the upper atmosphere is an earth and heaven in one, a glorified earth, fairer

and  purer  than  that  in  which  we  dwell.  As  the  fishes  live  in  the  ocean,

mankind are living in a lower sphere, out of which they put their heads for a

moment or two and behold a world beyond. The earth which we inhabit is a

sediment of the coarser particles which drop from the world above, and is to

that heavenly earth what the desert and the shores of the ocean are to us. A

part of the myth consists of description of the interior of the earth, which

gives  the  opportunity  of  introducing  several  mythological  names  and  of

providing places of torment for the wicked. There is no clear distinction of

soul and body; the spirits beneath the earth are spoken of as souls only, yet

they retain a sort of shadowy form when they cry for mercy on the shores of

the lake; and the philosopher alone is said to have got rid of the body. All the

three  myths  in  Plato  which  relate  to  the  world  below  have  a  place  for

repentant sinners, as well as other homes or places for the very good and very

bad. It is a natural reflection which is made by Plato elsewhere, that the two

extremes of human character are rarely met with, and that the generality of

mankind are between them. Hence a place must be found for them. In the

myth  of  the  Phaedo  they  are  carried  down  the  river  Acheron  to  the

Acherusian lake, where they dwell, and are purified of their evil deeds, and

receive the rewards of their good. There are also incurable sinners, who are

cast into Tartarus, there to remain as the penalty of atrocious crimes; these

suffer everlastingly. And there is another class of hardly-curable sinners who

are allowed from time to time to approach the shores of the Acherusian lake,

where they cry to their victims for mercy; which if they obtain they come outinto the lake and cease from their torments.


  Neither this, nor any of the three greater myths of Plato, nor perhaps any

allegory or parable relating to the unseen world, is consistent with itself. The

language of philosophy mingles with that of mythology; abstract ideas are

transformed into persons, figures of speech into realities. These myths may

be compared with the Pilgrim's Progress of Bunyan, in which discussions of

theology  are  mixed  up  with  the  incidents  of  travel,  and  mythological

personages are associated with human beings: they are also garnished with

names and phrases taken out of Homer, and with other fragments of Greek

tradition.


  The myth of the Republic is more subtle and also more consistent than

either of the two others. It has a greater verisimilitude than they have, and is

full of touches which recall the experiences of human life. It will be noticed

by an attentive reader that the twelve days during which Er lay in a trance

after  he  was  slain  coincide  with  the  time  passed  by  the  spirits  in  their

pilgrimage. It is a curious observation, not often made, that good men who

have lived in a well-governed city (shall we say in a religious and respectable

society?) are more likely to make mistakes in their choice of life than those

who have had more experience of the world and of evil. It is a more familiar

remark  that  we  constantly  blame  others  when  we  have  only  ourselves  to

blame;  and  the  philosopher  must  acknowledge,  however  reluctantly,  that

there  is  an  element  of  chance  in  human  life  with  which  it  is  sometimes

impossible  for  man  to  cope.  That  men  drink  more  of  the  waters  of

forgetfulness than is good for them is a poetical description of a familiar

truth. We have many of us known men who, like Odysseus, have wearied of

ambition and have only desired rest. We should like to know what became of

the infants 'dying almost as soon as they were born,' but Plato only raises,

without satisfying, our curiosity. The two companies of souls, ascending and

descending at either chasm of heaven and earth, and conversing when they

come  out  into  the  meadow,  the  majestic  figures  of  the  judges  sitting  in

heaven, the voice heard by Ardiaeus, are features of the great allegory which

have  an  indescribable  grandeur  and  power.  The  remark  already  made

respecting the inconsistency of the two other myths must be extended also to

this: it is at once an orrery, or model of the heavens, and a picture of the Day

of Judgment.  The three myths are unlike anything else in Plato. There is an Oriental, or

rather an Egyptian element in them, and they have an affinity to the mysteries

and to the Orphic modes of worship. To a certain extent they are un-Greek; at

any rate there is hardly anything like them in other Greek writings which

have a serious purpose; in spirit they are mediaeval. They are akin to what

may be termed the underground religion in all ages and countries. They are

presented in the most lively and graphic manner, but they are never insisted

on as true; it is only affirmed that nothing better can be said about a future

life. Plato seems to make use of them when he has reached the limits of

human  knowledge;  or,  to  borrow  an  expression  of  his  own,  when  he  is

standing on the outside of the intellectual world. They are very simple in

style; a few touches bring the picture home to the mind, and make it present

to us. They have also a kind of authority gained by the employment of sacred

and familiar names, just as mere fragments of the words of Scripture, put

together in any form and applied to any subject, have a power of their own.

They are a substitute for poetry and mythology; and they are also a reform of

mythology. The moral of them may be summed up in a word or two: After

death the Judgment; and 'there is some better thing remaining for the good

than for the evil.'


  All literature gathers into itself many elements of the past: for example,

the tale of the earth-born men in the Republic appears at first sight to be an

extravagant fancy, but it is restored to propriety when we remember that it is

based  on  a  legendary  belief.  The  art  of  making  stories  of  ghosts  and

apparitions credible is said to consist in the manner of telling them. The effect

is gained by many literary and conversational devices, such as the previous

raising  of  curiosity,  the  mention  of  little  circumstances,  simplicity,

picturesqueness,  the  naturalness  of  the  occasion,  and  the  like.  This  art  is

possessed by Plato in a degree which has never been equalled.


  The myth in the Phaedrus is even greater than the myths which have been

already described, but is of a different character. It treats of a former rather

than of a future life. It represents the conflict of reason aided by passion or

righteous indignation on the one hand, and of the animal lusts and instincts

on the other. The soul of man has followed the company of some god, and

seen truth in the form of the universal before it was born in this world. Our

present life is the result of the struggle which was then carried on. This worldis relative to a former world, as it is often projected into a future. We ask the

question, Where were men before birth? As we likewise enquire, What will

become  of  them  after  death?  The  first  question  is  unfamiliar  to  us,  and

therefore seems to be unnatural; but if we survey the whole human race, it

has been as influential and as widely spread as the other. In the Phaedrus it is

really  a  figure  of  speech  in  which  the  'spiritual  combat'  of  this  life  is

represented. The majesty and power of the whole passage--especially of what

may be called the theme or proem (beginning 'The mind through all her being

is immortal')--can only be rendered very inadequately in another language.


  The myth in the Statesman relates to a former cycle of existence, in which

men were born of the earth, and by the reversal of the earth's motion had their

lives reversed and were restored to youth and beauty: the dead came to life,

the old grew middle-aged, and the middle-aged young; the youth became a

child, the child an infant, the infant vanished into the earth. The connection

between the reversal of the earth's motion and the reversal of human life is of

course verbal only, yet Plato, like theologians in other ages, argues from the

consistency  of  the  tale  to  its  truth.  The  new  order  of  the  world  was

immediately under the government of God; it was a state of innocence in

which men had neither wants nor cares, in which the earth brought forth all

things spontaneously, and God was to man what man now is to the animals.

There  were  no  great  estates,  or  families,  or  private  possessions,  nor  any

traditions of the past, because men were all born out of the earth. This is what

Plato calls the 'reign of Cronos;' and in like manner he connects the reversal

of the earth's motion with some legend of which he himself was probably the

inventor.


  The question is then asked, under which of these two cycles of existence

was man the happier,--under that of Cronos, which was a state of innocence,

or that of Zeus, which is our ordinary life? For a while Plato balances the two

sides of the serious controversy, which he has suggested in a figure. The

answer depends on another question: What use did the children of Cronos

make  of  their  time?  They  had  boundless  leisure  and  the  faculty  of

discoursing,  not  only  with  one  another,  but  with  the  animals.  Did  they

employ these advantages with a view to philosophy, gathering from every

nature some addition to their store of knowledge? or, Did they pass their time

in eating and drinking and telling stories to one another and to the beasts?--ineither case there would be no difficulty in answering. But then, as Plato rather

mischievously adds, 'Nobody knows what they did,' and therefore the doubt

must remain undetermined.


  To  the  first  there  succeeds  a  second  epoch.  After  another  natural

convulsion, in which the order of the world and of human life is once more

reversed, God withdraws his guiding hand, and man is left to the government

of  himself.  The  world  begins  again,  and  arts  and  laws  are  slowly  and

painfully invented. A secular age succeeds to a theocratical. In this fanciful

tale  Plato  has  dropped,  or  almost  dropped,  the  garb  of  mythology.  He

suggests several curious and important thoughts, such as the possibility of a

state  of  innocence,  the  existence  of  a  world  without  traditions,  and  the

difference between human and divine government. He has also carried a step

further  his  speculations  concerning  the  abolition  of  the  family  and  of

property, which he supposes to have no place among the children of Cronos

any more than in the ideal state.


  It is characteristic of Plato and of his age to pass from the abstract to the

concrete, from poetry to reality. Language is the expression of the seen, and

also  of  the  unseen,  and  moves  in  a  region  between  them.  A  great  writer

knows  how  to  strike  both  these  chords,  sometimes  remaining  within  the

sphere  of  the  visible,  and  then  again  comprehending  a  wider  range  and

soaring  to  the  abstract  and  universal.  Even  in  the  same  sentence  he  may

employ both modes of speech not improperly or inharmoniously. It is useless

to criticise the broken metaphors of Plato, if the effect of the whole is to

create a picture not such as can be painted on canvas, but which is full of life

and meaning to the reader. A poem may be contained in a word or two, which

may call up not one but many latent images; or half reveal to us by a sudden

flash the thoughts of many hearts. Often the rapid transition from one image

to another is pleasing to us: on the other hand, any single figure of speech if

too often repeated, or worked out too much at length, becomes prosy and

monotonous. In theology and philosophy we necessarily include both 'the

moral law within and the starry heaven above,' and pass from one to the other

(compare  for  examples  Psalms  xviii.  and  xix.).  Whether  such  a  use  of

language is puerile or noble depends upon the genius of the writer or speaker,

and the familiarity of the associations employed.  In the myths and parables of Plato the ease and grace of conversation is

not forgotten: they are spoken, not written words, stories which are told to a

living  audience,  and  so  well  told  that  we  are  more  than  half-inclined  to

believe them (compare Phaedrus). As in conversation too, the striking image

or figure of speech is not forgotten, but is quickly caught up, and alluded to

again  and  again;  as  it  would  still  be  in  our  own  day  in  a  genial  and

sympathetic society. The descriptions of Plato have a greater life and reality

than is to be found in any modern writing. This is due to their homeliness and

simplicity. Plato can do with words just as he pleases; to him they are indeed

'more plastic than wax' (Republic). We are in the habit of opposing speech

and writing, poetry and prose. But he has discovered a use of language in

which they are united; which gives a fitting expression to the highest truths;

and in which the trifles of courtesy and the familiarities of daily life are not

overlooked.Gorgias


by Plato


Translated by Benjamin JowettPersons  of  the  Dialogue: CALLICLES,  SOCRATES,  CHAEREPHON,

GORGIAS, POLUS


Scene: The house of Callicles.


CALLICLES: The wise man, as the proverb says, is late for a fray, but not

for a feast.


SOCRATES: And are we late for a feast?


CALLICLES:  Yes,  and  a  delightful  feast;  for  Gorgias  has  just  been

exhibiting to us many fine things.


SOCRATES: It is not my fault, Callicles; our friend Chaerephon is to blame;

for he would keep us loitering in the Agora.


CHAEREPHON: Never mind, Socrates; the misfortune of which I have been

the cause I will also repair; for Gorgias is a friend of mine, and I will make

him give the exhibition again either now, or, if you prefer, at some other

time.


CALLICLES: What is the matter, Chaerephon--does Socrates want to hear

Gorgias?


CHAEREPHON: Yes, that was our intention in coming.


CALLICLES: Come into my house, then; for Gorgias is staying with me, and

he shall exhibit to you.


SOCRATES: Very good, Callicles; but will he answer our questions? for I

want to hear from him what is the nature of his art, and what it is which he

professes  and  teaches;  he  may,  as  you  (Chaerephon)  suggest,  defer  the

exhibition to some other time.


CALLICLES:  There  is  nothing  like  asking  him,  Socrates;  and  indeed  to

answer questions is a part of his exhibition, for he was saying only just now,

that any one in my house might put any question to him, and that he wouldanswer.


SOCRATES: How fortunate! will you ask him, Chaerephon--?


CHAEREPHON: What shall I ask him?


SOCRATES: Ask him who he is.


CHAEREPHON: What do you mean?


SOCRATES: I mean such a question as would elicit from him, if he had been

a maker of shoes, the answer that he is a cobbler. Do you understand?


CHAEREPHON: I understand, and will ask him: Tell me, Gorgias, is our

friend Callicles right in saying that you undertake to answer any questions

which you are asked?


GORGIAS: Quite right, Chaerephon: I was saying as much only just now;

and I may add, that many years have elapsed since any one has asked me a

new one.


CHAEREPHON: Then you must be very ready, Gorgias.


GORGIAS: Of that, Chaerephon, you can make trial.


POLUS: Yes, indeed, and if you like, Chaerephon, you may make trial of me

too, for I think that Gorgias, who has been talking a long time, is tired.


CHAEREPHON: And do you, Polus, think that you can answer better than

Gorgias?


POLUS: What does that matter if I answer well enough for you?


CHAEREPHON: Not at all:--and you shall answer if you like.


POLUS: Ask:--


CHAEREPHON: My question is this: If Gorgias had the skill of his brotherHerodicus, what ought we to call him? Ought he not to have the name which

is given to his brother?


POLUS: Certainly.


CHAEREPHON: Then we should be right in calling him a physician?


POLUS: Yes.


CHAEREPHON: And if he had the skill of Aristophon the son of Aglaophon,

or of his brother Polygnotus, what ought we to call him?


POLUS: Clearly, a painter.


CHAEREPHON: But now what shall we call him--what is the art in which he

is skilled.


POLUS:  O  Chaerephon,  there  are  many  arts  among  mankind  which  are

experimental, and have their origin in experience, for experience makes the

days  of  men  to  proceed  according  to  art,  and  inexperience  according  to

chance, and different persons in different ways are proficient in different arts,

and the best persons in the best arts. And our friend Gorgias is one of the

best, and the art in which he is a proficient is the noblest.


SOCRATES: Polus has been taught how to make a capital speech, Gorgias;

but he is not fulfilling the promise which he made to Chaerephon.


GORGIAS: What do you mean, Socrates?


SOCRATES: I mean that he has not exactly answered the question which he

was asked.


GORGIAS: Then why not ask him yourself?


SOCRATES:  But  I  would  much  rather  ask  you,  if  you  are  disposed  to

answer: for I see, from the few words which Polus has uttered, that he has

attended more to the art which is called rhetoric than to dialectic.POLUS: What makes you say so, Socrates?


SOCRATES: Because, Polus, when Chaerephon asked you what was the art

which Gorgias knows, you praised it as if you were answering some one who

found fault with it, but you never said what the art was.


POLUS: Why, did I not say that it was the noblest of arts?


SOCRATES: Yes, indeed, but that was no answer to the question: nobody

asked what was the quality, but what was the nature, of the art, and by what

name we were to describe Gorgias. And I would still beg you briefly and

clearly, as you answered Chaerephon when he asked you at first, to say what

this art is, and what we ought to call Gorgias: Or rather, Gorgias, let me turn

to you, and ask the same question,--what are we to call you, and what is the

art which you profess?


GORGIAS: Rhetoric, Socrates, is my art.


SOCRATES: Then I am to call you a rhetorician?


GORGIAS: Yes, Socrates, and a good one too, if you would call me that

which, in Homeric language, 'I boast myself to be.'


SOCRATES: I should wish to do so.


GORGIAS: Then pray do.


SOCRATES:  And  are  we  to  say  that  you  are  able  to  make  other  men

rhetoricians?


GORGIAS: Yes, that is exactly what I profess to make them, not only at

Athens, but in all places.


SOCRATES: And will you continue to ask and answer questions, Gorgias, as

we are at present doing, and reserve for another occasion the longer mode of

speech which Polus was attempting? Will you keep your promise, and answer

shortly the questions which are asked of you?GORGIAS: Some answers, Socrates, are of necessity longer; but I will do my

best to make them as short as possible; for a part of my profession is that I

can be as short as any one.


SOCRATES: That is what is wanted, Gorgias; exhibit the shorter method

now, and the longer one at some other time.


GORGIAS: Well, I will; and you will certainly say, that you never heard a

man use fewer words.


SOCRATES: Very good then; as you profess to be a rhetorician, and a maker

of rhetoricians, let me ask you, with what is rhetoric concerned: I might ask

with what is weaving concerned, and you would reply (would you not?), with

the making of garments?


GORGIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And music is concerned with the composition of melodies?


GORGIAS: It is.


SOCRATES:  By  Here,  Gorgias,  I  admire  the  surpassing  brevity  of  your

answers.


GORGIAS: Yes, Socrates, I do think myself good at that.


SOCRATES: I am glad to hear it; answer me in like manner about rhetoric:

with what is rhetoric concerned?


GORGIAS: With discourse.


SOCRATES:  What  sort  of  discourse,  Gorgias?--such  discourse  as  would

teach the sick under what treatment they might get well?


GORGIAS: No.


SOCRATES: Then rhetoric does not treat of all kinds of discourse?GORGIAS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: And yet rhetoric makes men able to speak?


GORGIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And to understand that about which they speak?


GORGIAS: Of course.


SOCRATES:  But  does  not  the  art  of  medicine,  which  we  were  just  now

mentioning, also make men able to understand and speak about the sick?


GORGIAS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Then medicine also treats of discourse?


GORGIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Of discourse concerning diseases?


GORGIAS: Just so.


SOCRATES: And does not gymnastic also treat of discourse concerning the

good or evil condition of the body?


GORGIAS: Very true.


SOCRATES: And the same, Gorgias, is true of the other arts:--all of them

treat of discourse concerning the subjects with which they severally have to

do.


GORGIAS: Clearly.


SOCRATES: Then why, if you call rhetoric the art which treats of discourse,

and all the other arts treat of discourse, do you not call them arts of rhetoric?


GORGIAS: Because, Socrates, the knowledge of the other arts has only to dowith some sort of external action, as of the hand; but there is no such action

of the hand in rhetoric which works and takes effect only through the medium

of discourse. And therefore I am justified in saying that rhetoric treats of

discourse.


SOCRATES: I am not sure whether I entirely understand you, but I dare say I

shall soon know better; please to answer me a question:--you would allow

that there are arts?


GORGIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: As to the arts generally, they are for the most part concerned

with doing, and require little or no speaking; in painting, and statuary, and

many other arts, the work may proceed in silence; and of such arts I suppose

you would say that they do not come within the province of rhetoric.


GORGIAS: You perfectly conceive my meaning, Socrates.


SOCRATES: But there are other arts which work wholly through the medium

of language, and require either no action or very little, as, for example, the

arts of arithmetic, of calculation, of geometry, and of playing draughts; in

some of these speech is pretty nearly co-extensive with action, but in most of

them the verbal element is greater--they depend wholly on words for their

efficacy and power: and I take your meaning to be that rhetoric is an art of

this latter sort?


GORGIAS: Exactly.


SOCRATES: And yet I do not believe that you really mean to call any of

these arts rhetoric; although the precise expression which you used was, that

rhetoric is an art which works and takes effect only through the medium of

discourse; and an adversary who wished to be captious might say, 'And so,

Gorgias, you call arithmetic rhetoric.' But I do not think that you really call

arithmetic rhetoric any more than geometry would be so called by you.


GORGIAS:  You  are  quite  right,  Socrates,  in  your  apprehension  of  my

meaning.SOCRATES: Well, then, let me now have the rest of my answer:--seeing that

rhetoric is one of those arts which works mainly by the use of words, and

there are other arts which also use words, tell me what is that quality in words

with which rhetoric is concerned:--Suppose that a person asks me about some

of the arts which I was mentioning just now; he might say, 'Socrates, what is

arithmetic?' and I should reply to him, as you replied to me, that arithmetic is

one  of  those  arts  which  take  effect  through  words.  And  then  he  would

proceed to ask: 'Words about what?' and I should reply, Words about odd and

even numbers, and how many there are of each. And if he asked again: 'What

is the art of calculation?' I should say, That also is one of the arts which is

concerned wholly with words. And if he further said, 'Concerned with what?'

I should say, like the clerks in the assembly, 'as aforesaid' of arithmetic, but

with a difference, the difference being that the art of calculation considers not

only  the  quantities  of  odd  and  even  numbers,  but  also  their  numerical

relations to themselves and to one another. And suppose, again, I were to say

that astronomy is only words--he would ask, 'Words about what, Socrates?'

and I should answer, that astronomy tells us about the motions of the stars

and sun and moon, and their relative swiftness.


GORGIAS: You would be quite right, Socrates.


SOCRATES:  And  now  let  us  have  from  you,  Gorgias,  the  truth  about

rhetoric: which you would admit (would you not?) to be one of those arts

which act always and fulfil all their ends through the medium of words?


GORGIAS: True.


SOCRATES: Words which do what? I should ask. To what class of things do

the words which rhetoric uses relate?


GORGIAS: To the greatest, Socrates, and the best of human things.


SOCRATES: That again, Gorgias is ambiguous; I am still in the dark: for

which are the greatest and best of human things? I dare say that you have

heard  men  singing  at  feasts  the  old  drinking  song,  in  which  the  singers

enumerate the goods of life, first health, beauty next, thirdly, as the writer of

the song says, wealth honestly obtained.GORGIAS: Yes, I know the song; but what is your drift?


SOCRATES: I mean to say, that the producers of those things which the

author  of  the  song  praises,  that  is  to  say,  the  physician,  the  trainer,  the

money-maker, will at once come to you, and first the physician will say: 'O

Socrates, Gorgias is deceiving you, for my art is concerned with the greatest

good of men and not his.' And when I ask, Who are you? he will reply, 'I am

a physician.' What do you mean? I shall say. Do you mean that your art

produces the greatest good? 'Certainly,' he will answer, 'for is not health the

greatest good? What greater good can men have, Socrates?' And after him the

trainer  will  come  and  say,  'I  too,  Socrates,  shall  be  greatly  surprised  if

Gorgias can show more good of his art than I can show of mine.' To him

again I shall say, Who are you, honest friend, and what is your business? 'I

am a trainer,' he will reply, 'and my business is to make men beautiful and

strong in body.' When I have done with the trainer, there arrives the money-

maker, and he, as I expect, will utterly despise them all. 'Consider Socrates,'

he will say, 'whether Gorgias or any one else can produce any greater good

than wealth.' Well, you and I say to him, and are you a creator of wealth?

'Yes,' he replies. And who are you? 'A money-maker.' And do you consider

wealth to be the greatest good of man? 'Of course,' will be his reply. And we

shall rejoin: Yes; but our friend Gorgias contends that his art produces a

greater good than yours. And then he will be sure to go on and ask, 'What

good? Let Gorgias answer.' Now I want you, Gorgias, to imagine that this

question is asked of you by them and by me; What is that which, as you say,

is the greatest good of man, and of which you are the creator? Answer us.


GORGIAS: That good, Socrates, which is truly the greatest, being that which

gives to men freedom in their own persons, and to individuals the power of

ruling over others in their several states.


SOCRATES: And what would you consider this to be?


GORGIAS: What is there greater than the word which persuades the judges

in the courts, or the senators in the council, or the citizens in the assembly, or

at any other political meeting?--if you have the power of uttering this word,

you will have the physician your slave, and the trainer your slave, and the

money-maker of whom you talk will be found to gather treasures, not forhimself, but for you who are able to speak and to persuade the multitude.


SOCRATES: Now I think, Gorgias, that you have very accurately explained

what you conceive to be the art of rhetoric; and you mean to say, if I am not

mistaken, that rhetoric is the artificer of persuasion, having this and no other

business, and that this is her crown and end. Do you know any other effect of

rhetoric over and above that of producing persuasion?


GORGIAS: No: the definition seems to me very fair, Socrates; for persuasion

is the chief end of rhetoric.


SOCRATES: Then hear me, Gorgias, for I am quite sure that if there ever

was a man who entered on the discussion of a matter from a pure love of

knowing the truth, I am such a one, and I should say the same of you.


GORGIAS: What is coming, Socrates?


SOCRATES: I will tell you: I am very well aware that I do not know what,

according to you, is the exact nature, or what are the topics of that persuasion

of  which  you  speak,  and  which  is  given  by  rhetoric;  although  I  have  a

suspicion about both the one and the other. And I am going to ask-- what is

this power of persuasion which is given by rhetoric, and about what? But

why, if I have a suspicion, do I ask instead of telling you? Not for your sake,

but in order that the argument may proceed in such a manner as is most likely

to set forth the truth. And I would have you observe, that I am right in asking

this further question: If I asked, 'What sort of a painter is Zeuxis?' and you

said, 'The painter of figures,' should I not be right in asking, 'What kind of

figures, and where do you find them?'


GORGIAS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And the reason for asking this second question would be, that

there are other painters besides, who paint many other figures?


GORGIAS: True.


SOCRATES: But if there had been no one but Zeuxis who painted them, thenyou would have answered very well?


GORGIAS: Quite so.


SOCRATES:  Now  I  want  to  know  about  rhetoric  in  the  same  way;--is

rhetoric the only art which brings persuasion, or do other arts have the same

effect? I mean to say--Does he who teaches anything persuade men of that

which he teaches or not?


GORGIAS: He persuades, Socrates,--there can be no mistake about that.


SOCRATES: Again, if we take the arts of which we were just now speaking:-

- do not arithmetic and the arithmeticians teach us the properties of number?


GORGIAS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And therefore persuade us of them?


GORGIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Then arithmetic as well as rhetoric is an artificer of persuasion?


GORGIAS: Clearly.


SOCRATES: And if any one asks us what sort of persuasion, and about what,

--we shall answer, persuasion which teaches the quantity of odd and even;

and we shall be able to show that all the other arts of which we were just now

speaking are artificers of persuasion, and of what sort, and about what.


GORGIAS: Very true.


SOCRATES: Then rhetoric is not the only artificer of persuasion?


GORGIAS: True.


SOCRATES: Seeing, then, that not only rhetoric works by persuasion, but

that other arts do the same, as in the case of the painter, a question has arisen

which is a very fair one: Of what persuasion is rhetoric the artificer, andabout what?--is not that a fair way of putting the question?


GORGIAS: I think so.


SOCRATES: Then, if you approve the question, Gorgias, what is the answer?


GORGIAS: I answer, Socrates, that rhetoric is the art of persuasion in courts

of law and other assemblies, as I was just now saying, and about the just and

unjust.


SOCRATES:  And  that,  Gorgias,  was  what  I  was  suspecting  to  be  your

notion; yet I would not have you wonder if by-and-by I am found repeating a

seemingly plain question; for I ask not in order to confute you, but as I was

saying that the argument may proceed consecutively, and that we may not get

the habit of anticipating and suspecting the meaning of one another's words; I

would have you develope your own views in your own way, whatever may

be your hypothesis.


GORGIAS: I think that you are quite right, Socrates.


SOCRATES: Then let me raise another question; there is such a thing as

'having learned'?


GORGIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And there is also 'having believed'?


GORGIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And is the 'having learned' the same as 'having believed,' and

are learning and belief the same things?


GORGIAS: In my judgment, Socrates, they are not the same.


SOCRATES: And your judgment is right, as you may ascertain in this way:--

If a person were to say to you, 'Is there, Gorgias, a false belief as well as a

true?'--you would reply, if I am not mistaken, that there is.GORGIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Well, but is there a false knowledge as well as a true?


GORGIAS: No.


SOCRATES: No, indeed; and this again proves that knowledge and belief

differ.


GORGIAS: Very true.


SOCRATES: And yet those who have learned as well as those who have

believed are persuaded?


GORGIAS: Just so.


SOCRATES: Shall we then assume two sorts of persuasion,--one which is

the source of belief without knowledge, as the other is of knowledge?


GORGIAS: By all means.


SOCRATES: And which sort of persuasion does rhetoric create in courts of

law and other assemblies about the just and unjust, the sort of persuasion

which gives belief without knowledge, or that which gives knowledge?


GORGIAS: Clearly, Socrates, that which only gives belief.


SOCRATES: Then rhetoric, as would appear, is the artificer of a persuasion

which creates belief about the just and unjust, but gives no instruction about

them?


GORGIAS: True.


SOCRATES: And the rhetorician does not instruct the courts of law or other

assemblies about things just and unjust, but he creates belief about them; for

no one can be supposed to instruct such a vast multitude about such high

matters in a short time?GORGIAS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: Come, then, and let us see what we really mean about rhetoric;

for I do not know what my own meaning is as yet. When the assembly meets

to  elect  a  physician  or  a  shipwright  or  any  other  craftsman,  will  the

rhetorician be taken into counsel? Surely not. For at every election he ought

to be chosen who is most skilled; and, again, when walls have to be built or

harbours  or  docks  to  be  constructed,  not  the  rhetorician  but  the  master

workman will advise; or when generals have to be chosen and an order of

battle arranged, or a position taken, then the military will advise and not the

rhetoricians: what do you say, Gorgias? Since you profess to be a rhetorician

and a maker of rhetoricians, I cannot do better than learn the nature of your

art from you. And here let me assure you that I have your interest in view as

well as my own. For likely enough some one or other of the young men

present might desire to become your pupil, and in fact I see some, and a good

many too, who have this wish, but they would be too modest to question you.

And therefore when you are interrogated by me, I would have you imagine

that  you  are  interrogated  by  them.  'What  is  the  use  of  coming  to  you,

Gorgias?' they will say--'about what will you teach us to advise the state?--

about the just and unjust only, or about those other things also which Socrates

has just mentioned?' How will you answer them?


GORGIAS: I like your way of leading us on, Socrates, and I will endeavour

to reveal to you the whole nature of rhetoric. You must have heard, I think,

that the docks and the walls of the Athenians and the plan of the harbour were

devised in accordance with the counsels, partly of Themistocles, and partly of

Pericles, and not at the suggestion of the builders.


SOCRATES: Such is the tradition, Gorgias, about Themistocles; and I myself

heard the speech of Pericles when he advised us about the middle wall.


GORGIAS: And you will observe, Socrates, that when a decision has to be

given in such matters the rhetoricians are the advisers; they are the men who

win their point.


SOCRATES: I had that in my admiring mind, Gorgias, when I asked what is

the nature of rhetoric, which always appears to me, when I look at the matterin this way, to be a marvel of greatness.


GORGIAS:  A  marvel,  indeed,  Socrates,  if  you  only  knew  how  rhetoric

comprehends and holds under her sway all the inferior arts. Let me offer you

a striking example of this. On several occasions I have been with my brother

Herodicus or some other physician to see one of his patients, who would not

allow the physician to give him medicine, or apply the knife or hot iron to

him; and I have persuaded him to do for me what he would not do for the

physician just by the use of rhetoric. And I say that if a rhetorician and a

physician were to go to any city, and had there to argue in the Ecclesia or any

other assembly as to which of them should be elected state-physician, the

physician would have no chance; but he who could speak would be chosen if

he wished; and in a contest with a man of any other profession the rhetorician

more than any one would have the power of getting himself chosen, for he

can speak more persuasively to the multitude than any of them, and on any

subject. Such is the nature and power of the art of rhetoric! And yet, Socrates,

rhetoric  should  be  used  like  any  other  competitive  art,  not  against

everybody,--the rhetorician ought not to abuse his strength any more than a

pugilist or pancratiast or other master of fence;--because he has powers which

are more than a match either for friend or enemy, he ought not therefore to

strike, stab, or slay his friends. Suppose a man to have been trained in the

palestra and to be a skilful boxer,--he in the fulness of his strength goes and

strikes his father or mother or one of his familiars or friends; but that is no

reason why the trainers or fencing-masters should be held in detestation or

banished  from  the  city;--surely  not.  For  they  taught  their  art  for  a  good

purpose, to be used against enemies and evil-doers, in self-defence not in

aggression, and others have perverted their instructions, and turned to a bad

use their own strength and skill. But not on this account are the teachers bad,

neither is the art in fault, or bad in itself; I should rather say that those who

make a bad use of the art are to blame. And the same argument holds good of

rhetoric; for the rhetorician can speak against all men and upon any subject,--

in short, he can persuade the multitude better than any other man of anything

which he pleases, but he should not therefore seek to defraud the physician or

any other artist of his reputation merely because he has the power; he ought

to use rhetoric fairly, as he would also use his athletic powers. And if after

having become a rhetorician he makes a bad use of his strength and skill, his

instructor  surely  ought  not  on  that  account  to  be  held  in  detestation  orbanished. For he was intended by his teacher to make a good use of his

instructions, but he abuses them. And therefore he is the person who ought to

be held in detestation, banished, and put to death, and not his instructor.


SOCRATES:  You,  Gorgias,  like  myself,  have  had  great  experience  of

disputations, and you must have observed, I think, that they do not always

terminate in mutual edification, or in the definition by either party of the

subjects  which  they  are  discussing;  but  disagreements  are  apt  to  arise  --

somebody says that another has not spoken truly or clearly; and then they get

into  a  passion  and  begin  to  quarrel,  both  parties  conceiving  that  their

opponents are arguing from personal feeling only and jealousy of themselves,

not from any interest in the question at issue. And sometimes they will go on

abusing one another until the company at last are quite vexed at themselves

for ever listening to such fellows. Why do I say this? Why, because I cannot

help feeling that you are now saying what is not quite consistent or accordant

with what you were saying at first about rhetoric. And I am afraid to point

this out to you, lest you should think that I have some animosity against you,

and that I speak, not for the sake of discovering the truth, but from jealousy

of you. Now if you are one of my sort, I should like to cross-examine you,

but if not I will let you alone. And what is my sort? you will ask. I am one of

those who are very willing to be refuted if I say anything which is not true,

and very willing to refute any one else who says what is not true, and quite as

ready to be refuted as to refute; for I hold that this is the greater gain of the

two, just as the gain is greater of being cured of a very great evil than of

curing another. For I imagine that there is no evil which a man can endure so

great as an erroneous opinion about the matters of which we are speaking;

and if you claim to be one of my sort, let us have the discussion out, but if

you would rather have done, no matter;--let us make an end of it.


GORGIAS:  I  should  say,  Socrates,  that  I  am  quite  the  man  whom  you

indicate; but, perhaps, we ought to consider the audience, for, before you

came, I had already given a long exhibition, and if we proceed the argument

may run on to a great length. And therefore I think that we should consider

whether we may not be detaining some part of the company when they are

wanting to do something else.


CHAEREPHON:  You  hear  the  audience  cheering,  Gorgias  and  Socrates,which shows their desire to listen to you; and for myself, Heaven forbid that I

should  have  any  business  on  hand  which  would  take  me  away  from  a

discussion so interesting and so ably maintained.


CALLICLES:  By  the  gods,  Chaerephon,  although  I  have  been  present  at

many discussions, I doubt whether I was ever so much delighted before, and

therefore if you go on discoursing all day I shall be the better pleased.


SOCRATES: I may truly say, Callicles, that I am willing, if Gorgias is.


GORGIAS:  After  all  this,  Socrates,  I  should  be  disgraced  if  I  refused,

especially as I have promised to answer all comers; in accordance with the

wishes  of  the  company,  then,  do  you  begin.  and  ask  of  me  any  question

which you like.


SOCRATES: Let me tell you then, Gorgias, what surprises me in your words;

though I dare say that you may be right, and I may have misunderstood your

meaning. You say that you can make any man, who will learn of you, a

rhetorician?


GORGIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: Do you mean that you will teach him to gain the ears of the

multitude on any subject, and this not by instruction but by persuasion?


GORGIAS: Quite so.


SOCRATES: You were saying, in fact, that the rhetorician will have greater

powers of persuasion than the physician even in a matter of health?


GORGIAS: Yes, with the multitude,--that is.


SOCRATES: You mean to say, with the ignorant; for with those who know

he cannot be supposed to have greater powers of persuasion.


GORGIAS: Very true.


SOCRATES:  But  if  he  is  to  have  more  power  of  persuasion  than  thephysician, he will have greater power than he who knows?


GORGIAS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Although he is not a physician:--is he?


GORGIAS: No.


SOCRATES: And he who is not a physician must, obviously, be ignorant of

what the physician knows.


GORGIAS: Clearly.


SOCRATES:  Then,  when  the  rhetorician  is  more  persuasive  than  the

physician, the ignorant is more persuasive with the ignorant than he who has

knowledge?--is not that the inference?


GORGIAS: In the case supposed:--yes.


SOCRATES: And the same holds of the relation of rhetoric to all the other

arts; the rhetorician need not know the truth about things; he has only to

discover some way of persuading the ignorant that he has more knowledge

than those who know?


GORGIAS:  Yes,  Socrates,  and  is  not  this  a  great  comfort?--not  to  have

learned the other arts, but the art of rhetoric only, and yet to be in no way

inferior to the professors of them?


SOCRATES: Whether the rhetorician is or not inferior on this account is a

question which we will hereafter examine if the enquiry is likely to be of any

service to us; but I would rather begin by asking, whether he is or is not as

ignorant of the just and unjust, base and honourable, good and evil, as he is of

medicine and the other arts; I mean to say, does he really know anything of

what is good and evil, base or honourable, just or unjust in them; or has he

only a way with the ignorant of persuading them that he not knowing is to be

esteemed to know more about these things than some one else who knows?

Or must the pupil know these things and come to you knowing them before

he can acquire the art of rhetoric? If he is ignorant, you who are the teacher ofrhetoric will not teach him--it is not your business; but you will make him

seem to the multitude to know them, when he does not know them; and seem

to be a good man, when he is not. Or will you be unable to teach him rhetoric

at all, unless he knows the truth of these things first? What is to be said about

all this? By heavens, Gorgias, I wish that you would reveal to me the power

of rhetoric, as you were saying that you would.


GORGIAS: Well, Socrates, I suppose that if the pupil does chance not to

know them, he will have to learn of me these things as well.


SOCRATES: Say no more, for there you are right; and so he whom you make

a rhetorician must either know the nature of the just and unjust already, or he

must be taught by you.


GORGIAS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: Well, and is not he who has learned carpentering a carpenter?


GORGIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And he who has learned music a musician?


GORGIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES:  And  he  who  has  learned  medicine  is  a  physician,  in  like

manner? He who has learned anything whatever is that which his knowledge

makes him.


GORGIAS: Certainly.


SOCRATES: And in the same way, he who has learned what is just is just?


GORGIAS: To be sure.


SOCRATES: And he who is just may be supposed to do what is just?


GORGIAS: Yes.SOCRATES: And must not the just man always desire to do what is just?


GORGIAS: That is clearly the inference.


SOCRATES: Surely, then, the just man will never consent to do injustice?


GORGIAS: Certainly not.


SOCRATES: And according to the argument the rhetorician must be a just

man?


GORGIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: And will therefore never be willing to do injustice?


GORGIAS: Clearly not.


SOCRATES: But do you remember saying just now that the trainer is not to

be accused or banished if the pugilist makes a wrong use of his pugilistic art;

and  in  like  manner,  if  the  rhetorician  makes  a  bad  and  unjust  use  of  his

rhetoric, that is not to be laid to the charge of his teacher, who is not to be

banished, but the wrong-doer himself who made a bad use of his rhetoric--he

is to be banished--was not that said?


GORGIAS: Yes, it was.


SOCRATES: But now we are affirming that the aforesaid rhetorician will

never have done injustice at all?


GORGIAS: True.


SOCRATES: And at the very outset, Gorgias, it was said that rhetoric treated

of discourse, not (like arithmetic) about odd and even, but about just and

unjust? Was not this said?


GORGIAS: Yes.


SOCRATES: I was thinking at the time, when I heard you saying so, thatrhetoric, which is always discoursing about justice, could not possibly be an

unjust thing. But when you added, shortly afterwards, that the rhetorician

might make a bad use of rhetoric I noted with surprise the inconsistency into

which you had fallen; and I said, that if you thought, as I did, that there was a

gain  in  being  refuted,  there  would  be  an  advantage  in  going  on  with  the

question,  but  if  not,  I  would  leave  off.  And  in  the  course  of  our

investigations,  as  you  will  see  yourself,  the  rhetorician  has  been

acknowledged  to  be  incapable  of  making  an  unjust  use  of  rhetoric,  or  of

willingness to do injustice. By the dog, Gorgias, there will be a great deal of

discussion, before we get at the truth of all this.


POLUS: And do even you, Socrates, seriously believe what you are now

saying about rhetoric? What! because Gorgias was ashamed to deny that the

rhetorician knew the just and the honourable and the good, and admitted that

to any one who came to him ignorant of them he could teach them, and then

out of this admission there arose a contradiction--the thing which you dearly

love, and to which not he, but you, brought the argument by your captious

questions--(do you seriously believe that there is any truth in all this?) For

will any one ever acknowledge that he does not know, or cannot teach, the

nature of justice? The truth is, that there is great want of manners in bringing

the argument to such a pass.


SOCRATES: Illustrious Polus, the reason why we provide ourselves with

friends  and  children  is,  that  when  we  get  old  and  stumble,  a  younger

generation may be at hand to set us on our legs again in our words and in our

actions: and now, if I and Gorgias are stumbling, here are you who should

raise us up; and I for my part engage to retract any error into which you may

think that I have fallen-upon one condition:


POLUS: What condition?


SOCRATES: That you contract, Polus, the prolixity of speech in which you

indulged at first.


POLUS: What! do you mean that I may not use as many words as I please?


SOCRATES: Only to think, my friend, that having come on a visit to Athens,